                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PLATFORM AS A RULE MAKER:
                 EVIDENCE FROM AIRBNB'S CANCELLATION POLICIES

                                            Jian Jia
                                         Ginger Zhe Jin
                                         Liad Wagman

                                       Working Paper 28878
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28878


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Chiara Farronato, Hui Li, Alessandro Gavazza, Martin Gaynor, Maryam Saeedi, Robert
Miller, Sylvia Hristakeva, Marvin Lieberman, Martin Peitz and seminar attendants at UCLA,
Carnegie Mellon University and University of Mannheim for constructive comments. We are
grateful to our home universities for providing financial support for access to the AirDNA data.
None of us has a significant financial relationship with Airbnb.com or any other short-term rental
platforms. All rights reserved. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jian Jia, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Platform as a Rule Maker: Evidence from Airbnb's Cancellation Policies
Jian Jia, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Liad Wagman
NBER Working Paper No. 28878
June 2021
JEL No. D81,D83,L14,L15

                                         ABSTRACT

Digital platforms are not only match-making intermediaries but also establish internal rules that
govern all users in their ecosystems. To better understand the governing role of platforms, we
study two Airbnb pro-guest rules that pertain to guest and host cancellations, using data on
Airbnb and VRBO listings in 10 US cities. We demonstrate that such pro-guest rules can drive
demand and supply to and from the platform, as a function of the local platform competition
between Airbnb and VRBO. Our results suggest that platform competition sometimes dampens a
platform wide pro-guest rule and sometimes reinforces it, often with heterogeneous effects on
different hosts. This implies that platform competition does not necessarily mitigate a platform's
incentive to treat the two sides asymmetrically, and any public policy in platform competition
must consider its implication on all sides.

Jian Jia                                        Liad Wagman
Illinois Institute of Technology                Illinois Institute of Technology
565 W Adams, 4th Flr                            565 W Adams St, Suite 412
Chicago, IL 60661                               Chicago, IL 60661
jjia5@hawk.iit.edu                              lwagman@stuart.iit.edu

Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
ginger@umd.edu
1     Introduction

Many digital platforms function as a match-maker between two or more sides; for example
eBay matches buyers and sellers, Uber matches riders and drivers, Airbnb matches guests
and hosts, and Monster matches employers and workers. In the match-making process, a
two-sided platform must set up rules to govern the behavior of market participants. However,
unlike a government regulator that often acts as a third-party arbitrator between different
stakeholders, a for-profit platform is directly involved in the business: it earns commissions,
fees, and other revenues from one or more sides. This raises an immediate question: Does
a multi-sided platform have incentives to treat different sides differently? If so, how would
platform competition affect such incentives?
    Many economists have studied this question in pricing, and concluded that asymmetric
pricing is natural for two-sided platforms with positive network effects. For example, more
guests on a short-term rental platform can attract more hosts to participate, and more hosts
can attract more guests. These positive network effects may motivate platforms to subsidize
the more price-sensitive side of their marketplaces and collect commissions and fees on the
other side (Rochet and Tirole, 2003; Chevalier and Mayzlin, 2006; and Mayzlin et al., 2014).
Sometimes, the subsidized side may even obtain the platform's service for free or receive
rewards for joining or using the platform. However, this asymmetric treatment does not
necessarily mean that side A of the platform benefits at the expense of side B, because more
users on side A could make the platform more attractive to participants on side B. As a
result, participants on side B could sometimes even prefer the platform to subsidize side
A. More importantly, an asymmetric treatment of A and B does not necessarily imply a
reduction in the total welfare of A, B, and the platform.
    Meanwhile, however, much of the policy debate has focused on the potential of platforms
to mistreat, abuse, or exploit one side of their marketplaces. For example, merchants were
concerned about high transaction fees and anti-steering clauses of major credit card compa-




                                               2
nies,1 for the District Court decision in US vs. American Express, 2015. some app developers
have complained about the high commission fees on Apple's iOS ecosystem,2 there are leg-
islative efforts to push ride-sharing platforms to treat drivers as employees rather than as
contractors,3 and some delivery workers for grocery, restaurant food, and merchandise shop-
ping reportedly feel squeezed by platform algorithms.4 Many of these concerns also attribute
the alleged harm to stakeholders to a lack of competition at the platform level, and these
assertions have further triggered antitrust investigations and legislative efforts to regulate
certain practices of platforms worldwide.
       The market for short-term rentals provides an excellent opportunity to study the interface
of asymmetric treatment and platform competition. In particular, Airbnb and VRBO are
the two major platforms that match the demand and supply of short-term home rentals in
the US. In comparison with VRBO, Airbnb is more pro-guest with at least two unique rules.
       First, upon a host's cancellation of a confirmed guest's rental reservation prior to the
guest's arrival, Airbnb posts an automated system review on the host's listing. This can-
cellation review looks similar to any other review, but since it is system generated and
only posted upon a confirmed cancellation by a host, it is credible and non-manipulable.
VRBO has not adopted any similar rule for system-generated reviews in the cases of host
cancellations.
       Second, if a guest cancels their own reservation, the resultant process follows the listing's
cancellation policy, which is selected by the listing's host, whereby the guest pays any cor-
responding penalties that are stipulated by the listing's cancellation policy. Beginning on
May 1, 2018, Airbnb applied a global change requiring all listings on its platform to offer
guests the option to cancel their reservations, with a full refund, inclusive of any platform
fees, within 48 hours of their booking, provided their check-in dates are at least 14 days
away. This guest-friendly grace period applies to all listings regardless of their hosts' chosen
   1
     See, for instance, https://www.justice.gov/file/485746/download
   2
     See, e.g., Spotify's complaint regarding Apple's "tax" on subscription payments, https://rb.gy/ywyxpg.
   3
     California Assembly Bill 5 and California Proposition 22, as well as the UK's Supreme Court; see, e.g.,
https://rb.gy/uv8k7l.
   4
     As reported on NPR news in 2019; see, e.g., https://rb.gy/dipgss.


                                                     3
cancellation policies, and does not provide hosts with an ability to opt out. Again, VRBO
does not have a similar rule across all listings.
   To study these two pro-guest rules along with platform competition, we collect data on
Airbnb and VRBO listings in 10 major US cities (Atlanta, Austin, Boston, Chicago, Houston,
Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York, Seattle, and Washington DC) between January 2015
and December 2019.
   We show that both pro-guest rules have the potential to benefit some Airbnb hosts
but hurt other hosts. For example, for listings whose hosts cancelled guests' reservations,
having any automated cancellation review leads to 6.37% fewer monthly reservations, 4.15%
lower nightly rates, and 4.77% more vacancies. This is a significant cost for the cancelling
host, and likely makes non-cancelling hosts more attractive on Airbnb. In contrast, the
newly introduced 48-hour rule benefited nearly all Airbnb hosts by leading to more guest
reservations on the platform, but it also increased costs for hosts with strict cancellation
policies. Specifically, Airbnb listings with loose cancellation policies -- which by definition
should be unaffected by the 48-hour rule because they already allow free guest cancellation
before the rule change -- have seen their monthly reservation rates up 7.58%, nightly rates
up 4.01%, and occupancy rates up 2.78% post the 48-hour rule, when compared to their
VRBO listings with loose cancellation policies. In comparison, Airbnb listings with strict
cancellation policies benefit 3.31% less in the number of monthly reservations, 2.27% less
in nightly rates, and 1.95% less in occupancy rates, than their Airbnb listing counterparts
with loose cancellation policies, although in net they still benefit from the 48-hour rule when
compared with VRBO listings with loose cancellation policies.
   To study the role of platform competition, we measure the local competition between
Airbnb and VRBO5 as the ratio of the number of VRBO listings to the number of Airbnb
and VRBO listings within a 0.3-mile geographic radius of a focal listing, before the May-2018
introduction of the 48-hour rule. This measure creates an index of platform competition for
   5
     Strictly speaking, both Airbnb and VRBO compete with hotels, bed and breakfasts, and other forms of
short-term rentals in each geographic market. See more background in Section 3.



                                                   4
each Airbnb listing, allowing us to distinguish between listings that face different levels of
competition with VRBO.
   We find that platform competition has mixed effects on the pro-guest incentives of Airbnb.
On the host side, the results suggest that a higher competition ratio amplifies the negative
effect of an automated host cancellation review for listings with loose cancellation policies,
but dampens it for listings with strict policies. Given the fact that strict listings tend to be
associated with more popular properties and are more likely to be located in areas with more
competition from VRBO, this suggests that Airbnb's incentive to drive for guest friendliness
is not monotonic in platform competition.
   On the guest side, we find that above-city-median competition with VRBO tempers the
expansion effect of the 48-hour rule for Airbnb listings. In particular, for listings with above-
city-median competition, Airbnb listings with loose guest cancellation policies, in comparison
to VRBO listings with similar guest cancellation policies, exhibit increases of 6.33% in the
number of monthly reservations, 3.19% in price, and 2.25% in occupancy rates after the
48-hour rule. These numbers are all higher if the listing's local competition is lower than
the city median before the 48-hour rule (7.08%, 5.24% and 4.53%). A similar pattern holds
for Airbnb listings with strict guest cancellation policies, with the above effects being 1.79%,
0.82%, 0.68% in areas of above-city-median competition, versus 3.88%, 2.77% and 2.63% in
areas of below-city-median competition. It is interesting that listings with strict cancellation
policies are more directly affected by the 48-hour rule than listings with loose policies, yet
enjoy a smaller expansion in business as a result of the 48-hour rule.
   Some antitrust scholars are concerned that dominant platforms are too harsh on one side
(typically suppliers), because strong network effects may shield large platforms from viable
competition, and those who may be squeezed by such platforms could have no alternative
options.6 Following this logic, some of the key questions are: (1) Can viable platform
competition arise organically despite positive network effects between the two sides of each
  6
    See, for instance, the 2019 Stigler report, https://www.chicagobooth.edu/research/stigler/news-and-
media/committee-on-digital-platforms-final-report.



                                                  5
platform? (2) Does viable platform competition indeed temper a platform's incentives to
squeeze its supply side? (3) How does a platform's pro-consumer rule affect different suppliers
differentially vis-`
                   a-vis platform competition?
   Our results speak to all of these questions. Although Airbnb is larger than VRBO today,
VRBO was founded thirteen years before Airbnb (1995 vs. 2008). Both have exhibited dra-
matic growth over time, with VRBO targeting vacation entire-home rentals while Airbnb has
sought a broader coverage of travelers and property types. The history of the two platforms
suggests that platform competition does arise organically despite the natural network effects
between guests and hosts on each platform. On the effects of platform competition, we show
that more significant competition from VRBO gives an outside option to both hosts and
guests, which sometimes tempers the benefits that Airbnb could reap from further turning
the dial on the guest-friendliness of its rules, but sometimes strengthens the effectiveness of
a pro-guest rule.
   In particular, the 48-hour rule is overall beneficial to Airbnb in terms of attracting more
traffic to the platform, but it imposes costs on some hosts and potentially squeezes their
profits if the cost increase dominates the traffic increase. When there is viable competition at
the platform level, hosts can multi-home. After the 48-hour rule, we find that the likelihood
of cross-listing on both platforms increases, and the total number of listings on Airbnb
decreases. The opposite moves in demand and supply imply that the network effects on
Airbnb are not strong enough to generate "tipping" as some scholars have worried about for
a general two-sided platform.
   In addition, hosts of listings with strict cancellation policies -- listings that were more
likely to be cross-listed even before the 48-hour rule -- are more likely to utilize host cancel-
lations on Airbnb after the 48-hour rule, especially in more competitive areas. Recall that
host cancellation reviews send a negative signal to the market and could hurt the host's
future business on Airbnb. That some hosts still resort to this harmful act suggests that the
48-hour rule has been costly for them and they would rather get around it by cross-listing
and cancelling on Airbnb if needed. Overall, the decrease in total listings, the increase in

                                                 6
cross-listing, and the increase in host cancellations would all undermine the positive feedback
between guests and hosts, thus reducing Airbnb's gain from the pro-guest rule.
    In contrast, platform competition strengthens the punitive effect of the automated review
of host cancellation for listings with loose cancellation policies, probably because guests can
more readily switch to or multi-home on the competing platform and therefore are less
tolerant of loose listings with a history of canceled guest reservations on Airbnb. These
differential findings imply that platform competition does not always mitigate a platform's
incentive to treat two of its sides asymmetrically, and thus any public policy in platform
competition must consider its implications on all sides.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature
review. Section 3 provides some background on Airbnb's cancellation policies. Section
4 describes the dataset and provides summary statistics. Section 5 reports our empirical
findings. Section 6 discusses the implications of our findings for antitrust analysis and the
platform's ecosystem, and Section 7 concludes.



2     Related Literature

2.1    Platform Policy and Competition

Earlier research on multi-sided platforms focused on pricing and how a platform may take
advantage of positive network effects. Cailaud and Jullien (2003) show that platform pricing
may follow a "divide and conquer" strategy, subsidizing participation on one side and profit-
ing from the another. The degree of such asymmetry may depend on how much of a positive
externality one side could generate for the other (Armstrong 2006), and to what extent users
may switch away in response to a price hike (Rochet and Tirole 2003). Platform competition
may result in lower prices on two or more sides if those sides single-home. But when one side
(e.g., buyers) single-homes and the other side (e.g., sellers) multi-homes, platforms may have
incentives to charge more on the multi-homing side and further subsidize the single-homing



                                              7
side in order to attract their participation (Armstrong 2006). Put another way, competition
can push platforms to subsidize the side that is more likely to single-home.
   In practice, we observe that many platforms subsidize individual consumers by offering
free services (e.g. search engines, social media services, and B2C e-commerce platforms), or
even negative prices (e.g. cash-back referral websites and credit cards). To support such
prices and subsidies, the platforms usually earn revenue from the other sides (e.g. adver-
tisers, sellers, and retail merchants). Jin and Rysman (2015) examine the role of platform
competition in Sportscard conventions, which were held offline and hence the degree of com-
petition can be measured by geographic and timing distance. Like many online platforms,
these offline conventions charge low or zero admission fees to individual consumers but a
substantial table fee to dealers. And such pricing is sensitive to platform competition: when
the price to consumers is positive, the price is decreasing with competition, but pricing to
dealers is insensitive to competition and in longer distances even increases with competition.
In contrast, when the price to consumers is zero (and thus constrained), the price to dealers
decreases more strongly with competition. These findings suggest that, at least in terms of
pricing, platforms do change their asymmetric treatment between the sides in response to
competition, though exactly how they respond depends on the ease of multi-homing on each
side and the difficulty to adopt a negative price.
   A growing literature recognizes similar incentives in the non-pricing decisions of plat-
forms. In the 1980s and 1990s, many theories on non-pricing decisions focused on platform
compatibility and interoperability, which dictate how easy it is for certain user groups to
multi-home (see Farrell and Klemperer, 2007, for a review). More recent theories explore
other non-pricing rules, such as the setup of consumer ratings, recommendation systems,
search rankings, price transparency, information accuracy, certification systems, and mini-
mum quality standards (see Belleflamme and Peitz, 2020, for a review). A common theme is
examining whether platforms have an incentive to adopt a non-price rule that conflicts with
consumer preferences. However, this comparison sets up a straw-man's argument, where
the platform should give 100% weight to the consumer side, which is unrealistic given that

                                              8
most platforms are for-profit entities. If a society cares about the welfare of stakeholders on
all sides, it is arguably more important to understand how for-profit platforms balance the
interests of the multiple sides, as an internal governor of its own ecosystem.
       On this front, a few studies offer stimulating insights. On quality standards, Hermalin
(2016) shows that a firm that taxes trade on its platform may have incentives to adopt
minimum quality standards even if seller quality is observable to buyers and the standard
is costly for sellers. Empirically, Hui et al. (2018) demonstrate the effect of eBay replacing
the "Power Seller" badge with a more stringent "eBay Top Rated Seller" badge in 2009; the
higher bar motivates some sellers to incur costs for quality improvements while other sellers
give up on the badge and reduce effort. In a different setting, Jin et al. (2020) examine
how the 2015 China Food Safety Law, which aims to help consumers, affects buyers and
sellers on Taobao.com in China. They find that the new law improved the average quality of
surviving sellers, though many small or non-reputable sellers exit, and market concentration
increases. Notably, the badge upgrade on eBay constituted a platform effort to govern the
two sides, whereas China's Food Safety Law was an external regulator trying to strike a new
balance between buyers and sellers in e-commerce. Our study is more similar to the former,
as Airbnb has full control over what cancellation policies to allow or disallow on its platform.
       While quality standards are often touted as a way to help consumers (the actual effects
may differ),7 several studies demonstrate that platforms may have incentives to tilt towards
the non-consumer side. For example, a quality certifier may offer few clues about product
quality once a seller meets a minimum quality standard (Lizzeri 1999); a platform may prefer
some noise in its user-rating system to avoid repelling too many sellers (Bouvard and Levy
2018); an online marketplace may shroud some product attributes because consumers are
unlikely to deviate when they are already deep in the search process (Hossain and Morgan
2006; Blake et al. 2018) or because too much transparency would intensify seller competi-
tion and reduce the platform's profit from the trade (Ellison and Ellison 2009; Johnen and
   7
    Quality standards can also be used to mitigate negative spillovers among sellers on a platform. For
example, Nosko and Tadelis (2015) show that buyers may draw conclusions about the quality of the platform
from single transactions, causing a reputational externality across sellers.


                                                   9
Somogyi 2019). As the founders of Google wrote, "advertising funded search engines will be
inherently biased towards the advertisers and away from the news of the consumers" (Brin
and Page 2012). Consistently, theories have shown that a search engine may be incentivized
to lower the quality of its search results because that will discourage users' (product) search
and soften seller competition (Chen and He 2011; Eliaz and Spieger 2011); and there is em-
pirical evidence that hotel booking platforms may rank a hotel's listing in a worse position
if the same hotel is priced lower on its own website or on other booking platforms (Hunold,
Kesler, and Laitenberger 2020).
   A particularly interesting question is how platform competition affects a platform's role
as an internal governor, especially with respect to non-price rules. In theory, the impact of
competition could go both ways: for instance, Lizzeri (1999) shows that competition among
certifiers results in more detailed quality information, but Bouvard and Levy (2018) find
that platforms facing competition have weaker incentives to boost information accuracy. We
are not aware of any systematic evidence in either direction, though mergers between two
platforms are often followed by platform rule changes in commission fees, search algorithms,
and other dimensions (Yao 2020; Farronato, Fong, and Fradkin 2020).
   In our study, we observe a blanket change that affects all of Airibnb's guest-facing cancel-
lation policies, but the same policy change has different impacts in markets facing different
competition from VRBO. Our findings suggest that more viable competition from VRBO
allows some hosts to escape from the harsher Airbnb policy towards hosts, which may further
weaken the positive network feedback between guests and hosts. This reaction by hosts has
the potential to discourage Airbnb from adopting friendlier policies towards guests in markets
where it faces more competition, should Airbnb have a choice to set different cancellation
policies in different markets. In contrast, competition with VRBO amplifies (dampens) the
punitive effect of automated reviews of host cancellations for listings that offer loose (strict)
cancellation policies, which arguably makes Airbnb more (less) guest-friendly in markets
with mostly loose (strict) listings. These diverging effects of competition are consistent with
the ambiguity suggested in the theoretical literature.

                                               10
2.2     Reputation Systems and the Sharing Economy

Our paper contributes to the literature on review informativeness and reputation systems
in online marketplaces (Senecal et al., 2004; Cox et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2009; Zhang and
Sarvary, 2015; Dai et al., 2018). Works in this literature demonstrate that reviewers can have
strategic incentives to manipulate reviews, which may result in under-reporting of negative
reviews, particularly when users fear retaliation on platforms with reciprocal review systems
(Bolton et al., 2013; Fradkin et al., 2017). Reviewers may also suffer from selection bias,
where consumers are more likely to purchase and review products and services with which
they are a priori satisfied (Li and Hitt, 2008; Masterov et al., 2015). Moreover, some reviewers
may in fact be businesses leaving promotional or voluntary content (or even damaging the
content of competitors) to artificially inflate their online reputations (Mayzlin et al., 2014;
Benderson et al., 2018). Reviews that can be generated anonymously, even at a cost, may be
susceptible to manipulation (Conitzer and Wagman, 2008 and 2014), and hosts on Airbnb
can in fact boost the ratings of their listings by renting nights to friends or family, or to their
own alternate accounts at lower prices.
    The automated cancellation reviews we study do not suffer from these potential manip-
ulations. Our study thus adds to this literature by focusing on what is objectively negative
system reviews, which can only be triggered by seller actions to cancel guest reservations.
This allows us to avoid issues concerning review authenticity. The benefit of doing so is
significant, because even the sheer possibility of review manipulation may impact the beliefs
and actions of both buyers and sellers, which may result in different equilibrium behaviors
(Dellarocas 2006; Anderson and Simester 2014).
    This paper also contributes to the growing literature on the sharing economy and Airbnb.8
Lee et al. (2015) point out that host reputation, including the number of reviews, host re-
sponsiveness, and host tenure, can impact a listing's price per night. Zervas et al. (2016)
indicate that Airbnb listings have higher average ratings compared to the hotel industry.
  8
    Recent works include Zervas et al. (2020), Edelman et al. (2017), Fradkin (2017), Fradkin et al. (2018),
Kim et al. (2017), and Jia and Wagman (2020).



                                                    11
Wang and Nicolau (2017) suggest that host attributes are the most important price deter-
minants of Airbnb listings. Our work complements the above by shedding some light on the
dynamics behind a platform's choice between pro-guest and pro-host rules. In doing so, we
also examine how guests incorporate information about host reliability into their bookings,
and how pro-guest rules may impact hosts. Our findings suggest that perceived unreliabil-
ity is associated with significant costs for sellers, and while pro-guest rules may harm some
hosts, they can benefit hosts in net by attracting more traffic to the platform.



3     Background of Airbnb Governance Framework

Sellers regularly contract with buyers for transactions that will take place at some point in the
future, including airlines, hotels, and suppliers. Sometimes, sellers fail to follow through on
contracted obligations. For example, airlines oversell seats, hotels overbook rooms, suppliers
under-deliver product units, and contractors in construction, consulting, carpentry, roof
repair, among others, may fail to complete agreed upon projects.
    A platform such as Airbnb can try to influence user behavior through a reputation system,
but it cannot directly control the users. Without sufficient trust, hosts may not be willing
to let strangers stay in their dwellings, and guests may not be willing to reserve an unseen
dwelling that is not as standardized as a hotel. To foster trust, Airbnb's reciprocal reputation
system enables hosts and guests to blindly review each other within 14 days after a guest's
stay. If one side does not review the other, the other's review becomes visible after 14 days.
    On Airbnb, short-term rental guests have to follow a listing's cancellation policy (flex-
ible, moderate, or strict), as selected by the listing's host, and pay the corresponding cost
stipulated by the listing's cancellation policy should they cancel a reservation. For example,
if a listing has a strict cancellation policy, its guests would only receive 50% of the cost of
their booking when cancelling a reservation that is at least one week away from arrival, and
lose the full 100% if the cancellation is less than a week away. If a listing offers a flexible
cancellation policy, guests could get a full refund if they cancel up to 24 hours before their


                                               12
trip, or up to 5 days before their trip for listings that offer a moderate cancellation policy.
Under any of the three guest-facing cancellation policies, flexible, moderate or strict, a refund
would not include the fee that guests paid to Airbnb.
      Beginning on May 1, 2018, however, Airbnb started offering guests the option to cancel
their reservations for a full refund -- inclusive of the Airbnb service fees -- within 48 hours
of their booking, as long as their check-in dates are at least 14 days away. In Figure 1, we
show a few Airbnb-provided examples of flexible, moderate, and strict cancellation policies
after the introduction of the 48-hour rule.
      We are not aware of any other major policy change on Airbnb around May 2018. Airbnb's
commission structure (3% charged to hosts and 12% to guests) was stable throughout our
sample period (2015-2019) until Airbnb started testing a simplified fee structure (0% on
guests and 15% on hosts) in December 2020. Similarly, Airbnb remained a private company
until its IPO in December 2020. Airbnb rolled out an algorithmic tool for price setting in
2013. Despite its subsequent update in 2015 (Hill, 2015), according to Gibbs et al. (2018),
host adoption of dynamic pricing has been limited.
      Perhaps in part because some hosts complained about guest cancellations after the in-
troduction of the 48-hour rule, Airbnb began allowing hosts to offer a no-refund option to
guests on October 1, 2019.9 This option offer a 10% discount to guests and is only available
to listings with flexible or moderate cancellation policies. Unfortunately, our data does not
capture this feature and thus we do not know how many flexible or moderate listings incor-
porated this option after October 2019. Since this option was only available in the last three
months of our sample period, we have rerun our analyses excluding these three months and
found that our results are robust to their exclusion. Given this no-refund option is in some
sense a partial dial back from the universal change of the 48-hour rule, the results reported
in this paper (with data until December 2019) are likely more conservative than the true
effects of the 48-hour rule.
  9
    See     https://www.airbnb.com/resources/hosting-homes/a/airbnb-answers-protecting-you-from-guest-
cancellations-124, accessed on May 14, 2021.




                                                 13
       On the host side, Airbnb provides an automated system review, which is added to the
other, guest-provided reviews, for listings whose hosts cancel a confirmed reservation prior
to the guest's arrival. Since they are system generated and posted only upon a confirmed
cancellation by a host, these cancellation reviews have a pre-structured syntax, and can be
readily distinguished from other, guest-written reviews.10 Figure 2 provides an example.
These automated reviews may signal to travelers that there could be a higher than usual
probability that their lodging plans might fall through at some point prior to their arrival
-- a costly situation especially in locales of high demand for temporary accommodations.
       In addition to receiving automated cancellation reviews when cancelling guest reserva-
tions, hosts forfeit eligibility for the "Superhost" status on Airbnb for a year, a status badge
related to metrics concerning a listing's performance.11 Host may also incur direct mone-
tary punishments from Airbnb in the form of a reduction in the amount of a future payout.
Airbnb also blocks the host-cancelled calendar days on the listing from being re-booked, so
the host cannot rent the listing out to another guest on Airbnb. However, if the listing
was cross-listed on both Airbnb and VRBO, the host can still rent it out on VRBO after
cancelling the booking on Airbnb.
       As for competition, it is difficult to define the market for short-term rentals. A guest
looking for short-term rentals may find supply in hotels, bed and breakfasts, and hostels, in
addition to private-room and shared-space listings; a host that manages a residential property
  10
     The automated cancellation review format is: "The host canceled this reservation X days before arrival.
This is an automated posting," where X 1 is as stated. For same-day cancellations, guests can still post
a (non-automated) review. Prior to August 2015, the format was: "The reservation was canceled X days
before arrival. This is an automated posting." There are multiple benefits to looking at system-generated
cancellation reviews as a measure of negative information about sellers' transaction reliability. First, they are
credible, non-manipulable, and demonstrably negative. Second, while prior works that study user-generated
reviews tend to focus on products such as goods, hotels or restaurants (including Mayzlin et al. 2014 and Luca
and Zervas 2016), Airbnb reviews are much more personal and rate an experience in another individual's
dwelling. As a result, reviews on Airbnb are overwhelmingly positive (Zervas et al. 2020), which may grant
further weight to the negative information implied by automated cancellation reviews. Third, Airbnb does
not show individual guest scoring of a listing but only averages, making it less clear-cut to objectively identify
negative guest reviews in a data set -- a non-issue for automated cancellation reviews.
  11
     Hosts who meet the following criteria receive a Superhost designation: (i) Hosted at least 10 guests in
the past year; (ii) maintained a high response rate and low response time; (iii) received primarily 5-star
reviews; (iv) did not cancel guest reservations in the past year. VRBO has a similar feature called `Premier'
host.



                                                       14
could put the property up for short-term rent, long-term rent, or other use. As a match-
maker, Airbnb brings together guests and hosts, as does VRBO, FlipKey, Booking.com, and
traditional travel agencies, among others.
       In this paper, we only consider the competition between Airbnb and VRBO because
VRBO has a similar business model and is arguably the closest competitor to Airbnb in the
US. In particular, VRBO offers similar features to hosts and guests but does not generate
automated cancellation reviews for hosts who cancel a guest's reservation, nor offers a 48-hour
grace period for guests who seek a full refund after booking a reservation.12 Moreover, as
VRBO's original name (Vacation Rentals By Owners) implies, VRBO specializes in vacation
rentals, and thus it tends to be more present in cities that attract tourism or in the touristic
parts of a city. This generates natural variations in the extent of local competition between
VRBO and Airbnb.



4        Data

We use all consumer-facing information and review content on the complete set of hosts
who had advertised their listings in the 10 US cities of Atlanta, Austin, Boston, Chicago,
Houston, Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York, Seattle, and Washington DC, on Airbnb
from January 2015 to December 2019. We also obtain such information for hosts who list
their properties in these 10 cities on VRBO from Janaury 2017 to December 2019. The data
was acquired from AirDNA, a company that specializes in collecting Airbnb and VRBO
data.
       Each listing is identified by a unique identifier and comes with time-invariant characteris-
  12
    Airbnb's cancellation policies on both its guest and host sides are illustrative of the observation that
peer-to-peer markets such as home sharing and ride sharing may also suffer from a reliability problem, more
so than traditional similar markets. The reliability issue can pervade both sides: on the seller side, Airbnb
hosts may cancel guests' confirmed reservations; on the buyer side, Airbnb guests may cancel their own
reservations. More centralized traditional market operators, such as hotels and taxis, offer standardization
and consistency, which may help improve reliability and align expectations. To foster reliability in a peer-
to-peer setting, a platform can choose policies that incentivize more reliable behavior on both its seller and
buyer sides, but those policies may also have other effects.




                                                     15
tics such as the host's unique identifier, listing zip code, approximate locale,13 and property
type (entire home, private room, or shared space). Throughout the paper, we focus on
entire-home listings, which are both more numerous14 and more comparable with the same
type of listings on VRBO.15
       Listing information also comprises time-variant characteristics, including an average
monthly price,16 the number of nights in a listing's calendar reserved by guests in a month,
nights that had been blocked off in a month (i.e., nights that hosts chose not to offer to
guests), the number of reservations reserved by guests in a month, the listing's number of
reviews, its average overall review rating by guests (based on a 5 star rating system with 1/4
star intervals), the listing's guest-facing cancellation policy, its minimum nights per stay, its
maximum number of guests, a measure of the host's experience (number of days since the
host's first listing was created), review time gap (number of days since the latest review),
whether the listing is offered for Instant Booking (i.e., without requiring host approval), the
average response time in minutes (the time it takes the host to respond to an initial guest
inquiry), response rate to guest inquiries (percentage of inquiries to which hosts respond
within 24 hours), and whether a listing's host is a Superhost.
       Similar to Airbnb's three-tier structure, VRBO defines guest cancellation policy in five
tiers: no refund, strict, firm, moderate and relaxed.17 Throughout the paper, we treat no
refund and strict as "strict" on VRBO, comparable to Airbnb's strict cancellation policy.
The other three -- firm, moderate and relaxed -- are aggregated as "loose" on VRBO,
comparable to flexible and moderate cancellation policies on Airbnb. Reclassifying VRBO's
firm cancellation policy as "strict" generates similar results.
  13
      To be exact, the data includes latitude and longitude positioning in a six-digit decimal format that
indicates the approximate location of a listing.
   14
      Private room and shared space average 1,248 and 150 per month per city on Airbnb, respectively.
   15
      VRBO does not allow private room or shared space listings.
   16
      A listing's per-night price represents the most recent rate a host set for the night up until the night was
either booked, blocked off the calendar, or remained unbooked/unblocked until it passed; these nightly prices
are then averaged over the month to give an average monthly listing price -- for brevity, we henceforth refer
to these averages as the listing's price.
   17
      Source: https://help.vrbo.com/articles/What-are-the-cancellation-policy-options, accessed on May 14,
2021.



                                                       16
       We focus on listings that are offered for rent for less than 30 days. We also exclude
observations with listing prices per night over $1000, because some hosts may set their rates
prohibitively high in lieu of blocking their calendars. We use regular monthly scrapes between
January 2015 and December 2019 on Airbnb and between January 2017 and December 2019
on VRBO. In total, the listing-month sample includes 1,158,952 observations of 128,428
entire-home listings on Airbnb, and 203,225 observations of 33,872 listings on VRBO.
       To measure the occupancy rate of a listing, we divide the number of reserved days by the
number of days available for reservations in a given month. We use two approaches for the
number of days available in a month, one being the number of calendar days, and the other
being the number of calendar days minus the number of days that had been blocked off the
calendar by the listing's host. Results under both approaches are similar and we report the
latter.
       To measure competition between Airbnb and VRBO, we use geographical mapping soft-
ware to count the total number of listings on VRBO that are located in close proximity to
each Airbnb listing. We define close proximity by forming a geographic circle with a radius of
0.3 miles around each Airbnb listing based on its approximate coordinates. We then define a
competition index equal to the number of VRBO listings divided by the total number of both
Airbnb and VRBO listings. If a listing appears on both platforms, it is counted as one on
each. This calculation is repeated every month, so the competition index is listing specific
and time-varying. In most regression analyses, we use a listing's competition index as of
April 2018 to avoid a potential change in the competition index because of the introduction
of the 48-hour rule in May 2018. In some specifications, we split the sample by high and low
competition areas, where a listing belongs to a high competition area if the listing's local
competition index is above the city-median as of April 2018.
       The next step is computing the number of host cancellations for each Airbnb listing.18
To do so, we take advantage of the fixed format of the automated reviews, e.g., "The host
canceled this reservation X days before arrival. This is an automated posting." Searching
  18
       We do not know host cancellations for VRBO listings.


                                                     17
for such a format in listing reviews, we count the cumulative number of cancellation reviews
for each Airbnb listing up to each specific month.
      Table 1 summarizes the data for Airbnb and VRBO listings separately (2015-2019 for
Airbnb and 2017-2019 for VRBO). On average, VRBO listings have a higher listing price
than Airbnb listings,19 but a lower number of reservations per month and a lower occupancy
rate. The average review rating is high on both platforms, consistent with the literature.
As for guest-facing cancellation policies, most listings on both platforms offer flexible or
moderate cancellation (we refer to both as "loose") policies. Throughout the sample, 26.5%
of Airbnb listings offer a strict cancellation policy, and 31.46% do so on VRBO. On the host
side, the average number of host cancellation reviews is low per listing -- about 11.47% of
listings have at least one cancellation review in our sample, and 24% of such listings are
located in New York City. On average, Airbnb listings comprise 87% of the total number of
listings within a 0.3-mile radius (implying a competition index of 0.13), though some listings
may be listed on both Airbnb and VRBO. For the period when we have both Airbnb and
VRBO data (2017-2019), 13.21% of Airbnb listings are cross-listed on VRBO.
      Focusing on Airbnb listings (2015-2019), Table 2 reports summary statistics on host
cancellations, by the type of guest-facing cancellation policy offered by the Airbnb host,
before and after Airbnb introduced the 48-hour rule. We consider three different groups of
listings (0, 1, and 2+ cancellations). The table suggests that listings with strict cancellation
policies are more likely to have two or more host cancellations than listings with loose
cancellation policies. The distribution of host cancellations seems stable over time, but
listings without host cancellations slightly increase after the May-2018 rule change.
      For Airbnb listings (2015-2019), Table 3 tabulates price, reservations, and occupancy
rate by the number of host cancellation reviews on Airbnb and the type of guest cancellation
policy the host offers. On average, listings with a strict cancellation policy have more reser-
vations, higher prices, and higher occupancy rates, which suggests that strict-cancellation
listings may provide higher-quality accommodations that can attract more guests even under
 19
      These prices do not include transaction fees that guests and hosts pay Airbnb and VRBO.


                                                    18
strict cancellation policies. Together, Table 2 and Table 3 highlight that listing quality is
multi-dimensional: the properties that adopt strict cancellation policies are more popular
than other properties, but they also offer guests the least flexibility (in terms of guest can-
cellations) and the highest uncertainty (in terms of the likelihood of host cancellations) on
average. This tradeoff is likely driven by the fact that most hosts on Airbnb manage few
properties, and thus hosts of more popular properties face a tighter capacity constraint and
a higher opportunity cost of guest flexibility.
    Figure 3 presents the competition index and the number of listings for the cities covered
in our dataset, mapping out this comparison using different shades for the level of VRBO
competition by city, and different bubble sizes for the number of Airbnb listings in each
city. New York City is the largest home-sharing market in our sample, with approximately
75,000 unique listing IDs over the sample period. Airbnb listings in New York City and New
Orleans tend to have higher competition from VRBO listings, compared to other cities in
our sample. Zooming into the top 30 zip codes in terms of the total number of listings (all in
New York City), Figure 4 suggests that areas that have a higher number of Airbnb listings
also face more competition from VRBO.



5     Empirical Analyses

5.1    Effects of the 48-Hour Rule

In this subsection, we assess the effects of Airbnb's introduction of the 48-hour rule on its
listings. We use a difference-in-differences methodology (DID), which contrasts Airbnb and
VRBO listings, before and after Airbnb introduced the 48-hour rule in May 2018. Our main
hypothesis is that, after the new rule came into effect, Airbnb listings would benefit from
a demand increase, as the new pro-guest rule should attract more reservations from new
and existing guests. This is built on the assumption that Airbnb and VRBO listings follow
similar pre-treatment trends before May 2018, which we confirm in statistical tests later



                                              19
on. A potential caveat of using VRBO as the control is that market demand may switch
between the two platforms, implying that our DID results may have double-counted the true
effect on Airbnb listings. However, from Airbnb's perspective, the estimated effects would
all contribute to the platform's market position vis-`
                                                     a-vis VRBO, no matter whether they are
driven by demand switching from VRBO or new demand for short-term rentals.
      Our baseline specification is:


                       yit = i + t + Xst + Airbnbi × P ost4 8hr Rulet + it,                                    (1)


where i denotes an individual listing, t indexes month, Airbnbi is a dummy that equals 1 for
Airbnb listings,20 P ost 48hr Rulet is a dummy that equals 1 if t is on or after May 2018.
Depending on the specification, the dependent variable Yit is the number of reservations per
month, log of the average listing price over the month, or log of the monthly occupancy rate.
Year-month and listing fixed effects are denoted by t and i , respectively. Xit is listing-level
controls, including the number of bedrooms and bathrooms, the number of minimum nights
per stay, the number of maximum guests per stay, average review rating, number of reviews,
Superhost status, instant-book status, response rate, response time, the number of months
since the host created their first listing, as well as the number of cancellation reviews of the
same listing in period t - 1.
      Because the number of monthly reservations is a count variable, we use a Poisson specifi-
cation and report marginal effects. The price and occupancy regressions are OLS, reporting
coefficient estimates. As shown in the last row of Table 4, all regressions pass the pre-
treatment test; standard errors are clustered by zip code throughout.
      Our baseline model (Column 1 of Table 4) suggests that Airbnb listings enjoy a 5.51%
increase in the number of reservations (as compared to VRBO listings), after Airbnb allowed
a 48-hour grace period on guest cancellations. This effect can be further decomposed into a
2.75% increase in the average monthly listing price and a 1.92% increase in occupancy rates.
 20
      In another specification, Airbnbi is 1 for Airbnb listings with strict cancellation policies and 0 otherwise.



                                                        20
   Within Airbnb listings, we explore heterogeneous effects according to a listing's guest-
facing cancellation policy. For example, listings that offer loose cancellation policies before
the policy change already offer more lenient guest cancellation policies than the 48-hour rule,
and thus are largely unaffected, except that Airbnb guests can now get the platform fees
refunded if they cancel within 48 hours (hosts are only charged platform fees on payments
that are not refunded to guests). Hence, listings with loose cancellation policies should
not face any direct cost increases from the new 48-hour rule, whereas their potential guests
directly benefit from it. On the other hand, listings with strict cancellation policies may
face higher costs as a result of the 48-hour rule, since their hosts no longer get to keep any
percentage of the revenue if potential guests cancel within 48 hours of their bookings (for
reservations at least 14 days away).
   To assess such differences, we proceed with a similar empirical methodology but different
treatment and control groups. In Columns 4 to 6 of Table 4, we define Airbnb listings with
loose cancellation policies as the treatment group and VRBO listings of similar cancellation
policies as the control. This comparison aims to tease out the effect from the increased
demand as a result of the platform's new policy. Results show that Airbnb listings with
loose cancellation policies benefit from the policy change, with a rise of 7.31% in the number
of monthly reservations, 3.92% in listing price, and 2.74% in occupancy rate after May 2018.
   To highlight the differential effect on other listings, we follow a similar specification but
define the treatment group as the Airbnb listings with strict cancellation policies, and the
control group as the Airbnb listings with loose cancellation policies. As shown in Columns 7
to 9 of Table 4, Airbnb listings with strict cancellation policies, relative to their Airbnb coun-
terparts with loose policies, incur a 3.31% decrease in their monthly number of reservations,
a 2.27% decrease in their average listing price, and a 1.95% decrease in their occupancy rate
after the platform's policy change.
   These relative effects are smaller than the demand increase enjoyed by the Airbnb listings
with loose cancellation policies (7.31%, 3.92% and 2.74% in Columns 4-6), so the net effects
are still positive for the listings with strict cancellation policies, if they are compared with

                                               21
VRBO listings of loose cancellation policies. In other words, nearly all Airbnb listings benefit
from a demand increase from the 48-hour rule, but the hosts that offer strict cancellation
policies before the change benefit less. This could be because the 48-hour rule raises the
costs of hosts with strict policies, or because these hosts were already close to their capacity
constraints and thus had less room to improve in reservations and occupancy rate. However,
their price increase post May 2018 is also of a smaller magnitude, which casts doubts on
the second explanation. A third explanation is that the 48-hour rule motivates guests to
pay closer attention to the guest-facing cancellation policy and associate a lower willingness
to pay for listings with a strict policy. This is plausible for listings that maintain or adopt
strict cancellation policies post the 48-hour rule. But since hosts can loosen their cancellation
policies anytime, it does not explain why the effects of the 48-hour rule are smaller for hosts
that had strict cancellation policies before the rule change. As shown later on, hosts that
offered strict cancellation policies before the 48-hour rule are also more likely to use host
cancellation after the 48-hour rule, which could directly reduce the number of reservations
and occupancy on Airbnb.


5.2    Effects of System-Generated Cancellation Reviews

The vast majority of Airbnb listings in our sample have an average overall rating at or above
4-stars. Hence, system-generated host cancellation reviews may play an important role in
potential guests' booking decisions. In particular, listings without a cancellation review may
be perceived as offering a higher-quality product, which can result in additional reservations,
higher occupancy rates, and higher prices.
   Our baseline specification is:


                        yit = i + t + Xst + HostCanceli,t-1 + it ,                           (2)


where HostCanceli,t-1 , is the total number of cancellation reviews for listing i at time t - 1.
The dependent and control variables are the same as those in Equation 1. Figure 5 plots


                                               22
the average number of host cancellation reviews per listing over time. Aside from some
seasonality over the holiday months, there is a notable difference in the trend immediately
after Airbnb introduced the 48-hour rule in May 2018.
    One may argue that some omitted demand factors may affect a listing's lagged cancel-
lation review counts, its price, and other performance metrics. To search for instruments,
we recognize that a listing's cancellation reviews are subject to external noise (e.g., extreme
weather or the level of law enforcement dedicated to sniffing out illegal short-term rental
operators in the city in a specific time), but guests may not have complete information
about such noise. Taking advantage of this, we use the number of days with at least 1 inch
of precipitation and the number of days with extreme temperatures (maximum  90 F or
minimum  0 F) as instruments for the number of cancellation reviews.21 The correlation
between the precipitation instrument and the number of cancellation reviews is 0.842, and
the correlation between the temperature instrument and the number of cancellations is 0.491.
We further confirm the power of the instruments in a first-stage F-test (above 10) and their
likely exogeneity in a Durbin-Wu-Hausman test.
    In regressions for the number of reservations and occupancy rate, we include the average
listing price as a control variable. To address the potential endogeneity of price, we use
as instruments the average monthly price of another category of listings (private rooms or
shared spaces), within a 10-mile radius of each entire-home listing. The different listing types
tend to be correlated in terms of overall supply but may differ on the demand side due to
the intention to attract different types of guests. The correlation between log(entire-home
price) and log(private-room price) is 0.781, and the correlation between log(entire-home
price) and log(shared-space price) is 0.571. The first-stage F-test for the joint significance of
the coefficients of these instruments is 17.85.
    Table 5 reports the results of two-stage least squares with these instruments. The first
  21
     We use monthly weather data from NOAA (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/search) to obtain the
instruments. We have latitude and longitude coordinates of each weather station, which we use to either
assign a zip code to the station or to match a listing with its nearest station in cases where there are no
weather stations in a zip code.



                                                    23
three columns are without listing fixed effects. They show that one more host cancellation
review is associated with a 6.17% reduction in the number of reservations, a 7.71% decline
in occupancy rate, but an insignificant change in listing price. When we include listing fixed
effects, the negative effect of host cancellation reviews on price becomes significant (4.15%
in Column 5). The negative effect on the number of reservations increases slightly to 6.88%
and the negative effect on occupancy rates drops to 4.77% (both remain significant at 99%
confidence).
   For the control variables, it is notable that enabling Instant Book on a listing (i.e., guest
bookings are immediately confirmed without requiring a host's manual approval) seems to
benefit Airbnb listings, resulting in a 5.55% increase in the number of monthly reservations,
a 1.46% increase in the listing's price, and a 4.59% rise in its occupancy rate. In comparison,
both the total number of reviews and overall rating (in terms of stars) are correlated with
reservations, price, and occupancy rate with statistical significance (mostly positive except
for number of reviews on price). As expected, the Superhost status of a listing is related to
more reservations, higher prices, and higher occupancy rates.


5.3    Platform Competition

Our findings thus far suggest that the two pro-guest rules of Airbnb have mixed effects on
hosts. On the one hand, these rules make Airbnb more attractive to guests, and thus benefit
hosts via increased demand. On the other hand, the rules may increase the costs of some
Airbnb hosts, as some reservations may be cancelled by guests without compensating the
host's opportunity costs, and the hosts may face economic penalties on future business if
they engage in host cancellation. Hosts may also become more dependent on Airbnb, and
face potentially more competition within Airbnb, if more guests end up joining Airbnb and
staying on the platform due to its pro-guest rules. That is, as a result of these pro-guest rules,
Airbnb could end up with more guests, more hosts, and more transactions. More generally,
the potential increase of market concentration is a concern about platform competition.



                                               24
   Of course, an increase in market concentration at the platform level is not the only
possibility of a future market evolution. It is also possible that, by raising the overall quality
of hosts on Airbnb, competing platforms may be induced to focus on the lower end of the
host quality spectrum, potentially exposing Airbnb to more platform competition.
   Against this background, we focus on the extent of platform competition from VRBO
in our sample period. VRBO, arguably the closest competitor to Airbnb in the US short-
term rentals market (aside from hotels, bed and breakfasts, and other traditional suppliers),
provides a similar service and faces similar tradeoffs in determining which pro-guest rules to
adopt. In this competitive market, both hosts and guests can multi-home. Given Airbnb's
apparent pro-guest strategy, VRBO may prefer the platform design of hiding host cancella-
tions, as by doing so it may attract frustrated hosts from Airbnb and provide existing hosts
with an incentive to stay on its platform. Guests, meanwhile, could view VRBO hosts as of-
fering lower-quality service, on average, but lower quality may also mean lower costs; hence,
VRBO can still attract consumers, especially those that are price sensitive but less quality
sensitive. Consequently, the policies adopted by these competing platforms in equilibrium
may feature differentiation in their pro-guest rules, which further implies differentiation in
price, occupancy, and cancellation frequencies. By considering the extent of VRBO compe-
tition in our specifications, we aim to test how Airbnb's two pro-guest rules differentially
affect Airbnb listings as a function of their competition from VRBO listings.
   To show the raw data by platform competition, Figure 6 depicts the monthly trend of
the number of Airbnb listings, Airbnb listing price, Airbnb listing occupancy rate, and the
multi-homing proportion of listings from 2017 to 2019. In line with Figure 3, we group
Atlanta, Houston, Los Angeles, New Orleans, and New York as high-competition cities, and
group the other five as low-competition cities. This grouping is based on the fact that the
average share of VRBO listings (in total listings at the zip code level) is higher in the first
set of cities. This binary grouping is only for illustration in Figure 6. In the regression
analysis, we will use a continuous competition index per listing (as defined in Section 4) to
characterize high- and low-competition areas within each city.

                                               25
   As reported in Figure 6a, the number of Airbnb listings has no obvious change in low-
competition cities after Airbnb introduced the 48-hour rule in May 2018, but it decreases
slightly in the high-competition cities. Listing price and occupancy rates increase in both
types of markets after May 2018, while the magnitude of the increase is greater in low-
competition cities. Consistently, the proportion of listings that multi-home on both Airbnb
and VRBO increase more after May 2018 in the high-competition cities than in the low-
competition cities. All these patterns suggest that the 48-hour rule is more helpful to Airbnb
in the cities with less platform competition.
   This impression persists when we conduct the regression analysis. In particular, we
separate the sample into high- and low-competition sub-samples, according to whether an
Airbnb listing's local competition index as of April 2018 is above or below the city-median
competition index at that time.22 Within each subsample, we repeat the DID analysis of
Equation 1 for all three listing outcomes.
   Columns 1 to 6 of Table 7 focus on the high-competition sub-sample, which includes
listings that had a local competition index above the city-median as of April 2018. In
Columns 1-3, the treatment group is defined as Airbnb listings with loose cancellation policies
in April 2018, while the control group is VRBO listings with similar (loose) cancellation
policies as of April 2018. Columns 4-6 define the treatment group as Airbnb listings with
strict cancellation policies in April 2018, compared to VRBO listings with similar (strict)
cancellation policies. Results suggest that, after the 48-hour rule, Airbnb listings with loose
(strict) cancellation policies benefit from a 6.33% (1.79%) increase in their number of monthly
reservations, a 3.19% (0.82%) increase in price, and a 2.25% (0.68%) increase in occupancy
rates.
   Columns 7 to 12 follow the same structure, with a focus on the low-competition sub-
sample, which includes listings that had a local competition index below the city-median as
of April 2018. In all of these columns, the effect of the 48-hour rule is greater than that in the
  22
     Using sample-median instead of city-median yields similar results. We prefer city-median because the
competition index may differ systematically across cities for reasons other than Airbnb-VRBO competition
(e.g. city wide regulation on short-term rentals).


                                                   26
high-competition sub-sample. Specifically, (7.08%, 5.24%, 4.53%) vs. (6.33%, 3.19%, 2.25%)
for listings with loose cancellation policies, and (3.88%, 2.77%, 2.63%) vs. (1.79%, 0.82%,
0.68%) for listings with strict cancellation policies. Across the board, platform competition
appears to dampen the benefits of business expansion for Airbnb listings because of the
48-hour rule.
   Turning to the host side, we now report the effect of platform competition on the sig-
nalling value of automated reviews of host cancellations. Table 7 reports the estimation
results of Equation 2 for four sub-samples: listings with loose cancellation policies ("loose
listings") in high-competition areas, loose listings in low-competition areas, listings with
strict cancellation policies ("strict listings") in high-competition areas, and strict listings in
low-competition areas, all as of April 2018. A comparison of Columns 1/5/9 and Columns
2/6/10 indicates that, when the local competition index increases from below-city-median to
above-city-median, the negative signal of one more host cancellation review becomes stronger
for loose listings in all listing outcomes: the number of reservations drops more (-5.82% vs. -
7.71%), the average price per night declines more (-4.33% vs. -7.29%), and a slightly larger
drop in occupancy rates (-5.17% vs. -5.72%). This suggests that more competition with
VRBO amplifies the negative signal of cancellation reviews for loose listings. One potential
explanation is that Airbnb guests are more likely to multi-home in a competitive market,
and as a result they are less tolerant of loose listings with a history of canceled guest reser-
vations. Unfortunately, we do not observe guest multi-homing and therefore cannot test this
hypothesis directly.
   In contrast, if we compare Columns 3/7/11 and Columns 4/8/12, the results are opposite
for listings with strict cancellation policies: having one more host cancellation review is still
a negative signal, but its negative impact on listing performance is of a smaller magnitude
if the listing is located in the high-competition area of a city than in its low-competition
area. Across the board, the negative effects of host cancellation reviews are also smaller
for strict listings than for loose listings in the same type of competition areas. Altogether,
these results suggest that Airbnb guests are more forgiving as far as strict listings that have

                                               27
host cancellation reviews, especially in high-competition areas. This could happen because
strict listings tend to be associated with more popular and harder-to-book properties. As
a result, guests may be willing to sacrifice flexibility and uncertainty in an effort to secure
these properties. This tradeoff does not exist for loose listings, which explains why host
cancellation reviews are less tolerated for loose listings, especially when a property is located
in a high-competition area within a city.


5.4     Supply-Side Dynamics

We have demonstrated thus far that listings within the same city may face different degrees
of platform competition, and that such competition may play a role in how different pro-
guest rules affect those listings and how their hosts react to those rules. In this subsection,
we provide further analysis of the effects of the 48-hour rule on the supply side of Airbnb,
including the effect on the number of Airbnb listings, hosts' decisions to multi-home, as well
as their decisions to use host cancellation and alter their listings' guest-facing cancellation
policies.
   In Table 8, we first assess the effect of the 48-hour rule on the number of Airbnb listings
and multi-homing listings. We do so by using the number of Airbnb listings (and multi-
homing listings) at the zip-code-month level as the treatment group, while using the number
of VRBO-only listings (i.e., not including listings that multi-home) as the control group.
Columns 1 and 2 indicate that, post the 48-hour rule, the number of monthly Airbnb list-
ings per zip code declines 2.79% in low-competition areas and 2.02% in high-competition
areas. These two numbers are not statistically different from each other. Meanwhile, the
number of multi-homing listings increases by 0.28% in low-competition areas and 1% in
high-competition areas. The difference is highly significant. Consistently at the listing level,
Column 3 suggests that Airbnb hosts are more likely to list their property on VRBO after
the 48-hour rule in comparison to VRBO hosts listing their properties on Airbnb, and this
increase is more conspicuous in high-competition areas than in low-competition areas.



                                               28
   Since the 48-hour rule imposes a minimum quality standard on guest cancellation policies,
it is interesting to examine how hosts adjust their cancellation policies after the 48-hour rule.
Figure 7 depicts trends of the number of listings with loose and strict cancellation policies, on
Airbnb and VRBO separately. The vertical line marks the time that Airbnb introduced the
48-hour rule. Both Airbnb and VRBO listings track each other somewhat closely, and the
number of listings with loose host cancellation policies exhibits an increase on both platforms
after May 2018, whereas there appears to be a decrease in the number of listings with strict
cancellation policies.
   To further examine the causal effect of the 48-hour rule, we run a listing-level regression
where the dependent variable is whether the listing adopts a strict cancellation policy as of
month t, and the key independent variables are whether the listing is on Airbnb (vs. VRBO),
whether month t is after the 48-hour rule, whether the listing is located in an area with
above-city-median competition (as of April 2018), and their interactions. We control for
listing attributes as well as city, zip-code and month fixed effects.
   The results are reported in Column 4 of Table 8, and suggest that the fraction of Airbnb
listings that offer strict cancellation policies dropped significantly after the 48-hour rule, with
a larger decline in high competition areas than in low competition areas. This is understand-
able, as the 48-hour rule has forced all hosts to offer more flexibility in guest cancellations,
which makes strict cancellation policies more homogenized with loose cancellation policies.
Some hosts of strict listings may find it pointless to insist on a (dampened) strict cancellation
policy on Airbnb.
   In the same Table 8, Columns 5 and 6 focus on the Airbnb sample only. This allows us
to characterize how loose and strict listings differ and how host cancellation reviews relate
to cross-listing and exit decisions. The shortcoming is that we now lack a control group
because we do not observe host cancellations on VRBO. In short, Column 5 suggests that
cross-listing is more likely to occur if the host of the Airbnb listing offers a strict cancellation
policy, has any cancellation reviews, or operates in high-competition areas. Column 6 shows
that strict listings or listings in high-competition areas are less likely to exit Airbnb, while

                                                29
listings with any cancellation reviews are more likely to exit. This is consistent with the
findings that strict listings tend to be associated with more popular properties, and host
cancellation reviews are by and large a negative signal on Airbnb. In the raw data, 79% of
the listings that exited Airbnb post the 48-hour rule had already offered flexible or moderate
cancellation policies even before the 48-hour rule, but their average price and occupancy rate
were much lower than an average listing on Airbnb.23 This suggests that, although loose
listings are not directly affected by the 48-hour rule, and the traffic expansion on Airbnb
has on average benefited loose listings more than strict ones, the decline in the total number
of Airbnb listings is mostly driven by loose listings associated with lower-quality properties.
One explanation is that the 48-hour rule has intensified competition within Airbnb, as strict
and loose listings become more homogenized in their cancellation policies, and some hosts of
loose listings at the low end of property qualities find it difficult to survive such competition.
    To further examine the difference between loose and strict listings, we run a regression on
the Airbnb sample only, where the dependent variable is the dummy of whether an Airbnb
listing is cross-listed on VRBO, and the key independent variables are whether the month
is after the introduction of the 48-hour rule, and its interaction with whether the listing
is located in a high-competition area of the respective city. As previously, we control for
month and listing fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by zip code. This regression is
conducted separately for flexible, moderate and strict listings (as of April 2018). Results are
reported in Columns 1-3 of Table 9.
    To our surprise, the rise in cross-listing is driven by the listings that had offered flexible
or moderate cancellation policies before the 48-hour rule. At first glance, this seems counter-
intuitive because only strict listings are directly affected by the 48-hour rule and the cost
implications of the rule should push hosts of strict listings to "escape" to VRBO. This
prediction does not pan out in the data, because hosts that offered strict cancellation policies
  23
     The listings that exited Airbnb after the 48 hour rule had an average price of $131.45 before the 48-hour
rule, as compared to $176.36 of stayers. They also differed in the average occupancy rate (18.72% for exiters
vs. 36.28% for stayers) and the number of reservations per month (3.77 for exiters vs. 7.82 for stayers) before
the 48-hour rule.



                                                      30
had already been much more likely to cross-list on VRBO even before the 48-hour rule (Table
3 Column 4). The rise of loose listings being cross-listed on VRBO is probably driven by an
indirect effect: since the 48-hour rule has increased the (perceived) quality of strict listings,
it intensifies competition within Airbnb, which could motivate hosts of some loose listings
to seek extra revenue on an alternative platform.
   The last two columns of Table 9 look at host cancellations on Airbnb. Within high-
competition areas, Column 4 compares strict and loose listings before and after the 48-hour
rule. In particular, we define the dependent variable as whether an Airbnb listing has any
host cancellation in month t, while the key independent variables are whether the host offers
a strict cancellation policy in month t, whether the host cross-lists on VRBO in t, whether
t is post the 48-hour rule, and their interactions. As before, we include month fixed effects
and listing fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by zip code. Results suggest that cross-
listing hosts are more likely to cancel, especially if they offer a strict cancellation policy, and
this tendency increases further after the 48-hour rule. In comparison, the same regression for
listings in low-competition areas show no coefficient significant at the 95% confidence. This
suggests that the 48-hour rule has motivated more host cancellations among hosts of cross-
listed strict listings. This is understandable, because the 48-hour rule has introduced more
uncertainty for hosts of strict listings on Airbnb, who could get around it by cross-listing
their properties on both Airbnb and VRBO and cancelling an Airbnb reservation if needed.
Although host cancellation is a negative signal and could hurt the host's future business on
Airbnb, its negative impact on strict listings in high-competition areas is somewhat limited
(Table 7), and the resultant profit loss on Airbnb is probably less than the the corresponding
revenue gain from cross-listing on VRBO. Ironically, this reaction to the 48-hour rule -- a
rule that aims to increase guest flexibility when booking strict listings -- ends up lowering
the quality of service for some guests.




                                                31
5.5     Back-of-the-Envelope Calculations of Airbnb's Gain from the

        48-Hour Rule

A platform, as the governor of its own ecosystem, should not only address users of different
sides as a match-making intermediary, but also consider the users as participants in the
ecosystem. As a consequence, the governance frameworks created by the platform must take
into account the interests of platform users. So far, our analysis has shown that positive
network effects between guests and hosts indeed motivate Airbnb to adopt the 48-hour grace
period as a pro-guest rule, and that such a rule has increased traffic for hosts while also
increasing costs to some host types.
   With respect to the competition between Airbnb and VRBO, different markets with
different competitive landscapes may lead to different effects from Airbnb's introduction of
the 48-hour rule. Using our results, we run several back-of-envelope calculations with respect
to Airbnb's profit in each local market (i.e., by each city) after accounting for the competition
level with VRBO.
   Specifically, we first run the same analyses as in the previous subsections but taking each
city as a separate sub-sample, assessing the effects of the 48-hour rule on the number of
Airbnb listings, price, and occupancy rate within each of the 10 cities. We next collect the
number of Airbnb listings in each city before and after the rule change. For Airbnb listings
that also listed on VRBO, for simplicity, we assume these listings receive a similar number of
reservations from the two platforms (i.e., in aggregate, equivalently, half of the total number
of such listings have transactions with Airbnb guests, and the other half with VRBO guests).
We further collect the average number of automated cancellation reviews in each city before
and after the new Airbnb rule was introduced, and multiply it by the average effects of
automated cancellation reviews on price and occupancy (in each city subsample) to assess
the gain/loss after May 2018. The idea is to compare Airbnb's profit within the same city
before and after the rule change, accounting for the effects on price and occupancy after May
2018.


                                               32
   Table 10 indicates that Airbnb listings in cities with higher competition from VRBO gain
relatively less from Airbnb's new policy, when compared to those in lower-competition cities.
The Airbnb policy change is arguably a form of quality enhancement from the perspective
of guests, but competition appears to make Airbnb hosts less willing to engage in quality
enhancement and more likely to multi-home. One potential explanation is that the policy
change increased the costs of hosts with strict cancellation policies on Airbnb, and those
hosts have a better ability to escape this pressure in more competitive markets. Their multi-
homing or higher likelihood to use host cancellation can undermine the positive feedback
between guests and hosts, making Airbnb's new policy less effective in more competitive
markets.
   To test such a hypothesis, we run an additional back-of-envelope calculation for listings
that had strict cancellation policies before the 48-hour rule was introduced and remained
on Airbnb afterwards (they could have any type of guest cancellation policy after the 48-
hour rule). We have shown that the magnitudes of the positive effects on price, number of
reservations and occupancy rate of such listings are not as large as for listings with loose
cancellation policies; at the same time, they are still positive, implying that listings with strict
cancellation policies do benefit from the platform's rule change. However, the rule change
may also raise costs for those listings, which may force them to use more host cancellations
to handle those costs. Although we do not know the real cost change for these hosts, we do
know the negative consequences of host cancellations, which may be a proxy for these costs.
In Table 11, we report back-of-the-envelope calculations of the net effects on listings with
strict cancellation policies before May 2018. From the table, we observe that Airbnb listings
with strict cancellation policies in higher competition cities are better off (gain more profit)
compared to those in lower competition areas after the May-2018 rule change.




                                                33
6     Discussion

In this section, we discuss the implications of our findings for antitrust analysis and the
general economics of the platform's ecosystem.
    As cited in Section 1, a significant amount of backlash against online platforms is triggered
by supply-side complaints, which leads to the concern that some large platforms may have
imposed costs on suppliers in their efforts to please consumers. When the questioned platform
is large enough, it is argued that suppliers have nowhere to escape given the positive network
effects on that platform, and thus platform competition should be a potential solution to the
asymmetric and harsh treatment against some suppliers on that platform.
    This logic seems to hinge on a few assumptions. For example, it assumes a strong network
effect between two or more sides of a large platform, which tends to imply that an increase
in demand should trigger an increase in supply on the same platform. This prediction is
challenged by our empirical findings on the 48-hour rule: on the one hand, reservations,
occupancy and average price have all increased on Airbnb relative to VRBO, which suggests
that demand has expanded on Airbnb after the 48-hour rule; on the other hand, the number
of listings declines on Airbnb, more hosts cross-list on VRBO, and host cancellations increase
on Airbnb. The opposite moves in demand and supply suggest that the network effects may
not be as strong as some policy makers have worried for a general two-sided platform.
    Another assumption underlining the antitrust concern is that a supplier's ability to multi-
home somewhere else will weaken the platform's incentive to squeeze some suppliers for
more consumer friendliness. In this paper, we consider two pro-guest rules on Airbnb and
find that their effectiveness is sometimes strengthened but sometimes weakened by platform
competition. This suggests that platform competition may not always help to reduce the
asymmetric treatment between the two sides.
    An immediate question is why platform competition has different effects for different pro-
guest rules. On the surface, the two rules are similar in guest-friendliness. They both target
host quality: automated cancellation reviews help to discern high and low quality hosts on


                                               34
Airbnb; and the 48-hour rule imposes a minimum quality standard, flexibility-wise, on all
hosts. Both rules make Airbnb more attractive to guests (especially those that care more
about quality), which in turn attracts hosts because of the positive network effects.
    However, we note that platform competition allows both sides to switch or multi-home
between platforms. For hosts that face a higher cost because of a pro-guest rule, they must
trade off between (1) the benefits of accommodating more and higher-willingness-to-pay
guests on Airbnb, and (2) an increase in operation costs if they decide to stay or single-home
on Airbnb. This tradeoff not only depends on whether there is an alternative platform in
the same market, but also on how the rule affects guest choice between the platforms and
how guests trade off the multiple dimensions of listing quality.
    Arguably, automated cancellation reviews affect all listings directly: by, in a sense, sham-
ing those that cancel guest reservations, they boost the perceived quality of all non-cancelling
listings.24 In comparison, the 48-hour rule only enhances the quality of the listings that offer
strict cancellation policies (26.5% of all Airbnb hosts) while keeping the quality of loose
hosts (73.5%) unchanged. In other words, the wider coverage of cancellation reviews may
represent a stronger treatment, which ends up attracting more quality-conscious guests to
Airbnb, especially when Airbnb competes more intensively with VRBO in the market. This
strengthening effect can be particularly strong for listings with loose cancellation policies,
because they tend to be associated with less popular properties and have less of an "excuse"
as far as capacity constraints in justifying host cancellation. The increased benefits of staying
on Airbnb could motivate the `long tail' of hosts to maintain or improve the quality of their
listings on Airbnb rather than escape to VRBO. This may explain why the effectiveness of
cancellation reviews as a signal of listing quality appears to increase in more competitive
markets for listings with loose cancellation policies.
    In comparison, the 48-hour rule is a limited treatment to Airbnb guests, because those
guests sensitive to cancellation flexibility would have chosen flexible or moderate listings even
  24
     The cancellation reviews could also depress the perceived quality of VRBO listings, if consumers believe
that high-quality listings have incentives to join Airbnb and signal their quality there.



                                                     35
before the 48-hour rule. Given this limit, the rule ends up having a smaller effect in boosting
demand in more competitive markets. As a result, for some Airbnb hosts, the benefits from
attracting more guests on Airbnb could be limited as compared to the increased costs, which
in turn motivates them to leave, cross-list on VRBO, or lower quality on Airbnb (e.g., by
using more host cancellations) in more competitive markets. This makes the 48-hour rule
less effective for Airbnb when they face more platform competition.
   One may argue that the ambiguous role of platform competition in the asymmetric
treatment of the different sides is irrelevant, because the final goal of antitrust policy is
welfare rather than symmetry. To this end, it is important to ask whether a pro-guest rule
by one platform is more welfare-enhancing if the market has more platform competition.
Unfortunately, we do not have enough information to compute guest welfare, host welfare
and platform profits precisely, so we only make some conjectures below.
   On the guest side, cancellation reviews are akin to a disclosure policy on product quality,
which in theory should foster guest sorting by their willingness to pay for quality, and moti-
vate hosts to provide better quality. Although the sorting could lead to higher-quality prod-
ucts being more expensive, the common wisdom is that quality disclosure benefits consumers
as a whole (see a review by Dranove and Jin, 2010). As shown in our findings, platform
competition increases the signal value of cancellation reviews for loose listings. Since loose
listings account for 73.5% of listings, this implies that platform competition should benefit
most guests in terms of the information content of cancellation reviews.
   In comparison, the 48-hour rule is akin to a minimum quality standard, which in theory
could raise or lower guest welfare because it excludes guests from the choice of below-standard
quality (Leland, 1979; Shapiro, 1986). However, since guests that prefer a below-standard
quality could still go to VRBO for such quality, it is conceivable that the 48-hour rule is
helpful in terms of overall guest welfare, especially when VRBO has a solid foothold in the
market. That being said, some guests may find their welfare lift not as large as the 48-hour
rule has intended, because they now face a higher risk of host cancellation by strict listings
(although the 48-hour rule required such listings to provide more flexibility to guests).

                                              36
    On the host side, both rules have differential effects on different listings. The listings
without host cancellations (89% of all Airbnb listings in our sample) are rewarded by the
market when Airbnb posts a cancellation review on their competing listings, and this reward
is greater for loose listings in a market with more platform competition. Similarly, listings
that offer flexible and moderate cancellation policies (73.5%) are unaffected as far as costs
by the 48-hour rule but benefit from the increased attractiveness of the Airbnb platform as a
whole. It appears that these listings with loose policies -- at least those that stay on Airbnb
-- are better off post the 48-hour rule, although they seem to benefit less from this windfall
if the market has more platform competition. On the other hand, listings that cancel guest
reservations (11%) are harshly punished for cancellation reviews. Moreover, the subset of
listings with strict policies, which face higher costs due to the 48-hour rule (23.5%), are
more likely to resort to host cancellation (a demand-reducing behavior) after the 48-hour
rule, although they do enjoy some demand boost from the rule. In short, both pro-guest
rules benefit the majority of listings on Airbnb, while hurting a minority of them.
    To complete the picture, we note that Airbnb, as a platform, has likely benefited from
both rules. Cancellation reviews make guests more willing to reserve non-cancelling listings
at higher prices. Since 89% of listings on Airbnb in our sample are non-cancelling listings,
the increased revenue gained by these listings could easily exceed the lost revenue of listings
with cancellations. As for the 48-hour rule, Table 10 suggests that the net benefits to Airbnb
are positive in all 10 cities, though they tend to be more positive in less competitive cities.
Moreover, the 48-hour rule allows for a refund of Airbnb's own fee during the 48-hour grace
period, which may attract more demand to the platform. The rule may also overcome a
failure of collective actions, if the host of each strict listing fails to incorporate the potential
gain that its unilateral adoption of a loose cancellation policy could bring to the whole
platform.25 In that case, the 48-hour rule could boost the profit of Airbnb as a platform and
  25
     That is, every host had the choice of adopting a flexible, moderate or strict cancellation policies before
the platform policy change. Adopting a loose (flexible or moderate) cancellation policy would have effectively
granted the same 48-hour grace period to guests as far as the "refundability" of guest payments to hosts is
concerned. Although hosts may recognize that loose cancellation policies can collectively raise the overall
demand for Airbnb listings and potentially benefit all listings, each host was making their guest-facing


                                                      37
offer a way out for some strict hosts from this Prisoner's Dilemma.
    Above all, our findings suggest that the two pro-guest rules are likely beneficial to most
guests, to most Airbnb hosts, and to Airbnb as a platform. In the meantime, it could raise
costs for a minority of listings on Airbnb, and hurt the profits of VRBO as a competing
platform. Unfortunately, platform competition does not necessarily reduce Airbnb's incen-
tive to impose costs on hosts in the aim of guest-friendliness, nor is it clear how platform
competition can help to simplify the guest tradeoff between different types of hosts.



7      Conclusion

To consider the role of a platform as the governor of its own ecosystem, we examined the
effects of two pro-guest Airbnb rules, one for host cancellations and one for guest cancel-
lations, on Airbnb listings in 10 US cities. We demonstrated that the two pro-guest rules
have market consequences that, in net, may benefit Airbnb hosts, due to attracting more
demand from guests. However, the effects of the policies are heterogeneous, and can drive
some supply away from the platform and into a competing platform, as a function of the
extent of competition in the vicinity of a listing.
    Our findings further suggest that platform competition can have different and complex
interactions with the effects of pro-guest rules, and may either dampen or reinforce them, as
well as lead to heterogeneous effects on different hosts. In particular, the newly implemented
48-hour rule has made some hosts more likely to multi-home or altogether migrate to a
competing platform. This could incentivize the competing platform to increase its efforts to
attract specific host segments. To that effect, our results suggest that viable competition
from another platform could temper a platform's ability to implement a pro-guest rule, and
consequently impose limits on the benefits that the platform can gain from such a rule.
However, cancellation reviews present an opposite example, where their signaling value on
cancellation policy choice in their own best interest, taking the other hosts' decisions as given. When a
positive mass of hosts elect strict cancellation policies for their listings, the overall benefit of a single listing
being switched from strict to flexible is negligible. In other words, the new 48-hour rule may have helped
alleviate a situation along the lines of a Prisoner's Dilemma.


                                                         38
hosts that offer non-strict cancellation policies is strengthened by platform competition,
which could further incentivize Airbnb to utilize them in more competitive markets.
   It is important to note that our empirical setting is limited to two match-making platforms
in short-term rentals. While Airbnb and VRBO are the two best-known short-term rental
platforms in the US, they target some of the same guests as hotels, bed and breakfasts,
and other home-sharing services. They also compete for properties on the supply side with
long-term rentals and other property uses. Since our competition index is limited to Airbnb-
VRBO competition, it does not capture the market definition that antitrust agencies may
use in a similar context. Moreover, the guest and host cancellations we studied are specific
to short-term rental services, which implies that our findings may not be readily applicable
to other types of platform economies.
   That being said, our study of the short-term rental context suggests that pro-guest rules
do not necessarily trigger demand and supply to move in the same direction as one would
expect in a platform with positive network effects, nor does platform competition always
motivate the platform to become more pro-host and less pro-guest. The differential effects
of pro-guest rules on different hosts also suggest complex welfare tradeoffs under such rules.
How to incorporate these nuanced effects in the antitrust analysis of platform competition
warrants further research.


References
 [1] Anderson, E.T., and D.I. Simester (2014): "Reviews without a purchase: Low
     ratings, loyal customers, and deception," Journal of Marketing Research, 51(3), 249­
     269.

 [2] Armstrong, M. (2006): "Competition in two-sided markets," RAND Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 37, 668­691.

 [3] Belleflamme, P. and M. Peitz (2020): "The Economics of Platforms: Concepts
     and Strategy," Book Manuscript.

 [4] Blake, T., S. Moshary, K. Sweeney, and S. Tadelis (2018): "Price salience
     and product choice," Management Science, 59(2), 265­285.

                                             39
 [5] Bolton, G., B. Greiner, and A. Ockenfels (2013): "Engineering trust: Reci-
     procity in the production of reputation information," NBER working paper #25186.

 [6] Bouvard, M. and R. Levy (2018): "Engineering trust: Reciprocity in the production
     of reputation information," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4(4), 65­106.

 [7] Brin, S. and L. Page (2012): "The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search
     Engine," Computer Networks, 56, 3825­3833.

 [8] Brown, J.; T. Hossain and J. Morgan (2013): "Shrouded Attributes and Infor-
     mation Suppression: Evidence from the Field," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     125(2), 859­876.

 [9] Caillaud, B. and B. Jullien (2003): "Chicken and egg: Competition among inter-
     mediation service providers," RAND Journal of Economics , 34, 309­328.

[10] Chen, Y. and C. He (2011): "Paid placement: Advertising and search on the inter-
     net," Economic Journal, 121(556), 309­328.

[11] Chevalier, J., and D. Mayzlin (2006): "The effect of word of mouth on sales:
     Online book reviews," Journal of Marketing Research, 43, 345­354.

[12] Conitzer, V. and L. Wagman (2008): "Optimal False-Name Proof Voting Rules
     with Costly Voting," In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence.

[13] Conitzer, V. and L. Wagman (2014): "False-name-proof voting over two alterna-
     tives," International Journal of Game Theory, 43(3), 599­618.

[14] Cox, C., S. Burgess, C. Sellitto, and J. Buultjens (2009): "The role of user-
     generated content in tourists' travel planning behavior," Journal of Hospitality Market-
     ing & Management, 8(2), 743­764.

[15] Dai, W., G.Z. Jin, J. Lee, and M. Luca (2018): "Aggregation of consumer ratings:
     an application to Yelp.com," Quantitative Marketing and Economics, forthcoming.

[16] Dellarocas, C. (2006): "Strategic manipulation of Internet opinion forums: Impli-
     cations for consumers and firms," Management Science, 52(10), 1577­1593.

[17] Dranove, D. and G. Z. Jin (2010): "Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory
     and Practice," Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4), 936­963.

[18] Edelman, B., M. Luca, and D. Svirsky (2017): "Racial discrimination in the
     sharing economy: Evidence from a field experiment," American Economic Journal:
     Applied Economics, 9(2), 1­22.

                                             40
[19] Eliaz, K. and R. Spiegler (2011): "A simple model of search engine pricing,"
     Economic Journal, 121(556), 329­339.

[20] Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009): "Search, obfuscation, and price elasticities,"
     Econometrica, 77, 427­452.

[21] Farronato, C., J. Fong, and A. Fradlkin (2020): "Dog Eat Dog: Measuring
     Network Effects Using a Digital Platform Merger," NBER working paper # 28047.

[22] Farrell, J. and P. Klemperer: "Coordination and Lockin: Competition with
     Switching Costs and Network Effect," Handbook of Industrial Organization, 3(Chap-
     ter31), 1967­2072.

[23] Fradkin, A. (2017): "Searching, matching, and the role of digital marketplace design
     in enabling trade: Evidence from Airbnb." MIT Sloan School of Management and Airbnb
     working paper.

[24] Fradkin, A., E. Grewal, and D. Holtz (2018): "The determinants of online
     review informativeness: Evidence from field experiments on Airbnb." MIT Sloan School
     of Management and Airbnb working paper.

[25] Gibbs, Chris; Daniel Guttentag; Ulrike Gretzel; Lan Yao; and Jym
     Morton (2018): "Use of dynamic pricing strategies by Airbnb hosts." Interna-
     tional Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 30(1): 2­20, available at
     https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM-09-2016-0540.

[26] Hermalin, B. (2016): "Platform-intermediated trade with uncertain quality," Journal
     of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 172, 5­29.

[27] Hill, D. (2015): "The Secret of Airbnb's Pricing Algorithm" IEEE Spec-
     trum, available at https://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/the-secret-of-airbnbs-
     pricing-algorithm.

[28] Hu, N., J. Zhang, P. Pavlou (2009): "Overcoming the J-shaped distribution of
     product reviews," Communications of the ACM, 52(10), 144­147.

[29] Hui, X., M. Saeedi, G. Spagnolo, and S. Tadelis (2018): "Certification, repu-
     tation and entry: An empirical analysis," Unpublished manuscript.

[30] Hunold, M., R. Kesler, and U. Laitenberger (2020): "Rankings of online travel
     agents, channel pricing, and consumer protection," Marketing Science, 39, 92­116.




                                            41
[31] Jia, J. and L. Wagman (2020): "Platforms, anonymity, and illegal Actors: Evidence
     of Whac-a-Mole enforcement from Airbnb." Journal of Law & Economics, 63(4), 729­
     761 .

[32] Jin, G.Z. and M. Rysman (2015): "Platform Pricing at Sportscard Conventions."
     Journal of Industrial Economics, 63(4), 704­735 .

[33] Jin, G.Z., Z.Lu, X.Z. Zhou, and C. Li (2020): "The Effects of Government Licens-
     ing on E-commerce: Evidence from Alibaba." NBER working paper #27884.

[34] Johnen, J. and R. Somogyi (2019): "Deceptive products on platforms," NET In-
     stitute Working Paper.

[35] Lee, D., W. Hyun, J. Ryu, W.J. Lee, W. Rhee, and B. Suh (2015): "An
     analysis of social features associated with room sales of Airbnb," In Proceedings of the
     18th ACM Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
     Computing, 219­222.

[36] Leland, H.E. (1979): "Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Qual-
     ity Standards", Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1328­1346.

[37] Li, X., and L.M. Hitt (2008): "Self-selection and information role of online product
     reviews," Information Systems Research, 19(4), 456­474.

[38] Lizzeri, A. (1999): "Information revelation and certification intermediaries," RAND
     Journal of Economics, 30, 214­231.

[39] Luca, M., and G. Zervas (2016): "Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition,
     and Yelp review fraud," Management Science, 62(12), 3412­3427.

[40] Masterov, D., U.F. Mayer, and S. Tadelis (2015): "Canary in the e-commerce
     coal mine: Detecting and predicting poor experiences using buyer-to-seller messages," In
     Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 81­93.

[41] Mayzlin, D., Y. Dover, and J. Chevalier (2014): "Promotional reviews: An
     empirical investigation of online review manipulation," American Economic Review,
     104(8), 2421­2455.

[42] Nosko, C., and S. Tadelis (2015): "The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets:
     An Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment," NBER Working Paper #20830, available
     at https://www.nber.org/papers/w20830.

[43] Rochet, J.-C. and J. Tirole (2003): "Platform competition in two-sided markets,"
     Journal of the European Economic Association , 1, 990­1029.

                                             42
[44] Senecal, S., and J. Nantel (2004): "The influence of online product recommenda-
     tions on consumers' online choices," Journal of Retailing, 80(8), 159­169.

[45] Shapiro, C. (1986): "Investment, Moral Hazard, and Occupational Licensing", The
     Review of Economic Studies, 53(5): 843­862.

[46] Wang, D. and J.L. Nicolau (2017): "Price determinants of sharing economy based
     accommodation rental: A study of listings from 33 cities on Airbnb.com," International
     Journal of Hospitality Management, 62, 120­131.

[47] Yao, X. (2020): "Platform Mergers in Search Markets: An Application to the U.S.
     Used Heavy Truck Market," Working paper.

[48] Zervas, G., D. Proserpio, and J. Byers (2020): "A first look at online reputation
     on Airbnb, where every stay is above average." Marketing Letter, 32, 1­16.

[49] Zervas, G., D. Proserpio, and J. Byers (2016): "The rise of the sharing economy:
     Estimating the impact of Airbnb on the hotel industry," Journal of Marketing Research,
     Forthcoming.

[50] Zhang, K., and M. Sarvary (2015): "Differentiation with user-generated content,"
     Management Science, 61(4), 898­914.




                                            43
            (a) Flexible Cancellation Policy




           (b) Moderate Cancellation Policy




             (c) Strict Cancellation Policy


Figure 1. Airbnb guest cancellation policy structure




                          44
Figure 2. Example of automated cancellation review




                       45
                 350000
                 300000
                                                                                                                New York
                 250000
 # of listings




                 200000
                 150000
                                                                 Chicago       Los Angeles
                                                      Boston
                                                                                                                                   New Orleans
                 100000                                                Austin
                                                                                             Atlanta




                                                                                                                                                                       46
                                            Washington DC                           Houston
                 50000                                               Seattle
                     0
                          0         0.05                       0.1                     0.15                    0.2                      0.25                     0.3
                                                                                Competition Index
                              Figure 3. Map of cities covered in our data by competition level with VRBO and # of total listings
Note: The size of bubble stands for the # of listings. The larger the bubble, the more # of listings in that city. The shade level represents the competition index,
the darker the bubble, the more competition from VRBO on Airbnb listings in that city.
                 4500
                 4000                                                     10011
                                                     10002
                 3500
                              10019
                 3000                                        10014                   10003                                    10012
                                                                       10009
                 2500                        10036
                                                                                                     10016
 # of Listings




                 2000
                                             10001             10025
                                10023                                                                                                              10024
                 1500
                             10010                                                  10128                      10029      10027
                        10013




                                                                                                                                                                     47
                 1000                10028     10031                           10021      10022
                                                                           10065
                                                                      10018
                                                  10035                                10075
                 500                    10030                    10026                           10017
                   0
                        0        0.05           0.1            0.15            0.2            0.25           0.3       0.35           0.4   0.45       0.5    0.55
                 -500                                                                        Competition Index
                                     Figure 4. Map of top 30 zipcode by # of listings and competition level with VRBO
Note: The size of bubble stands for the # of listings. The larger the bubble, the more # of listings in that zipcode. The shade level represents the competition
index, the darker the bubble, the more competition from VRBO on Airbnb listings in that zipcode.
0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


 0




      Figure 5. Average # of automated cancellation per listing over time




                                      48
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                         0.12
                                                                                                                                         0.14
                                                                                                                                         0.16
                                                                                                                                         0.18
                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           170
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 190
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             230




                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.45


                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14000
                                                                                                                                201701                                                                                                                201701                                                                              12000
                                                                                                                                                                     201701
                                                                                                                                201702                                                                                                                201702                                                                     201701
                                                                                                                                                                     201702
                                                                                                                                201703                                                                                                                201703                                                                     201702
                                                                                                                                                                     201703
                                                                                                                                201704                                                                                                                201704                                                                     201703
                                                                                                                                                                     201704
                                                                                                                                201705                                                                                                                201705                                                                     201704
                                                                                                                                                                     201705
                                                                                                                                201706                                                                                                                201706                                                                     201705
                                                                                                                                                                     201706
                                                                                                                                201707                                                                                                                201707                                                                     201706
                                                                                                                                                                     201707
                                                                                                                                201708                                                                                                                201708                                                                     201707
                                                                                                                                                                     201708
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201708
                                                                                                                                201709                               201709                                                                           201709
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201709
                                                                                                                                201710                               201710                                                                           201710
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201710
                                                                                                                                201711                               201711                                                                           201711
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201711
                                                                                                                                201712                               201712                                                                           201712
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201712
                                                                                                                                201801                               201801                                                                           201801
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201801
                                                                                                                                201802                               201802                                                                           201802
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201802
                                                                                                                                201803                               201803                                                                           201803
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201803
                                                                                                                                201804                               201804                                                                           201804
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201804
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Low_Competition City




                                                                                                                                201805                               201805                                                                           201805
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 201805




49
                                                                                                                                201806                               201806                                                                           201806                                                                     201806
                                                                                                                                201807                               201807                                                                           201807                                                                     201807
                                                                                                                                201808                               201808                                                                           201808                                                                     201808

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b) Listing price




                                                                                                                                                (c) Occupancy rate
                                                                                                                                                                     201809                                                                           201809                                                                     201809




                                                                                                       (d) Cross-listing rate
                                                                                                                                201809
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) # of listings over time




                                                                                                                                                                     201810                                                                           201810                                                                     201810
                                                                                                                                201810
                                                                                                                                                                     201811                                                                           201811                                                                     201811
                                                                                                                                201811
                                                                                                                                                                     201812                                                                           201812                                                                     201812
                                                                                                                                201812
                                                                                                                                                                     201901                                                                           201901                                                                     201901
                                                                                                                                201901
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  High_Competition_City




                                                                                                                                                                     201902                                                                           201902                                                                     201902
                                                                                                                                201902
                                                                                                                                                                     201903                                                                           201903                                                                     201903
                                                                                                                                201903
                                                                                                                                                                     201904                                                                           201904                                                                     201904
                                                                                                                                201904
                                                                                                                                                                     201905                                                                           201905                                                                     201905
                                                                                                                                201905
                                                                                                                                                                     201906                                                                           201906                                                                     201906
                                                                                                                                201906                               201907                                                                                                                                                      201907
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201907
                                                                                                                                201907                               201908                                                                                                                                                      201908
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201908
                                                                                                                                201908                               201909                                                                                                                                                      201909
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201909
                                                                                                                                201909                               201910                                                                                                                                                      201910
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201910




     Figure 6. Listing attributes in cities between high competitive level and low competitive level
                                                                                                                                201910                               201911                                                                                                                                                      201911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201911
                                                                                                                                201911                               201912                                                                                                                                                      201912
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      201912
                                                                                                                                201912
14000


12000


10000


8000


6000


4000


2000


   0




                      Strict_Airbnb      Loose_Airbnb        Strict_VRBO       Loose_VRBO


        Figure 7. # of listings plot for different type of hosts in different platforms over time




                                                    50
Table 1: Summary statistics
                                                                    Airbnb                                    VRBO
                                                 Mean       Std.Dev          N               Mean      Std.Dev         N
 Price                                          168.52       199.12      1,158,952          179.25     102.88       203,225
 # of reservations                                5.67         2.05      1,158,952            4.22       3.58       203,225
 Occupancy rate                                28.35%         0.347      1,158,952          23.02%      0.332       203,225
 # of host cancellations                          0.75         0.33      1,158,952              -          -
 Having any host cancellation (dummy)          11.47%          0.23      1,158,952              -          -
 Flexible Cancellation                         39.00%         0.136      1,158,952          42.33%      0.072       203,225
 Moderate Cancellation                         34.50%         0.092      1,158,952          26.21%      0.105       203,225
 Strict Cancellation                           26.50%         0.078      1,158,952          31.46%      0.056       203,225
 Competition Index with VRBO                     0.124         0.21      1,158,952              -          -
 Cross-listing on VRBO (dummy)                 13.21%          0.35      1,158,952              -          -
 Review Number                                   13.66        22.18      1,158,952           10.07       17.2       203,225
 Review rating                                    4.53         0.32      1,158,952            4.59       0.28       203,225
 Superhost proportion                           7.18%          0.12      1,158,952           8.22%       0.11       203,225
 No. Bedrooms                                     1.37         0.96      1,158,952            1.92       0.72       203,225
 No. Bathrooms                                    1.33         0.41      1,158,952            1.56       0.28       203,225
Note: The unit of observation is at platform-listing-month level. Airbnb data covers 2015-2019, and VRBO data covers 2017-
2019.




                                                               51
Table 2: Distribution of Airbnb listings by host cancellations (0,1,2+) and guest cancellation policies
                                                              Before 48-hour rule             After 48-hour rule
                                                               (up to April 2018)          (on and after May 2018)
 =1 if the listing has 0 host cancellation                          87.41%                        90.47%
  with Flexible Cancellation Policy                                 38.62%                        38.94%
  with Moderate Cancellation Policy                                 35.05%                        36.71%
  with Strict Cancellation Policy                                   26.33%                        24.35%


 =1 if the listing has 1 host cancellation                          5.37%                          4.96%
  with Flexible Cancellation Policy                                 50.26%                        53.08%
  with Moderate Cancellation Policy                                 27.77%                        30.88%
  with Strict Cancellation Policy                                   21.97%                        16.04%


 =1 if the listing has 2+ host cancellations                        7.22%                          4.58%
  with Flexible Cancellation Policy                                 35.51%                        41.44%
  with Moderate Cancellation Policy                                 26.09%                        34.42%
  with Strict Cancellation Policy                                   38.40%                        24.15%
Note: The sample consists of Airbnb listing-months from 2015 to 2019.




                                                               52
Table 3: Price, reservations, and occupancy of Airbnb listings by host cancellation and guest cancellation policies
                                                    Avg. Monthly Avg. # of Monthly Avg. Monthly                Avg. Monthly
                                                          Price          Reservation      Occupancy Rate Cross-listing Rate
 Panel A: Whole sample of Airbnb listings
 with Flexible Cancellation Policy                       187.84          3.81             31.58%              6.73%
 with Moderate Cancellation Policy                       188.98          4.41             33.53%               9.31%
 with Strict Cancellation Policy                         192.69          5.11             35.65%              16.62%

 Panel B: Subsample by # of host cancellation
 a property has 0 host cancellation                      186.52          3.59             29.66%              5.98%
 with Flexible Cancellation Policy                       185.95          3.10             27.41%              3.66%
 with Moderate Cancellation Policy                       187.12          3.62             30.82%              4.95%
 with Strict Cancellation Policy                         190.38          3.95             33.12%              9.33%
 a property has 1 host cancellation                      191.33          5.36             36.93%              10.73%
 with Flexible Cancellation Policy                       189.78          4.63             36.05%              6.77%
 with Moderate Cancellation Policy                       192.57          5.05             37.19%              8.52%
 with Strict Cancellation Policy                         195.66          6.21             39.27%              16.91%
 a property has more than 1 host cancellations           188.33          4.92             33.25%              15.94%
 with Flexible Cancellation Policy                       187.79          3.72             31.27%              9.75%
 with Moderate Cancellation Policy                       187.26          4.55             32.59%              14.44%
 with Strict Cancellation Policy                         192.05          5.15             34.55%              23.62%
Note: The sample consists of Airbnb listing-months from 2015 to 2019.




                                                               53
Table 4: Effects of the 48-hour rule on reservations, price and occupancy
                                                (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
                                               # of                     log         # of                     log         # of                      log
Dep.Var                                                  log(price)                           log(price)                          log(price)
                                           reservations             (occupancy) reservations             (occupancy) reservations              (occupancy)
Sample                                                Airbnb vs VRBO               Airbnb (Loose) vs VRBO (Loose)      Airbnb (Strict) vs Airbnb (Loose)
 Lag # of cancellation review                -0.0759***     -0.0602***    -0.0438***     -0.0713***     -0.0562***      -0.0371**    -0.0826***    -0.0627***     -0.0470**
                                              (0.0333)       (0.0244)      (0.0103)       (0.0192)       (0.0113)       (0.0166)      (0.0203)      (0.0219)       (0.0191)
 Airbnb_host                                   -0.0073        -0.0010       -0.0025        0.0127         0.0554         0.0080
                                              (0.0059)       (0.0020)      (0.0014)       (0.0147)       (0.0628)       (0.0175)
 Airbnb_host * Post 48-hour rule              0.0551***      0.0275***     0.0192***      0.0731***      0.0392***      0.0274***
                                              (0.0214)       (0.0124)      (0.0049)       (0.0172)       (0.0102)       (0.0038)
 Strict Airbnb_host                                                                                                                    -0.0029      -0.0046        -0.0017
                                                                                                                                      (0.0019)      (0.0037)       (0.0021)
 Strict Airbnb_host * Post 48-hour rule                                                                                              -0.0331***    -0.0227***    -0.0195***
                                                                                                                                      (0.0122)      (0.0102)       (0.0038)
 Listing controls                                Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Cancellation policy controls                    Yes            Yes           Yes             -               -              -             -            -              -




                                                                                                                                                                              54
 Time FE                                         Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Listing FE                                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 City FE                                         Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Zipcode FE                                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Observations                                 953,523        953,523       953,523        504,273        504,273         504,273     1,149,040     1,149,040      1,149,040
 R-square                                                      0.625         0.522                         0.541          0.385                       0.541          0.385
 F-test on pre-treatment (p-value)               0.36           0.21          0.27          0.18            0.33           0.25          0.19         0.12           0.15
Note: This table uses listing-month observations on Airbnb and VRBO from 2017 to 2019 in first 6 columns but uses listing-month observations on Airbnb only from
2015 to 2019 in columns 7-9. In Columns 1-3, the treatment group includes all listings on Airbnb and the control group includes all listings on VRBO. In Columns 4-
6, the treatment group includes all Airbnb listings that offered a loose cancellation policy as of April 2018, and the control group includes the same type of VRBO
listings. In Columns 7-9, the treatment group includes all Airbnb listings that offered a strict cancellation policy as of April 2018 and the control group includes all
Airbnb listings that offered a loose cancellation policy as of April 2018. We use Poisson regression and report marginal effects if the dependent variable is the number
of reservations. We use OLS and report coefficients if the dependent variable is log(price) or log(occupancy). Standard errors are clustered by zip code. ***, ** and *
indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
Table 5: Effects of host cancellation reviews on reservations, price and occupancy (with instruments)
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
                                    # of                            log         # of                               log
Dep. Var                                        log(price)                                      log(price)
                                reservations                    (occupancy) reservations                       (occupancy)
Sample                                                           All Airbnb Listings
                                          ***
Lag # of cancellation review -0.0617             0.0125         -0.0771***      -0.0688***      -0.0415***     -0.0477***
                                 (0.0236)       (0.0177)         (0.0094)       (0.0150)        (0.0144)        (0.0141)
                                          ***                             ***             **
Log(price)                      -0.0502                         -0.2363         -0.0047                        -0.2335***
                                 (0.0157)                        (0.0471)       (0.0021)                        (0.0165)
                                          ***             **             ***              ***             *
Response rate                    0.0011         -0.0004         0.0041          -0.0025         -0.0003        -0.0054**
                                 (0.0003)       (0.0001)         (0.0003)       (0.0001)        (0.0001)        (0.0014)
                                          ***             ***            ***              ***
# of reviews                     0.0017         -0.0006         0.0022          -0.0106         -0.0017*        -0.0015
                                 (0.0000)       (0.0000)         (0.0001)       (0.0027)        (0.0008)        (0.0009)
                                          ***            ***             ***
Overall rating                   0.0900         0.1222          0.1533           -0.0327         -0.0033         0.0627
                                 (0.0143)       (0.0262)         (0.0153)       (0.0228)        (0.00342)       (0.0734)
                                          ***            ***             ***              ***             **
# of photos                      0.0018         0.0033          0.0015          -0.0071         -0.0066         -0.0042
                                 (0.0002)       (0.0006)         (0.0005)       (0.0006)        (0.0028)        (0.0034)
                                          ***            ***             ***
bedrooms                        -0.0233         0.0910          0.0547
                                 (0.0080)       (0.0128)         (0.0048)
                                                         ***
bathrooms                         0.0054        0.7475          0.0564***
                                 (0.0065)       (0.0155)         (0.0092)
                                          ***            ***
Max # of guests                  0.0248         0.0727            0.0001
                                 (0.0021)       (0.0040)          (0.005)
                                          ***            ***
Superhost/premier partner        0.0264         0.0858          0.0401***
                                 (0.0075)       (0.0080)         (0.0128)
                                          ***
Minimum stay                     -0.119          0.00454         0.0109*
                                 (0.0111)       (0.0032)         (0.0053)
                                          ***            ***
Instant book                     0.0555         0.0146          0.0459***
                                 (0.0044)       (0.0039)         (0.0078)
Listing FE                          No             No               No             Yes             Yes            Yes
Time FE                            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
City FE                            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Zipcode FE                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                    1,149,040       1,149,040       1,149,040       1,149,040       1,149,040      1,149,040
 R-square                                          0.521         0.232                         0.901        0.426
Note: This table uses listing-month observations on Airbnb from 2015 to 2019. We use Poisson regression
and report marginal effects if the dependent variable is the number of reservations. We use OLS and report
coefficients if the dependent variable is log(price) or log(occupancy). In all columns, we use 2SLS to predict the
lag number of cancellation reviews using rainfall and extreme temperature in the lag period as instruments. In
the reservation and occupancy regressions, we use the price of other listing types (i.e., private room and shared
space) within 10 miles of the study listing as an instrument to predict price in the first stage. Standard errors are
clustered by zip code. ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.


                                                           55
Table 6: Effects of the 48-hour rule on reservations, price and occupancy by high and low competition index
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)            (7)        (8)        (9)             (10)        (11)      (12)
                                                            log                                     log                                  log                                    log
                                    # of        log                        # of          log                      # of        log                        # of         log
                                                          (occu-                                  (occu-                               (occu-                                 (occu-
                                reservations  (price)                  reservations   (price)                 reservations  (price)                  reservations (price)
                                                         pancy)                                  pancy)                               pancy)                                  pancy)
                                  Airbnb (Loose) vs VRBO (Loose)         Airbnb (Strict) vs VRBO (Strict)      Airbnb (Loose) vs VRBO (Loose)         Airbnb (Strict) vs VRBO (Strict)
Lag # of cancellation review     -0.0829***   -0.0782***   -0.0531**    -0.0805***   -0.0721***   -0.0502**   -0.0392***   -0.0343***   -0.0280***   -0.0617***   -0.0505**   -0.0469**
                                  (0.0263)    (0.0264)     (0.0206)      (0.0285)     (0.0167)    (0.0172)     (0.0082)     (0.0060)    (0.0091)      (0.0172)    (0.0211)    (0.0127)
Airbnb_host                       -0.0057      -0.0255      -0.0108      -0.0109      -0.0194     -0.0221      -0.0185       -0.012     0.00397        -0.0189     0.0210      0.0534
                                  (0.0941)    (0.0202)     (0.0111)      (0.0301)     (0.0395)    (0.0285)     (0.0317)     (0.0103)    (0.0178)      (0.0179)    (0.0158)    (0.0343)
Airbnb_host*Post 48-hour rule    0.0633***    0.0319***    0.0225***    0.0179***    0.0082***    0.0068**     0.0708***   0.0524***    0.0453***     0.0388***   0.0277***   0.0263***
                                  (0.0252)    (0.0095)     (0.0039)      (0.0029)     (0.0027)    (0.0031)     (0.0195)     (0.0273)    (0.0204)      (0.0117)    (0.0114)    (0.0108)
Competition Level                  High         High         High         High         High         High         Low          Low         Low           Low         Low         Low
Listing controls                    Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Listing FE                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
City FE                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Zipcode FE                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                                                                                                                                                          56
Observations                      396,924      396,924      396,924      224,085      224,085     224,085      186,855      186,855     186,855       152,039     152,039     152,039
R-square                                        0.755        0.430                     0.541       0.385                     0.894        0.901                    0.426       0.428
Note: This table uses listing-month observations on Airbnb and VRBO from 2017 to 2019. We use Poisson regression and report marginal effects if the dependent variable is the
number of reservations. We use OLS and report coefficients if the dependent variable is log(price) or log(occupancy). In Columns 1,2,3,7,8,9, the treatment group includes Airbnb
listings that offered a loose cancellation policy as of April 2018, while the control group includes the same type of listings on VRBO. In Columns 4,5,6,10,11,12, the treatment group
includes Airbnb listings that offered a strict cancellation policy as of April 2018, while the control group includes the same type of listings on VRBO. The first six columns focus on
listings that had above-city-median competition index as of April 2018. The last six columns focus on listings that had below-city-median competition index as of April 2018. Standard
errors are clustered by zip code. ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
Table 7: Effects of the 48-hour rule on reservations, price and occupancy by high and low competition index
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
                                        # of                      # of                                                                     log                     log
                                                                                       log(price)              log(price)
                                    reservations              reservations                                                             (occupancy)             (occupancy)
                                  Loose Listing              Strict Listing         Loose Listing            Strict Listing           Loose Listing           Strict Listing
Lag # of cancellation review   -0.0771***   -0.0582***   -0.0508**    -0.0621*** -0.0729*** -0.0433*** -0.0347*** -0.0559***     -0.0572***   -0.0517***   -0.0421**   -0.0465**
                                (0.0263)    (0.0264)     (0.0206)     (0.0247)   (0.0230)    (0.0125)    (0.0132)    (0.0176)     (0.0177)     (0.0162)    (0.0208)    (0.0227)
Competition Level                High         Low          High         Low        High         Low        High        Low          High        Low          High        Low
Listing controls                  Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Time FE                           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Listing FE                        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
City FE                           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Zipcode FE                        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                    567,524     309,088      187,172       85,256     567,524     309,088    187,172      85,256      567,524      309,088     187,172      85,256
 R-square                                       0.771       0.478                    0.571        0.420                   0.854       0.887                 0.445      0.457
Note: This table uses listing-month observations on Airbnb from 2015 to 2019. We use Poisson regression and report marginal effects if the dependent variable is the
number of reservations. We use OLS and report coefficients if the dependent variable is log(price) or log(occupancy). Columns 1,2,5.6,9,10 focus on Airbnb listings that
offered a loose cancellation policy as of April 2018; Columns 3,4,7,8,11,12 focus on Airbnb listings that offered a strict cancellation policy as of April 2018. The odd




                                                                                                                                                                                   57
number columns focus on listings that had above-city-median competition index as of April 2018. The even number columns focus on listings that had below-city-median
competition index as of April 2018. In all columns, we use 2SLS to predict the lag number of cancellation reviews using rainfall and extreme temperature in the lag period
as instruments. In the reservation and occupancy regressions, we use the price of other listing types (i.e. private room and shared space) within 10 miles of the study listing
as an instrument to predict price in the first stage. Standard errors are clustered by zip code. ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
Table 8: Effects of the 48-hour rule on supply dynamics in Airbnb
                                                               (1)              (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)
                                                                                              Cross-                       Cross-
Dep. Var                                                   # of listings   # of listings                Strict policy?                 Exit?
                                                                                             listing?                     listing?
                                                           Airbnb vs       Cross-listing   Airbnb vs     Airbnb vs
Sample                                                                                                                    Airbnb      Airbnb
                                                            VRBO            vs VRBO          VRBO         VRBO
Airbnb_host                                                 0.0208           0.0267         -0.0128*      -0.0258
                                                            (0.0632)         (0.311)       (0.0068)       (0.0712)
Airbnb_host * Post 48-hour rule                            -0.0279***        0.0028***     0.0481***     -0.0921***
                                                            (0.0048)         (0.0011)      (0.0027)       (0.0374)
High_competition_area * Post 48-hour rule                    0.0031          0.0037**       0.0129**      -0.0241
                                                            (0.0412)         (0.0018)      (0.0059)       (0.0412)
High_competition_area *Airbnb * Post 48-hour rule            0.0072          0.0072***     0.0618***     -0.1328***
                                                            (0.0312)         (0.0020)      (0.0282)       (0.0528)
Strict_host                                                                                                              0.2102***   -0.0782***
                                                                                                                         (0.0481)    (0.0245)
Host_cancellation                                                                                                        0.0821***   0.0051**
                                                                                                                         (0.0205)    (0.0024)
High_competition_area                                                                                                    0.0755***   -0.0509***
                                                                                                                         (0.0192)    (0.0204)
Host_cancellation * High_competition_area                                                                                             0.0072
                                                                                                                                     (0.0512)
Strict_host * Host_cancellation                                                                                                      -0.0744***
                                                                                                                                     (0.0310)
Strict_host * Host_cancellation * High_competition_area                                                                              -0.1021***
                                                                                                                                     (0.0392)


Zipcode controls                                               Yes             Yes             -              -              -           -
Listing controls                                                 -               -            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Time FE                                                        Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
City FE                                                        Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Zipcode FE                                                     Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
Observations                                                  1,750           1,750         953,523       953,523        1,149,040   1,149,040
 R-square                                                                                    0.522                        0.541        0.385
Note: Columns 1-2 use aggregated data of Airbnb and VRBO from 2017 to 2019. The dependent variable is the total number
of listings (Column 1) or the number of cross-listings (Column 2) per zipcode-month on each platform. Columns 3-4 use listing-month
observations on Airbnb and VRBO from 2017 to 2019 while columns 5-6 use listing-month observations on Airbnb from 2015 to 2019.
The dependent variable is whether the listing is also cross-listed on the other platform at the study period (Columns 3 and 5), whether the
host offers strict cancellation policy at the study period (Column 4), and whether the listing was inactive for at least 6 months after May
2018 (column 6). For Columns 1-4, the treatment and control groups are listed in the sample row with the first part indicating the
treatment group. On the right-hand side, Strict_host represents a dummy equal to one if the listing offered a strict cancellation policy in
April 2018; and High_competition_area represents a dummy equal to one if the listing had above-city-median competition index as of
April 2018. We use Poisson regression and report marginal effectse if the dependent variable is the number of listings (Columns 1-2).
We use Probit regression and report coefficients if the dependent variable is a dummy (Columns 3-6). Standard errors are clustered by zip
code. ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                                      58
Table 9: Effects of the 48-hour rule on the supply dynamics of Airbnb hosts
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)                  (5)
                                                    Cross-        Cross-        Cross-
Dep. Var                                                                                      Host cancel?         Host cancel?
                                                   listing?      listing?      listing?
                                                   Airbnb        Airbnb        Airbnb      Airbnb (Strict vs    Airbnb (Strict vs
Sample                                             Flexible     Moderate        Strict      Loose) ­ High         Loose) ­ Low
                                                                                           Competition Area     Competition Area
High_competition_area * Post 48-hour rule          0.0414**      0.0391***    -0.0108***
                                                   (0.0202)      (0.0141)      (0.0023)
Cross_listing * Strict host                                                                     0.0521***             0.0108
                                                                                                (0.0118)              (0.412)
Cross_listing * Pos 48-hour rule                                                                 0.0201               0.0014
                                                                                                (0.0311)              (0.121)
Cross_listing * Strict host * Post 48-hour rule                                                 0.0657***             0.0149*
                                                                                                (0.0312)             (0.0082)
Listing controls                                     Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                  Yes
Time FE                                              Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                   Yes
Listing FE                                           Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                   Yes
City FE                                              Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                   Yes
Zipcode FE                                           Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes                   Yes
 Observations                                        451,991       399,838       307,122           633,284              515,756
Note: This table uses listing-month observations on Airbnb from 2015 to 2019. The dependent variable is whether the Airbnb
listing is cross-listed on VRBO at the study period (Columns 1-3), and whether the Airbnb listing has received automated
cancellation review at the study period (Columns 4-5). All regressions are Probit and report coefficients. On the right-
hand side, Strict_host represents a dummy equal to one if the listing offered a strict cancellation policy in April 2018;
High_competition_area represents a dummy equal to one if the listing had above-city-median competition index as of April
2018. and Cross_listing equal to one if the listing was listed on both Airbnb and VRBO as of April 2018. Standard errors are
clustered by zip code. ***, ** and * indicate significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                               59
Table 10: Back-of-envelope calculation for Airbnb GMV after the 48-hour rule
                         Total        # of      Transaction      Avg.       Avg.      Avg. Daily      Avg.       Gain/Loss
                                                                                                                              Gain/Loss       Net
              Compe-    Listings   Listings    Loss/Gain on Daily Rate Occupancy       Rate ($)    Occupancy ($ MM) before
                                                                                                                               ($ MM)     Benefit/Loss
    City       tition    before     Change     Cross-Listings ($) before  (in days)     Change      (in days)   Considering
                                                                                                                              from Host ($ MM) after
               Index    48-hour    after 48-   after 48-hour   48-hour   before 48-    after 48-   Change after    Host
                                                                                                                             Cancellation 48-hour rule
                          rule     hour rule        rule         rule    hour rule     hour rule   48-hour rule Cancellation
D.C.           0.08     54,599       1,637          -157        137.21      10.89        14.36        0.866        18.34        (0.07)       18.27
Boston         0.09     125,213     1,903          -142        173.25       9.30        10.08         1.198        42.63         (0.06)       42.57
Chicago        0.11     134,677     1,421          -74         157.89       9.90         9.76         1.075        39.76         (0.07)       39.70
Austin         0.12     120,845     1,339          -247        139.55       9.00         6.37         1.031        26.71         (0.05)       26.65
Seattle        0.12     49,503      1,017          -283        151.22      11.10         8.16         0.911        13.08         (0.05)       13.03
Los Angeles    0.14     140,501     -1,021        -1,173       188.53       9.45         9.59         0.675        27.12         (0.05)       27.07
Houston        0.15     59,695      -1,345         -272        143.25       7.80         8.33         0.932        10.17         (0.06)       10.12
Atlanta        0.16     83,718       -475          -338        138.25       8.70         4.39         0.772        11.32         (0.04)       11.28
New York       0.21     276,634     -2,633        -2,203       190.56      11.34         5.33         0.433        29.03         (0.09)       28.94
New Orleans    0.25     113,566     -1,655        -1,537       160.78      10.05         2.86         0.417         5.55         (0.06)       5.48




                                                                                                                                                         60
Table 11: Back-of-envelope calculation on the effects of the 48-hour rule on strict hosts relative to loose hosts on Airbnb
                              Total Listing      Total Listings      Avg.          Avg.                        Avg.       Gain/Loss
                                                                                                Avg. Daily                             Gain/Loss       Net
                 Compe-        with strict         with strict    Daily Rate    Occupancy                   Occupancy ($ MM) before
                                                                                                 Rate ($)                               ($ MM)     Benefit/Loss
     City         tition      cancellation        cancellation    ($) before     (in days)                   (in days)   Considering
                                                                                               Change after                            from Host ($ MM) after
                  Index       policy before       policy after     48-hour      before 48-                  Change after    Host
                                                                                               48-hour rule                           Cancellation 48-hour rule
                              48-hour rule        48-hour rule       rule        hour rule                  48-hour rule Cancellation
D.C.               0.08          19,335             16,558          139.23         13.04           13.61        0.7        (0.33)        (0.20)       (0.53)
Boston             0.09           33,665            29,365          180.77         12.12            7.74            1.07            (0.74)          (0.18)          (0.93)
Chicago            0.11           37,246            34,277          163.91         10.28            5.48            1.02            2.85            (0.19)           2.66
Austin             0.12           30,519            28,065          146.56         12.36            4.9             0.88            0.99            (0.15)           0.85
Seattle            0.12           6,681              6,335          154.91         12.51            5.21            0.87            0.62            (0.13)           0.49
Los Angeles        0.14           25,381            23,025          191.52          8.82            8.16            0.45            (0.25)          (0.04)          (0.30)
Houston            0.15           15,537            14,682          143.30          6.28            7.41            0.73            1.53            (0.06)           1.47
Atlanta            0.16           25,363            24,995          142.86          7.56            2.63            0.49            1.88            (0.04)           1.84
New York           0.21           67,450            66,751          191.33          9.92            3.74            0.17            3.36            (0.09)           3.27
New Orleans        0.25            43,765           43,261           165.01          9.25            1.44           0.09            0.46             (0.07)          0.39
Note: Strict (loose) hosts refer to the Airbnb hosts that offered strict (loose) cancellation policy before the 48-hour rule, regardless of their cancellation policy post the rule.




                                                                                                                                                                                       61
