                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHEN INNOVATION GOES WRONG:
                TECHNOLOGICAL REGRESS AND THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC

                                         David M. Cutler
                                        Edward L. Glaeser

                                       Working Paper 28873
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28873


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021




We are grateful to Toby Chaiken, Julia Dennett, and Travis Donahoe for expert research
assistance. We are also grateful to Leonard Young and Netrali Dalvi of the Massachusetts
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program for providing assistance with MA's Prescription
Monitoring Program (PMP) data, Adam Berrones and Dave Hopkins for providing assistance
with Kentucky's All Schedule Prescription Electronic Reporting (KASPER) data, and Gilbert
Samia for providing assistance with California's Controlled Substance Utilization Review and
Evaluation System (CURES) data. This research was supported by the National Institute On
Aging of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers R37AG047312. Cutler is
involved in the multi-district litigation regarding opioids as an expert witness to the plaintiff
counties suing opioid manufacturers, distributors, and dispensers. Additional detail on the data
and results presented are available in the online appendix. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28873.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David M. Cutler and Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Innovation Goes Wrong: Technological Regress and the Opioid Epidemic
David M. Cutler and Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 28873
May 2021
JEL No. I0,J1

                                           ABSTRACT

The fivefold increase in opioid deaths between 2000 and 2017 rivals even the COVID-19
pandemic as a health crisis for America. Why did it happen? Measures of demand for pain relief
­ physical pain and despair ­ are high but largely unchanging. The primary shift is in supply,
primarily of new forms of allegedly safer narcotics. These new pain relievers flowed mostly to
areas with more pain, but since their apparent safety was an illusion, opioid deaths followed. By
the end of the 2000s, restrictions on legal opioids led to further supply-side innovations which
created the burgeoning illegal market that accounts for the bulk of opioid deaths today. Because
opioid use is easier to start than end, America's opioid epidemic is likely to persist for some time.


David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28873
       The fivefold increase in the death rate from opioid drugs between 2000 and 2017,

illustrated in Figure 1, is an American health crisis rivalling even the COVID-19 pandemic. Nearly

850,000 people died from opioid overdoses between 1999 and 2019, and in 2019, more people

died from opioids (70,630) than from motor vehicle accidents (38,800) or breast cancer (42,281).

The increase in drug overdose deaths is the dominant reason for the declining US life expectancy

between 2014 and 2017 (Woolf and Schoomaker 2019) and has contributed to the longer-term

stagnation of life expectancy first emphasized by Case and Deaton (2015). The opioid crisis has

also exacerbated the link between lifespan and education; the opioid death rate is three times higher

for high school graduates than for college graduates (Ho, 2017). Opioid deaths rose during the

COVID pandemic, despite the sharp reductions in mobility (Goodnough, 2021).

       At its heart, the opioid story is one of technological regress. It was hoped that opioids would

end America's longstanding scourge of untreated pain, just as antihypertensives, cholesterol-

lowering agents, and antidepressants brought therapy to millions of previously untreated people

with high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and mental illness. It was not to be.

       The opioid epidemic began with the availability of OxyContin in 1996. OxyContin was

portrayed as a revolutionary wonder drug: because the painkiller was released only slowly into the

body, relief would last longer and the potential for addiction would decline. From 1996 to 2011,

legal opioid shipments rose six-fold. But the hoped-for benefits proved a mirage. Pain came back

sooner and stronger than expected. Tolerance built up, which led to more and higher doses. Opioid

use led to opioid abuse, and some took to crushing the pills and ingesting the medication all at

once. A significant black market for opioids was born.

       Fifteen years after the opioid era began, restrictions on their use began to bind. From 2011



                                                 1
on, opioid prescriptions fell by one third. Unfortunately, addiction is easier to start than stop. With

reduced access to legal opioids, people turned to illegal ones, first heroin and then fentanyl, which

has played a dominant role in the recent spike in opioid deaths.

       In this essay, we begin with a brief sketch of the history of opioids and the rise of their use

in the United States since about 1995. Our main focus is on the positive question of how demand

for and supply of opioids produced the epidemic. In considering demand, we look at available

measures of physical and mental pain, despair, and the opportunity cost of time, which is associated

with joblessness and social isolation. We show that changes in demand-side factors alone, such as

physical pain, depression, despair, and social isolation can only explain a small fraction of the

increase in opioid use and deaths from 1996 to 2012. However, we also find that patterns of

demand helped to shape the locations in which the opioid crisis became most severe.

       The dominant changes in opioid supply started with modest technological and marketing

innovations in the legal sector, which was followed by a burst of entrepreneurship in the illegal

sector. In the legal market, physicians who cared about treating the impaired were persuaded by

a time release system and a highly effective-marketing campaign that the new opioids were truly

safer than the older ones, and they started prescribing. While the opioid crisis did not begin with

supply shifts in the illegal market, technological and institutional changes within that market

furthered the epidemic. The introduction of fentanyl and the rise of Asian fentanyl exports appears

to be a narcotic variant of the China trade shock, where declining transport costs and East Asian

industrial expertise flooded American markets and displaced the opium producers of Mexico

(Grandmaison, Morris, and Smith 2019).

       Opioid prescriptions are now down substantially from their peak. However, even if the

reduction in legal opioid prescriptions since about 2011 reduces the flow of new addicts, the stock



                                                  2
of existing addicts will continue to seek supply, even when it means substituting into more

dangerous illegal sources. Thus, the opioid epidemic is likely to be with us for some time to come.



The Opioid Crisis and its History



       Opiates are naturally occurring substances that can be extracted from the opium poppy

plant. The plant can be smoked directly, or purified into more potent opiates including legal drugs

like codeine and morphine, or illegal drugs like heroin. The term opioid refers also to semi-

synthetic drugs such as oxycodone (the key ingredient in OxyContin), hydrocodone, and

hydromorphone, and to fully synthetic drugs such as fentanyl and methadone.

       The various derivatives of opium are chemically similar, but their potency varies greatly

(CMS 2017). Codeine has 15 percent the potency of morphine, while oxycodone has 150 percent

of morphine's potency. Heroin is roughly three times as potent as morphine, and fentanyl is 100

to 200 times more potent than morphine, with the variation arising because the potency of illegal

drugs varies from batch to batch.

       Opioids relieve pain and make people feel calm and happy. They also depress basic bodily

functions such as respiration and cardiac activity. For this reason, a dose that is far enough above

the typical amount can lead to death, even among tolerant users. Unfortunately, the line between

euphoria and death is not very wide by therapeutic standards. Gable (2004) finds that for

intravenous heroin, the lethal dose is only six times the effective dose, making it the most

dangerous of common drugs.




                                                 3
The Ultimate Addictive Good

       Opium has been used to stimulate pleasure and relieve pain since at least 3400 BCE. There

are Sumerian references to the "joy plant" (Booth 1996; Saunders 2014). Opium was well-known

to civilizations from Greece to Egypt to Persia to India, both for its beneficial effect and possible

overdoses. Hippocrates (460-377 BCE), the father of modern medicine ­ from whom we have the

Hippocratic Oath ­ frequently mentioned the poppy in his remedies. Herakleides of Pontus (~340

BCE) in his book On Government describes how one island's inhabitants regularly committed

suicide "by means of the poppy" (Saunders 2014). Avicenna's 11th century Canon of Medicine

warned that "the most powerful of the stupefacients is opium," which made it a useful painkiller,

but that it was also "definitely poisonous."

       Opium became a major trade good and a source of conflict during the Age of Exploration.

Britain and China fought two Opium wars, which ended with the British protecting their right to

sell opium in China. Perhaps one in five Chinese men were opium users early in the 20th century

(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2010), and the Chinese opium epidemic only ended

when the Communists imposed draconian restrictions on consumption.

       Opium's combination of danger and pleasure has led to repeated cycles of innovation,

addiction and rection, which begin when entrepreneurs produce an allegedly safer opioid.

However, when purchasers begin consuming the new drug, they discover that this new innovation

is as addictive and deadly as the old forms of opium. New consumers avoid the drug or are

prohibited from using it. Existing users pass away, and the fad dies down ­ until memories fade

and the cycle begins again. London physician Thomas Sydenham combined opium with alcohol

in 1676 to produce laudanum, a wonder drug that eliminated almost all forms of pain--and which

became its own substance abuse problem. Twenty-five years later, in 1701, Dr. John Jones wrote



                                                 4
in "The Mysteries of Opium Reveal'd" that long term use of opium generates an "inability or

listlessness to do any things except it be while the Opium operates," but that quitting opium use

could leave to "intolerable ... anxieties," and even a "miserable death."

       In 1804, Friedrich Serturner separated "morphine" from opium. He believed that he had

discovered a safe medication, but he would himself become an addict. Several decades later, Merck

pioneered the drug commercially. Morphine and opium were widely used as painkillers during the

US Civil War, and morphine addiction was termed the "Soldier's Disease" in the last third of the

19th Century.

       By 1872, the Annual Report of the State Board of Health of Massachusetts noted that "the

sulphate of morphia seems to be growing in favor," and that "this salt is not only taken internally,

but is sometimes used hypodermically." The Report repeats the canard that morphine is "free from

the more objectionable properties of opium," but also reports (p. 167) a comment from a state

assayer that "among the most dangerous preparations of morphia are those now prescribed and

sold by uneducated or villainous individuals as so-called `cures' for persons afflicted with the

uncontrollable appetite for opium."

       Pierre Robiquet isolated codeine in 1832, and it remains the most commonly prescribed

opiate today. Felix Hoffmann at Bayer was trying to produce codeine when he stumbled upon

heroin, a more potent form of morphine. Bayer's marketed heroin, claiming: "Heroin is completely

devoid of the unpleasant and toxic effects of opium derivatives." The Boston Medical and Surgical

Journal (the forerunner of the New England Journal of Medicine) informed its readers in 1900 that

heroin "possesses many advantages over morphine as a respiratory sedative," especially an

"absence of danger of acquiring the habit" (February 20, 1900, v. 142, p. 190). Heroin was sold

to suppress coughs, relieve the burden of childbirth and war injuries, prepare for anesthesia, and



                                                 5
control certain mental disorders. As the dangers of heroin became clear, Bayer phased out its

promotion in favor of another new compound, acetylsalicylic acid (aka aspirin), also synthesized

by Felix Hoffmann.

        Semi-synthetic and synthetic opioids were developed in the 20th century. In 1916, two

German scientists produced oxycodone, and it became a popular painkiller for the Nazis; Hitler

and Goering both appear to have been enthusiasts (Ohler, 2017). Fully synthetic opioids came later

still. Fentanyl was created in Belgium in 1959, and Tramadol was developed in Germany in 1962.

        Opioids are an extreme example of the addictive goods analyzed by Becker and Murphy

(1988). They have strong intertemporal complementarity in consumption: past use greatly

increases the marginal benefit of current use. Further, there is a large tradeoff between short-term

mood advantages and longer-term downsides. The longer-term costs from opioids are not direct

health costs like the lung damage generated by cigarettes on smokers but are indirect and mediated

by addiction or "tolerance." When addicts attempt to satisfy their habit, especially by using illegal

opioids, they pay financial costs and face risk of overdose and death. Nutt et al. (2007) surveyed

experts to determine a scale of harm for 20 different drugs and found that heroin generated the

highest level of dependence and risk of an overdose. 1



The Illegal Supply of Opioids before the Epidemic

        US legislation in the early 20th century sought to limit opioid use as a way to reduce

widespread morphine and heroin abuse. The Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914 required

consumers to have a doctor's prescription to gain access to opiates, and doctors were typically



1
 Of the world's most widely used drugs, only caffeine appears to have practically no well-documented long-term
health costs.


                                                      6
skeptical about prescribing drugs that appeared to be addictive. After 1917, the Act was interpreted

to mean that doctors should not prescribe opiates to addicts merely to maintain their habits. Heroin

was banned in 1924, owing to its alleged impact on crime. Codeine remained a mainstay of cough

suppressants, but medical prescriptions of other opiates plummeted.

       Legal restrictions did not end the supply of opioids; rather, that supply moved underground.

Before World War II, at least in Chicago, opium smoking was far more common than heroin

injection and it was concentrated in the city's Chinatown (Dai 1937). Between the 1950s and 1972,

America's heroin supply appears to have been primarily produced from poppies grown in Turkey

and smuggled in through the "French Connection." That route was disrupted by law enforcement

in 1972, and the price of heroin correspondingly rose (Brown and Silverman, 1974). The

combination of high prices and the shutdown of the European supply chain attracted other

entrepreneurs, from Southeast Asia's Golden Triangle to Afghanistan's Golden Crescent, and later

Mexico.

       The long-run supply of heroin seems to be quite elastic. Heroin prices fell over 80 percent

in real terms between 1981 to 2001. However, the new supply sources boosted consumption, and

heroin-related deaths started rising again in the early 1990s (as shown in Figure 1). Still, none of

these heroin crises saw death rates anywhere near those that appeared after 2010.



The Rise of Opioid Use



       Trends in legal opioid use in the past two decades are shown in Figure 2, which presents

aggregate shipments of opioids per adult ­ in milligrams of morphine equivalents, or MMEs ­

from 1997 through 2017. The data underlying figure 2, and all data on legal opioid shipments that



                                                 7
we present, are from the Drug Enforcement Administration's Automation of Reports and

Consolidated Order System (ARCOS), which details shipments by product and three-digit zip

code. We aggregate the ARCOS data to counties or the nation as appropriate. The appendix has

more detail. Fifty MME is a typical daily dose for a person in pain. Thus, total opioid supply in

1997 was roughly three days of typical use per adult. By 2011, the supply was 20 days per person

­ roughly one prescription per adult per year. The overall growth was 461 percent. OxyContin was

a major part of the total. Oxycodone shipments rose 27 percent annually from 1997 to 2011.

Shipments of other opioids rose as well, though none to quite the same extent.

       The increased use of opioids involved changes on the extensive and intensive margin (see

the Appendix for details). Our primary source of prescription data is the Medical Expenditure

Panel Study (MEPS), an ongoing survey of the non-institutional population since 1996. MEPS

data show that opioid prescriptions per capita doubled between 1996 and 2010. Data from IMS

Health show similar trends. One-quarter of the increase in prescriptions came from the extensive

margin of more people being prescribed medications; three quarters was due to the intensive

margin of more scripts per person. In addition to more prescriptions, data from the Massachusetts

Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) show that days supplied per prescription

increased by a quarter from 2000 to 2012.

       The increase in the number of people receiving prescriptions, the number of prescriptions

per recipient, and the number of pills per script does not add to the total increase in opioid

shipments. It is possible that the gap is due to high volume `pill mills', not all of which might be

recorded in national survey data.

       The appendix shows variability in opioid use along several dimensions, using the MEPS

data. We focus on the share of people with two or more prescriptions in the ~2½ years people are



                                                 8
asked about in the survey, to capture heavy use. There are stark differences in heavy use by

education. In 2009, 13 percent of people without a college degree had more than one opioid script,

compared to 9 percent of people with a college degree. Opioid use also began to fall earlier for

people with college degrees. In 1998, opioid use was the same in rural and urban areas, but then it

rose more rapidly in rural areas. By 2012, 15 percent of rural residents had more than one opioid

scipt, as opposed to 10 percent of ubanites. Heavy use declined more rapidly in urban areas after

2012, further increasing the gap between country and city. Differences by labor force participation

are also marked: 20 percent of people aged 25-44 who were out of the labor force were heavy

opioid users in 2012, compared to 10 percent for blue collar workers and 6 percent for white-collar

workers.

        The MEPS also allows us to see whether opioids served as a substitute for other

medications. To examine this, we take advantage of the panel nature of the data. People are in

MEPS for 5 rounds, each lasting about half a year. Starting with the 2001 panel, people in the

second round were asked: "During the PAST 4 WEEKS, how much did PAIN interfere with your

normal work (including both work outside the home and housework)?" We count people as in pain

if they answer "moderately," "quite a bit," or "extremely," as opposed to "not at all" or "a little

bit."

        We sample people who are in pain in the second round of the survey, but who were not

taking opioids, antidepressants, or anxiolytics in the first round. Among that group, the share of

opioid user increased dramatically from about 6 percent in 2001 to about 9 percent in 2009 (see

the appendix). The use of antidepressants and anxiolytics (anti-anxiety medications) was generally

flat. Use of other pain medications, for example high dose prescription non-steroidal anti-




                                                9
inflammatories, fell. Thus, is appears that opioids primarily substituted for less powerful pain

relievers but not for antidepressants or anti-anxiety medications.



Shifting Demand and the Rise of Opioids



       Opioid use is determined by the interaction of demand and supply in the linked markets for

legal and illegal drugs. The observed increase in opioid use can reflect an increase in demand, in

supply, or both. Demand factors can explain the course of the opioid epidemic either because rising

opioid use reflect shifts in demand, or because rising supply drives up national opioid use, but

local demand factors determine where that supply has the most impact. Here we address whether

demand shifts on their own can explain the national rise in opioid use. We consider four potential

demand shifters for opioids: physical pain; depression; despair; and social isolation.



Demand-Side Forces: Physical Pain, Depression, Despair, and Opportunity Cost of Time

       Jeremy Bentham (1789, p. i) famously noted: "Nature has placed mankind under the

governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure." Opioid use replaces pain with pleasure.

As pain increases, one would naturally expect opioid use to increase as well, as happened after the

Civil War.

       Opioid use might also appeal to individuals who are in psychic pain: Case and Deaton

(2017) famously termed America's rising middle-aged mortality rates "deaths of despair."

However, mental and physical pain differ in a central way. Physical pain, suffered on the factory

floor or the battlefield, may be unrelated to any other personal attribute. Mental pain, generated by

disorders such as depression or a consequence of social and economic changes, often co-exists



                                                 10
with other characteristics that may either increase or decrease the demand for opioids. Anxiety, for

example, might reduce opioid use by generating increased fear of addiction or an inability to take

actions, like finding a cooperative doctor or dealer.

       Opioids may relieve pain and lessen despair, but for most consumers, use comes at a cost

of diminished attention and energy. Serious opioid consumption produces lethargy and diminishes

interest in other people. Consequently, the demand for opioids should be higher among people

with a lower opportunity cost of time. An extreme version of this hypothesis is that opioids can be

a complement to doing nothing, because the short-term pleasure generated by opioids is large and

independent of most other activities. For much of the past decade, more than 15 percent of 25-54

year-old men have not been employed. The employment to population ratio for these "prime-aged"

men has been less than 75 percent in many parts of America's eastern heartland, where opioid use

has been severe (Austin, Glaeser and Summers, 2018). Krueger (2017) reports that one-half of

jobless men take some form of painkillers.



Patterns of Demand-Side Variables

       Figure 3 shows national-level trends in four variables related to these explanations:

physical pain; depression; despair; and social isolation. Trends in these variables are age- and sex-

adjusted to the 2000 US population when possible. Panel a shows two measures of pain in the

MEPS. The first is the measure of pain interfering with work in the past four weeks, noted above.

The second is whether the person reports one of 11 painful conditions, for example arthritis or

back pain. Pain in the US is high. About 20 percent of people report that pain interfered with their

normal work at least moderately in the past four weeks and 25 percent report a painful condition.

The share of people reporting that pain interfered with their work is relatively constant, but the



                                                 11
prevalence of reporting at least one painful condition increased 14 percent. The difference between

these two may imply that pain treatment is somewhat effective, or it could be that pain is now

given a diagnosis where formerly it was not. Panels b and c report the share of adults visiting the

emergency department for any injury or a workplace injury; and the share of adults with joint pain,

back pain, or neck pain, taken from the National Health Interview Survey. As in MEPS, about one-

third report joint pain, and this increased about 12 percent over the time period. Emergency room

visits for injuries declined.

        Panels d-f show several measures of despair, based on average life satisfaction from

Gallup. Gallup reports aggregate data from 1979 on and data by age group from 2008. We report

the full-time series not adjusted for age and sex, and the shorter time series with age and sex

adjustment. 86 percent of people were satisfied with their life in 1996 and 2019; the share has

remained between 73 and 87 percent since 1979. Life satisfaction has rebounded since the Great

Recession.

        The last two panels (g and h) capture social isolation and the opportunity cost of time: the

share of the 25-54 year-old male population that is not employed and the share of the population

aged 25-64 that is never married. Both of these measures have increased, the latter especially so.

The percent of 18-34 year-olds who are married fell from 58 percent in 1978 to 29 percent in 2018.

The share of Americans who live alone increased from 13 percent in 1960 to 28 percent in 2016.

Putnam (1994) documents the widespread decline of many different forms of social connection,

from bowling leagues to fraternal clubs. Quinones (2015) explicitly links the rise of opioid abuse

to weakening social ties, particularly in the eastern heartland.




                                                 12
Demand and Opioid Initiation

        In Figure 3, most of these variables do not increase enough to offer a promising source of

explanation for the five-fold increase in opioid deaths or the six-fold increase in opioid shipments

from 1996 to 2012. Figure 4 shows this informally, focusing on the 2001-02 and 2009-10 cohorts.

The first cohort is the earliest with good pain data; the latter is at the height of opioid prescribing.

        The figure shows that the share of people with 2+ painful conditions rises slightly across

the two time periods, but the share of people with 2+ conditions who have at least 2 opioids scripts

in the 2½ years they are in the MEPS rises dramatically. The lion's share of the growth in opioid

use comes from increased number of prescriptions, holding the number of pain categories fixed,

not from the increase in the number of people reporting multiple forms of pain.

        The appendix shows the role of demand-side factors in the growth of opioid utilization

more formally. We sample people in the MEPS who are opioid-naïve in the second round. For this

group, we record several measures of potential demand for opioids: whether the person reports

pain, based on the two measures above; how much of the past four weeks the person felt

downhearted and depressed, which we scale from zero to one; and several measures of social

isolation, including labor force participation and marital status. We relate each of these variables

to the onset of heavy use opioids (2 or more opioid prescriptions) after the second round.

        All of these variables are associated with subsequent use of opioids. Controlling for basic

demographics, health care access, and other health behaviors, an individual in extreme pain has a

15 percentage point higher probability of initiating multiple opioid prescriptions than an individual

with no pain, a person who reported being downhearted and depressed all of the time in the past

four weeks is 5 percentage points more likely to initiate heavy opioid use than one reporting no

time spent downhearted and depressed, and a person who is widowed, separated, or divorced is 2



                                                  13
percentage points more likely to initiate heavy opioid use than a married person. However, most

of these variables did not change greatly over time, implying that they cannot explain the growth

in opioid use. Regressions including the report of painful conditions explain 20 percent of the

growth in heavy opioid use; regressions using pain interfering with work explain only 4 percent of

that increase.. The same pattern appears when looking at explaining the growth in the use of any

opioid.

          As MEPS does not have a good measure of despair, we turn to the Midlife in the US Survey

(MIDUS) to examine the impact of despair on opioid use. MIDUS is a panel of roughly 7,000

people who were interviewed in 1995-97, in 2004-05, and a third time in 2013-15. We consider

whether an opioid-naïve person in one survey round (i.e., round 1 or 2) becomes a user of

prescription pain relievers by the next round, controlling for basic demographics. MIDUS asks

about prescription pain relievers in general, not opioids in particular. The bulk of prescription pain

relievers, but not all, are likely to be opioids. On average, 27 percent of people in waves 2 and 3

take prescription pain relievers.

          MIDUS asks a number of questions on health and outlook. We combine groups of

questions into summary statistics meant to capture the categories of pain, negative affect, despair,

economic insecurity, and social isolation (see the appendix). Measures that feed into despair

include life satisfaction, social integration, and perceived contributions to society. Economic

insecurity includes measures of their financial situation and difficulty paying bills.

          The MIDUS results for pain and negative affect are similar to those in the MEPS. People

in pain are more likely to initiate prescription pain relievers, as are people with negative affect; the

impact of pain is quantitatively larger. Despair and economic insecurity matter for opioid initiation

as well. A one standard deviation increase in despair increases the probability of subsequent



                                                  14
prescription pain reliever use by 3 percentage points; a one standard deviation increase in economic

insecurity leads to a 6 percentage point increase in prescription pain reliever initiation. Taken as a

whole, however, changes in pain, negative affect, despair, and economic insecurity predict only

one-quarter of the increase in prescription pain reliever use. The bulk of this is because the

population is aging and pain reports increase with age. Far more important quantitatively is an

increase in prescription pain reliever use conditional on pain, mental health, despair, and economic

insecurity.



          Other studies

          A number of studies have examined the effect of economic change on opioid use and abuse

(see Maclean et al., 2020, for a review). The general finding confirms the results above: economic

change over the past few decades is related to opioid overdose deaths, but the impact of economic

changes on the rise in overall opioid use is modest. For example, Pierce and Schott (2020) estimate

that an increase from the 25th to 75th percentile in a county's import competition from China (due

to the permanent normal trade relations bill in 2000) was associated with between 2 and 3

additional drug overdose deaths per 100,000 people, less than 20 percent of the increase in the

drug overdose death rate between 1999 and 2018. Similarly, Ruhm (2019) and Case and Deaton

(2017) estimate that medium term economic changes such as unemployment rates and median

income, have only a minor effect on opioid deaths. Ruhm (2018) estimates that from 1999 to 2015,

changes in unemployment, poverty, median household incomes, home prices, and exposure to

import competition--taken together--explain fewer than 10 percent of the increase in opioid

deaths.

          One paper reaching a different conclusion is Charles et al. (2019). That paper uses state-



                                                  15
level data to estimate that the decline in manufacturing share of employment between 2000 and

2015 could explain virtually all of the increase in opioid deaths over that time period. In the

appendix, we explore this relationship in more detail (we are grateful to Charles et al. for providing

us their data and replication code). Because the data are at the state level, Charles et al. do not

include other controls in their regression. Estimating the model at the commuting zone level and

including basic demographic controls such as population age shares and median income eliminates

the relationship between manufacturing decline and opioid deaths. We thus conclude that the direct

effect of economic change on opioid deaths is modest. Changes in supply seems to be far more

like causes of the opioid epidemic than changes in demand-side factors including pain and despair.



The Changing Supply of Opioids



       If increases in demand do not explain the increase in opioid use, the obvious alternative

explanation is supply. Indeed, the recent opioid cycle is reminiscent of the supply-driven cycles

seen for morphine in the 19th century and heroin in the early 20th century. In each of these cases, a

pharmaceutical company produced a new and supposedly safer version of opium. Consumers

bought the new drug, only to learn that it was no less addicting. Demand falls until the stock of

addicts decline and memories fade, whereupon the cycle starts anew. The history of Purdue

Pharma and OxyContin after 1996 follows a similar pattern, though technology has had an extra

impact pushing the current cycle into illegal use.




                                                 16
Creating an Epidemic

         OxyContin was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in December 1995 and

Purdue began marketing in earnest in 1996. Three factors enabled Purdue to turn OxyContin into

a blockbuster drug. First, Purdue managed to differentiate OxyContin sufficiently from past

opioids, both because the semi-synthetic opioid oxycodone had less of a history than did morphine,

and through the delayed-release "Contin" system. The time release system, it was hypothesized,

would moderate the amount of the opioid received at any point in time, which would reduce the

risk of dependence and increase the time between needed doses. 2 At the time of FDA approval and

even after, no clinical trials backed up this theory.

         Second, Purdue was a dynamo at drug marketing. Arthur Sackler, the oldest of the three

Sackler brothers who owned Purdue, revolutionized pharmaceutical sales. He advocated

"detailing, free samples, free food and drink, flashy journal advertising and mailings" (Podolsky

et al., 2019, p. 1786). The 2019 lawsuit by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts against Purdue

details cases such as a doctor who was visited by Purdue representatives more than 600 times after

2008 and was given a consulting contract to promote Purdue opioids. That doctor allegedly

prescribed hundreds of thousands of Purdue opioid pills, generating nearly $1.5 million of revenue

for Purdue.

         Third, Purdue's sales pitch rode the wave created by a nascent medical movement focused

on the alleviation of pain. In 1973, the anesthesiologist John Bonica convened a meeting of pain

specialists and founded the International Association for the Study of Pain, which had its own

peer-reviewed journal: Pain. Dame Cicely Saunders, a hospice pioneer, advocated using morphine


2
  In 1984, Purdue Pharma tried this approach with MS Contin, which delivered morphine slowly into the body. The
forthcoming expiration of that patent, combined with the perception by physicians that morphine was too potent to
give to patients on a long-term basis, led Purdue to search for other formulations (Sarpatwari, Sinha, and Kesselheim,
2017).

                                                         17
to alleviate the suffering of dying patients: obviously, in the case of dying patients, potential long-

run costs of opioid use are not relevant. Purdue and other makers of pain medications provided

financial support for at least one chapter of the International Association for the Study of Pain: the

American Pain Society, which shut down in 2019 under a blizzard of lawsuits claiming it was a

front company for opioid manufacturers and should be partly liable for the opioid epidemic.

       Traditionally, opioid pain relief was considered for patients with end-stage cancer or acute

trauma. Addiction was of little consequence for the first group and use for the latter group was

generally limited to inpatient care. Thus, the real shift for OxyContin was in the use of opioids for

the much larger group of people with chronic pain in outpatient settings.

       The key to making this switch was overcoming the fear of physicians that such patients

would become addicted to opioids. To win over the doctors, Purdue promoted a 1980 letter to the

New England Journal of Medicine claiming that among "11,882 patients who received at least one

narcotic preparation, there were only four cases of reasonably well documented addiction in

patients who had no history of addiction" (Porter and Jick, 1980). This finding was among

inpatients but was taken to be general.

       It is unclear whether doctors believed the advertising or were induced by the promotions.

In either case, prescriptions flowed.

       Purdue and other pharmaceutical manufacturers were behaving like stereotypical amoral

profit-maximizing companies, but they also met little resistance. A National Academy of Sciences

panel (2021) noted several system-wide failures in the opioid epidemic. Pharmaceutical

distributors and dispensers both have legal obligations to watch for diversion of products, but they

are also profit-maximizing entities who benefitted from the sale of opioids.

       Physicians are the ultimate gatekeepers for prescription medicine, and many of them



                                                  18
behave far more altruistically than any simple homo economicus. Yet not all doctors are saints,

and some wrote very large numbers of opioid prescriptions. Prescription Drug Monitoring Program

data show that in 2011, prescribers in the top 5% of the prescribing distribution wrote 58 percent

of total prescriptions in Kentucky, 36 percent in Massachusetts, and 40 percent in California.

       Both the Food and Drug Administration and the Drug Enforcement Administration made

decisions that enabled the massive increase in opioid prescriptions (Egilman et al., 2019; Kolodny,

2020; Office of the Inspector General, 2019). The FDA generally requires at least two long-term

studies of safety and efficacy in a particular condition before drug approval, but for OxyContin,

the primary trial for approval was a 2-week trial in patients with osteoarthritis. Even with this

limited evidence, the FDA approved OxyContin "for the management of moderate to severe pain

where use of an opioid analgesic is appropriate for more than a few days" ­ with no reference to

any particular condition and no limit to short-term use.

       In approving subsequent opioids, the FDA sometimes relied on clinical trials where all

patients were initially placed on the active opioid (open label). Among those who responded

favorably and could tolerate the side effects, some were randomized to continue the therapy and

others were switched to a placebo. The idea was that the drug would then be tested in efficacy

among those for whom it can be tolerated. However, with this design, withdrawal effects from

ending opioid use could be interpreted as efficacy of the therapy.

       Regulatory capture is the standard explanation for lax oversight. Two examiners involved

in OxyContin's FDA approval went on to work for Purdue. When the FDA convened an advisory

group in 2002 to examine the harms from OxyContin, eight of the 10 experts had ties to

pharmaceutical firms.

       The DEA is in charge of monitoring use of opioids ­ it maintains the ARCOS data ­ and



                                                19
approving increases in production quotas. The DEA approved an increase in production quotas for

oxycodone and other opioids numerous times, even as the scope of the opioid epidemic became

clear. The DEA has also been blamed for being slow to set up a suspicious order system and to

shut down suspected diversion of pills.

       States enacted and expanded their prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) (Meara

et al., 2016), but these came some years later than many would have wished. Earlier, states had

moved away from monitoring prescriptions, for example through triplicate prescribing forms, and

these have been shown to have slowed the growth of opioid use (Alpert et al., 2019). Private

insurers as well were also slow to curb the use of opioid medications, for examples through

formulary restrictions or prior authorization requirements. In a sense, the case of OxyContin only

reinforces the point that nimble, well-incentivized, profit-seeking companies can often find their

way around a slow-moving regulatory apparatus.

       The first hints that OxyContin and its later competitors were no safer than earlier opioids

appeared early. By 2001, users had learned that crushing time-release tablets would provide access

to the full dose of oxycodone at once (National Drug Intelligence Center, 2001). Further, the pain-

relieving properties of OxyContin seemed shorter than its promoters promised, and the subsequent

pain was intense (Van Zee 2009). In the appendix, we show that the flood of opioids nationwide

made no difference to the reduction in pain between rounds two and four of the MEPS, regardless

of the level of pain in period 2. As the pain continued, there was demand for more frequent and

larger doses of medication.

       Opioid-related deaths followed the patterns of rising opioid prescriptions. As shown in

Figure 1, prior to 1999, only the total rate of opioid deaths was recorded in national data. After

1999, the drug overdose deaths are delineated by type of drug. The overall death rate from drug



                                                20
overdoses in the United States was below five per 100,000 in 1990, despite the notorious crack

epidemic and what was known at the time as "Heroin Chic"--when popular musicians, such as

Kurt Cobain, were known for their heroin use. The growth rate of opioid deaths shows a trend

break almost immediately after Oxycontin was introduced in 1996.

       Throughout the 2000s, increasing attention was paid to the abuse of opioids. The National

Drug Intelligence Center (2001) report noted with alarm that "the Pike County, Kentucky, Coroner

reported 19 Oxycontin-related deaths during the calendar year 2000." In July 2001, the New York

Times published "The Alchemy of Oxycontin" (Tough, 2001), which noted that "the earliest

reported cases of OxyContin abuse were in rural Maine, rust-belt counties in western Pennsylvania

and eastern Ohio and the Appalachian areas of Virginia, West Virginia and Kentucky."

Congressional hearings as early as 2001 described increased deaths and pill diversion from

OxyContin (US House, 2001).

       Policy interventions followed, but with a lag. In 2003, the Food and Drug Administration

sent a letter warning Purdue that "your advertisements thus grossly overstate the safety profile of

Oxycontin," and that "failure to respond to this letter may result in regulatory action, including

seizure or injunction, without further notice." That same year, the DEA released its OxyContin

action plan that called for the "rapid reformulation" of Oxycontin to "reduce the abuse of the

project, particularly by injection."

       Over time, insurers began to restrict access to opioids through their coverage decisions.

State governments set up Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs so that physicians could see how

many prescriptions their patients were receiving. Altogether, states added 81 new controlled

substance laws between 2006 and 2012 (Meara et al. 2016). State and private lawsuits began to

target Purdue Pharmaceuticals and other firms in the opioid business. Finally in August 2010,



                                                21
Purdue reformatted OxyContin to make it less vulnerable to abuse. Prescriptions fell, especially

for new patients (Zhu et al. 2019), and abuse of oxycontin declined (ICER, 2017).



Illegal Innovation and Globalization

       Stronger drug monitoring programs and reformulating OxyContin did not end the opioid

epidemic; rather, they moved demand into the deadlier illegal market. Cicero and Ellis (2015)

found that one-third of opioid users switched to other drugs after the reformulation of OxyContin,

and that 70 percent of those who identified an alternative drug specified heroin. The change was

greater in those states that had the highest levels of OxyContin misuse prior to 2010 (Alpert et al.,

2018). Figure 1 shows no reduction in overall death rates after 2011; rather, the decline in deaths

associated with prescription opioids is fully offset by the increase in deaths from heroin. Indeed,

Evans, Lieber and Power (2019) estimate no impact of the reformulation on overall mortality.

       Soon after 2010, imported heroin from Mexico increased in a way that offset the decline

in legal opioids. Quinones (2015) describes an almost corporate system, where buyers call dealers,

who then deliver heroin on demand. While US demand for heroin generated both competition on

quality and violence in Mexico, the US side of the market remained peaceful and efficient, and

heroin overdoses rose dramatically until 2016. Better delivery systems that use cell phones also

make it easier for consumers to buy heroin without going to dangerous, physical drug markets.

       Over time, heroin was replaced by fentanyl, which is more potent still and is fully synthetic

­ thus does not need the poppy plant. Fentanyl is far less costly to produce and the drug's

concentrated strength means that it is particularly easy to ship in tiny but still powerful quantities.

The downside is that it is even more deadly. Even transmission through the skin can kill naïve

users, depending on the dose. In an accounting sense, fentanyl-related deaths explain almost all of



                                                  22
the increase in drug overdose mortality between 2014 and 2017. Indeed, the ability to access an

Asian supplier of fentanyl over the internet may be far more revolutionary than the ability to buy

consumer goods on Amazon. We now ask how this is related to the initial addiction to prescription

opioids.



How the Pill Supply Translated into Deaths



       The opioid epidemic was not uniform spatially, nor was it predominantly an urban

phenomenon, unlike crack cocaine in the 1980s (Fryer et al., 2013). Figure 5 shows county-level

maps of opioid deaths in 1999-01, 2008-10, and 2016-18. Up through 2010, death rates rose the

most and were highest in Appalachia, the industrial Midwest (Quinones's book chronicled

Southern Ohio), and rural areas of Maine and Nevada.

       The change in death rates from 2009-2017 was more disparate. Generally, areas east of the

Mississippi River have higher deaths due to illegal opioids than areas west of the Mississippi River,

perhaps related to the type of heroin available prior to the opioid epidemic (Pardo et al., 2019).

Fentanyl mixes better with powdered heroin than black tar heroin, and powdered heroin is more

common east of the Mississippi. Overall, the cross-area correlation coefficient between opioid-

related mortality rates in 2008-10 and 2016-18 is .45.

       To understand the factors explaining these area trends, we examine whether the national

shift in legal opioid supply had a larger impact on opioid shipments and deaths in communities

with more pain. We consider this alongside the alternative hypothesis that opioid use was driven

by despair. The data on opioid shipments are from the ARCOS database. Opioid deaths in each

county in each year from 1999-2018 were obtained through a special request of the Centers for



                                                 23
Disease Control and Prevention.

       The first column of table 1 relates opioid shipments in a county to a first measure of pain,

the share of people in the county receiving Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) in 1990,

before the opioid epidemic. The pain variable is interacted with national opioid shipments; thus,

the coefficient indicates how national drug supply translated into pill availability in areas with

more and less preexisting pain. The regressions also control for county and year fixed effects. To

focus on legal opioids in the largely unrelated time period, the regressions are for the period 1997-

2010. Pain is a potent predictor of opioid shipments. An area with one standard deviation more

people on SSDI received 23 percent more opioids than the average area.

       Column 2 considers an alternate measure of pain, the share of the population in the 2002-

2010 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS) that reports joint pain. This measure

is available for 331 large counties. The coefficient is similar to that for SSDI receipt; an area with

one standard deviation more pain received 18 percent more opioids.

       The third column interacts national opioid availability with the share of people in the

county who were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with life, also drawn from the 2002-2010 BRFSS.

Opioid supply did not rise more in areas where more people were more dissatisfied. The fourth

column includes all three variables together; among them, the share of the population on SSDI is

most related to opioid supply. In the Appendix, we impute joint pain and life dissatisfaction to all

counties, using a LASSO regression in the counties where the data are available. We then relate

opioid shipments to predicted pain and despair. The results are similar to what we report.

       Column 5 translates these shipments into deaths. The regression mirrors that in column 4,

with the exception that the dependent variable is the prescription opioid mortality rate. The sample

is again 1997-2010. The coefficients are similar to those in column 4. Both SSDI receipt and joint



                                                 24
pain interact with national opioid supply in leading to prescription opioid deaths; area despair does

not interact in this way.

        To examine how these factors explain deaths due to illegal opioids, column 6 relates the

county's death rate from illegal opioids to the national death rate from illegal opioids interacted

with the same county characteristics. We also allow for an interaction between deaths from illegal

opioids nationally and per capita oxycodone shipments in 2008, to examine whether greater

prescription opioid use translated into more deaths due to illegal opioids (Evans et al., 2019, and

Alpert et al., 2018).

        Deaths from illegal opioids were greater in areas where pain was greater and where

OxyContin shipments were more prevalent. In contrast, despair is not related to deaths from illegal

opioids. Overall, therefore, the opioid epidemic was worse in areas where there was more pre-

existing pain and where opioid shipments were greater.

        Pain is correlated with education at the individual and area level. In the 331 counties with

data on pain, the correlation between pain and share with a college degree is -0.11. Pain is also

higher in rural areas, areas with more manual labor, and areas with higher rates of obesity. This in

part explains why opioid death rates are higher in areas with historical manufacturing employment

and areas with obesity-related health problems.



Conclusion



        America's battle with opioids is not over. A movement to aid a population suffering from

chronic pain has become a national crisis, with pain, despair, and entrepreneurship mixed in an

unholy brew. The government may assert its authority over legal opioids, but it seems unable to



                                                  25
stem most of the current illegal market supply, which increasingly comes in small shipments from

Asia or Mexico. Even a pandemic could not slow the deaths from opioid drugs.

       In the past, opioid crises ended slowly. Users painfully detoxified when supplies could not

be obtained or died after one too many overdoses. New users were deterred by fear of addiction

and physicians' reluctance to prescribe. The current crisis may follow the same slow and painful

path, but that is not entirely clear. New technologies have made it much harder to restrict access

to illegal opioids. When the poppy plant had to be grown, supply could be curtailed by eliminating

poppy fields. In contrast, fentanyl is much easier to produce, and its sale is much harder to stop.

       On the other hand, society also has more tools to address addiction ­ medication-assisted

treatment, widespread availability of overdose reversal medication (Narcan), and strong penalties

for illegal suppliers ­ and the use of these treatments is spreading.

       Past US public health efforts offer both hope and despair. Nicotine is an extremely

addictive substance and yet smoking rates have fallen dramatically over the past five decades,

because of both regulation and fear of death. On the other side, the harms of obesity are also well-

known and average weights are still increasing. We cannot predict whether opioid addiction will

decline like cigarette smoking or persist like obesity.

       The medical use of opioids to treat pain will always involve costs and benefits, and the

optimal level of opioid prescription is unlikely to be zero. The mistake that doctors and prescribers

made in recent decades was to assume overoptimistically that a time release system would render

opioids non-addictive. Thousands of years of experience with the fruits of the poppy should have

taught that opioids have never been safe and probably never will be.

       The larger message of the opioid epidemic is that technological innovation can go badly

wrong when consumers and regulators underestimate the downsides of new innovations and firms



                                                 26
take advantage of this error. Typically, consumers can experiment with a new product and reject

the duds, but with addiction, experimentation can have permanent consequences.




                                              27
                                          References

Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. "Supply-Side Drug Policy in the

       Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent

       Opioids," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (4): 1-35.

Alpert, Abby E., William N. Evans, Ethan MJ. Lieber, and David Powell, "Origins of the opioid

       crisis and its enduring impacts," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

       26500.

Austin, Ben, Edward Glaeser, and Lawrence Summers, "Jobs for the Heartland: Place-Based

       Policies in 21st-Century America," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2018(1), 151-

       255.

Avicenna, The Canon of Medicine, Translated into English by Hameed HA. S. Waris Nawab,

       Senior Press Superintendent, Jamia Hamdard Printing Press, New Delhi, 1998.

https://www.fda.gov/drugs/information-drug-class/timeline-selected-fda-activities-and-

       significant-events-addressing-opioid-misuse-and-abuse

Becker, Gary, and Kevin Murphy, "A Theory of Rational Addiction," Journal of Political

       Economy, 1988, 96(4): pp. 675-700.

Bentham, Jeremy, Introduction to the Principles and Morals of Legislation, London: Printed for T.

       Payne and Son, at the Mews Gate, 1789.

Booth, Martin, Opium: A History, London: Simon and Schuster, 1996.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, "Opioid Oral Morphine Milligram Equivalent

       (MME) Conversion Factors," 2017.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, "The Transformation of Manufacturing and the Decline in U.S.

       Employment," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER



                                               28
       Macroeconomics Annual 2018, Volume 33, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019.

Cicero Theodore J., and Matthew S. Ellis, "Abuse-Deterrent Formulations and the Prescription

       Opioid Abuse Epidemic in the United States: Lessons Learned From OxyContin," JAMA

       Psychiatry. 2015; 72(5):424-430.

Cutler, David, M., and Edward Glaeser, "What Explains Differences in Smoking, Drinking, and

       Other Health-Related Behaviors?" American Economic Review, 2005, 95(2): 238-242.

DeShazo, Richard D., McKenzie Johnson, Ike Eriator, et al., "Backstories on the US Opioid

       Epidemic. Good Intentions Gone Bad, an Industry Gone Rogue, and Watch Dogs Gone to

       Sleep," The American Journal of Medicine, 2018, 131(6): 595-601.

Drug Enforcement Administration, Office of Diversion, Oxycontin Diversion and Abuse, October

       2003.

Egilman, David S. Gregory B. Collins, Julie Falender, Naomim Shembo, Ciara Keegan, and Sunil

       Tohan, "The marketing of OxyContin: A cautionary tale." Indian Journal of Medical

       Ethics, Jul-Sep 2019, 4(3), NS:183-93.

Evans, William N. Ethan M J Lieber, and Patrick Power, "How the Reformulation of OxyContin

       Ignited the Heroin Epidemic," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101(1):1-15.

FDA      Warning      Letter    to    Purdue,        January   17,   2003.     Available     at

       http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/2003/ucm147275.htm.

Fingerhut, Lois A., and Christine C. Cox, (1998). Poisoning mortality, 1985-1995. Public Health

       Reports, 113(3), 218.

Fryer, Roland G., Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy, "Measuring Crack

       Cocaine and Its Impact," Economic Inquiry. 2013; 51(3):1651-1681.

Gable, Robert S. "Comparison of acute lethal toxicity of commonly abused psychoactive



                                                29
       substances," Addiction 2004, 99, 686-696.

Goodnough, Abby, "Overdose Deaths Have Surged During the Pandemic, C.D.C. Data Shows,"

       New York Times, April 14, 2021.

Grandmaison, Romain LeCour, Nathaniel Morris, and Benjamin T. Smith, "The US Fentanyl

       Boom and the Mexican Opium Crisis: Finding Opportunities amidst Violence?", mimeo,

       2019.

Hedegaard, Holly, Arialdi M. Miniño, and Margaret Warner. Drug overdose deaths in the United

       States, 1999­2017. NCHS Data Brief, no 329. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health

       Statistics. 2018.

Ho Jessica Y., "The Contribution of Drug Overdose to Educational Gradients in Life Expectancy

       in the United States, 1992-2011." Demography. 2017;54(3):1175-1202.

Hoyert, Donna L., Elizabeth Arias, Betty L. Smith, Sherry L. Murphy, and Kenneth D. Kochanek,

       Deaths: final data for 1999. National vital statistics reports. vol. 49. No. 8. Hyattsville,

       MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 2001..

Institute for Clinical and Economic Review, Abuse-Deterrent Formulations of Opioids:

       Effectiveness and Value, Final Evidence Report, August 8, 2017.

Jones, John, The Mystery of Opium Reveal'd, London: Printed for Richard Smith at the Angel and

       Bible without Temple-Bar, 1701.

Joranson, David E., Karen M. Ryan, Aaron M. Gilson, and June L. Dahl, "Trends in medical use

       and abuse of opioid analgesics," JAMA 283, no. 13 (2000): 1710-1714.

Kolodny, Andrew, "How FDA Failures Contributed to the Opioid Crisis," AMA Journal of Ethics,

       2020; 22(8): E743-750.

Krueger, Alan B., "Where have all the workers gone? An inquiry into the decline of the U.S. labor



                                               30
       force participation rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017(2), 1-87.

Maclean, Johanna Catherine, Justine Mallatt, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon, "Economic

       Studies on the Opioid Crisis: A Review," NBER Working Paper No. 28067, 2020.

Meara, Ellen, Jill R. Horwitz, Wilson Powell, Lynn McClelland, Weiping Zhou, A. James

       O'Malley, and Nancy E. Morden, "State Legal Restrictions and Prescription-Opioid Use

       among Disabled Adults," New England Journal of Medicine, 375, 2016, 44-53.

Miech, Richard A., Lloyd D. Johnson, Patrick M. O'Malley, et al., (2019). "Monitoring the Future

       national survey results on drug use, 1975­2018: Volume I, Secondary school students.",

       Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan, 2019, available at

       http://monitoringthefuture.org/pubs.html#monographsIns.

Miniño, A. M., Anderson, R. N., Fingerhut, L. A., Boudreault, M. A., & Warner, M. (2006).

       Deaths: injuries, 2002. National vital statistics reports. vol. 54. No. 10. Hyattsville, MD:

       National Center for Health Statistics.

Nahin, Richard L., Bryan Sayer, Barbara J. Stussman, Termeh M. Feinberg, "Eighteen-Year

       Trends in the Prevalence of, and Health Care Use for, Noncancer Pain in the United States:

       Data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey," The Journal of Pain, 2019, 20(7): 796-

       809.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. High and Rising Mortality Rates

       Among Working-Age Adults. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2021.

National Drug Intelligence Center, Oxycontin Diversion and Abuse, January 2001.

Nutt, David, Leslie King, William Saulsbury, and Colin Blakemore, "Development of a rational

       scale to assess the harm of drugs of potential misuse," Lancet. 2007; 369: 1047-1053.

Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice, "Review of the Drug Enforcement



                                                31
       Administration's Regulatory and Enforcement Efforts to Control the Diversion of

       Opioids," Washington, D.C.: Department of Justice, Evaluation and Inspection Division

       19-05, 2019.

Ohler, Norman, Blitzed: Drugs in the Third Reich, New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017.

Pardo, Bryce, Jerka, Jonathan P. Caulkins, and Peter Reuter, The future of fentanyl and other

       synthetic opioids. RAND Corporation, 2019.

Pathan, Hasan, and John Williams. "Basic opioid pharmacology: an update." British journal of

       pain vol. 6,1 (2012): 11-6.

Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott, "Trade liberalization and mortality: evidence from US

       counties." American Economic Review: Insights, 2020, 2(1), 47-64.

Podolsky, Scott H., David Herzberg, and Jeremy A. Greene, "Preying on Prescribers (and Their

       Patients): Pharmaceutical Marketing, Iatrogenic Epidemics, and the Sackler Legacy," New

       England Journal of Medicine, 2019, 380:1785-1787.

Porter Jane, and Hershel Jick, "Addiction rare in patients treated with narcotics," New England

       Journal of Medicine, 1980; 302:123-123.

Purdue Pharma, "I Got My Life Back," https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Er78Dj5hyeI, 1998.

Quinones, Samuel, Dreamland, New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2015.

Ruhm, C. J. (2018). Corrected US opioidinvolved drug poisoning deaths and mortality rates,

       1999­2015. Addiction, 113(7), 1339-1344.

Ruhm, C. J. (2019). Drivers of the fatal drug epidemic. Journal of health economics, 64, 25-42.

Sarpatwari, Ameet, Michael S. Sinha, and Aaron S. Kesselheim, "The Opioid Epidemic: Fixing a

       Broken Pharmaceutical Market," Harvard Law and Policy Review, 11(2), 2017, 463-484.

Saunders, Nicholas J., The Poppy: A History of Conflict, Loss, Remembrance, and Redemption,



                                               32
      United Kingdom: Oneworld Publications, 2014.

Tough, Paul, "The Alchemy of Oxycontin," New York Times Magazine, July 29, 2001.

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, A Century of International Drug Control, October

      2010.

United States House of Representatives, Committee on Energy and Commerce, Subcommittee on

      Oversight and Investigations, "OxyContin: Its Use and Abuse," Serial Number 107-54,

      Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, August 28, 2001.

Van Zee, Art. "The promotion and marketing of oxycontin: commercial triumph, public health

      tragedy." American journal of public health, 2009, 99(2): 221-227.

Zhu, Wenjai, Michael E. Chernew, Tisamarie B. Sherry, and Nicole Maestas, "Initial opioid

      prescriptions among U.S. commercially insured patients, 2012-2017." New England

      Journal of Medicine, 2019; 380:1043-52.




                                             33
    Figure 1: Trends in age- and sex-adjusted drug deaths and opioid deaths, 1990-2018




Notes: Data are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Vital Statistics System.
Drug deaths after 1999 were identified based on International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition
underlying cause-of-death codes X40­X44, X60­X64, X85, and Y10­Y14. Overdoses by category were
identified by multiple-cause-of-death codes T40.1 (heroin), T40.2 (prescription opioids = natural and
semisynthetic opioids), T40.3 (methadone), and T40.4 (fentanyl/tramadol = synthetic opioids other than
methadone) (Hedegaard, Miniño, and Warner, 2018). Total opioid deaths also included code T40.6
(other/unspecified narcotics). Drug deaths before 1999 were identified based on International
Classification of Diseases, 9th edition underlying cause-of-death codes E850-E858, E950.0-E950.5, E9620,
and E980.0-E980.5. Opioid deaths before 1999 were identified from underlying cause-of-death-codes
E850.1-E850.2 and 305.5, as well as multiple-cause-of-death codes 965.00-965.09 (Fingerhut & Cox
(1998). Deaths involving more than one opioid category are counted in both. To account for the change
from ICD-9 codes (1990­1998) to ICD-10 codes (1999­2017), the following comparability ratios were
applied to ICD-9 codes E850-E858, E950-E950.5, E9620, and E980.0-E980.5 (respectively) in the
calculation of total drug deaths: 1.0365, 1.0013, 0.9870, and 1.0417 (Miniño, et al., 2002). Total opioid
deaths were adjusted upward by about 20 percent (comparability ratio = 1.195) (Hoyert, et al., 2001). Deaths
were age- and sex- adjusted to the US 2000 population. Deaths from specific causes were adjusted for
underreporting following Ruhm (2018), as described in the Online Appendix.




                                                    34
                  Figure 2: Trends in Opioid Shipments per Adult, 1997-2017




Note: The figure shows milligrams of morphine equivalents per adult in the US from 1997 to 2017. Data
are from the DEA ARCOS database. The total omits methadone and buprenorphine, which are often used
in treating opioid abuse, along with some smaller opioids for which data are not available in all years. Data
for hydromorphone, codeine, morphine, and fentanyl base was missing in 2000 and was imputed using data
in 1999 and 2001, assuming a constant growth rate. The same was done for total shipments.




                                                     35
                              Figure 3: Trends in Pain, Mental Health, Despair, and Social Isolation




Note: Data are adjusted to the 2000 population by age and sex except for longer-term data from Gallup in panels (e) and (f).

                                                                  36
                         Figure 4: Pain and the Initiation of Opioids




Note: Data are from the Medical Expenditure Panel Study. Painful conditions include sickle cell
anemia, headache (including migraine), nonspecific chest pain, rheumatoid arthritis and related
disease, osteoarthritis, other nontraumatic joint disorders, spondylosis (including intervertebral
disc disorders, other back problems), joint disorders and dislocations (trauma-related), all
fractures, sprains and strains, and abdominal pain.




                                               37
                                Figure 5: Age-adjusted opioid deaths (per 100,000) by commuting zone.




Note: Data are from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, National Vital Statistics System. Due to CDC restrictions, areas are not shown
if the number of deaths < 10 in the three-year total or the commuting zone population is < 100,000 people. These areas are indicated with grey fill
and white boundaries. Data are adjusted to the year 2000 population by age and sex.

                                                                        38
                               Table 1: Impact of drug shipments interacted with pain and despair on local areas
                                                                                                                                         Interaction with National
                                                      Interaction with Opioid Shipments                                                      Illicit Death Rate
                                                                                      Prescription
                                            Prescription Opioid Shipments          Opioid Death Rate                                      Illicit Opioid Death Rate
                                                      (1997-2010)                     (1997-2010)                                                 (2008-2017)
                                         (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)                                                        (6)
Interaction between national shipments / illegal opioid deaths and
  Pain
   % of labor force claiming DI        86.10***                        149.13***         1.90***                                                      2.99***
      (1990)                           (10.73)                          (42.39)          (0.64)                                                       (0.99)
                                                       **
   Self-reported joint pain prevalence           65.83                   32.50           0.56**                                                       2.98***
                                                 (31.26)                (35.03)          (0.29)                                                       (1.43)

 Despair
  Share dissatisfied/very dissatisfied                                      33.98          -29.87                   -0.14                              1.31
    w/ life                                                                (28.26)        (32.11)                  (0.35)                             (1.03)

  Opioid shipments, 1997-2010
   Oxycodone MME per capita,                                                                                                                          4.48***
    1997-2010                                                                                                                                         (1.14)
Unadjusted mean                                 368.58       373.68        373.68         373.68                    2.35                                7.67
R-squared                                        0.750        0.713         0.707          0.725                   0.431                               0.608
N                                               42,966        4,634         4,634          4,634                   4,622                               3,641
   The dependent variable is age- and sex-adjusted rate in the county and year. Column (1) includes all counties. Columns (2)-(6) only include counties for which
   data on joint pain prevalence or share dissatisfied with life were available. National opioid shipments included shipments of oxycodone, hydrocodone,
   hydromorphone, codeine, morphine, and fentanyl base and were scaled by the change in shipments between 1997 and 2010 in Figure 2. The coefficients represent
   the impact of one standard deviation higher pain (or despair) times the change in national opioid shipments or national deaths due to illegal opioids which occurred
   over the period. Counties were weighted by total population in 2005. All regressions control for county and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
   county-level and are reported in parentheses. ***(**)* denote p<0.01(p<0.05)p<0.10.




                                                                                   39
