                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       (WHEN) DOES PATENT PROTECTION SPUR
                       CUMULATIVE RESEARCH WITHIN FIRMS?

                                        Ashish Arora
                                       Sharon Belenzon
                                         Matt Marx
                                        Dror Shvadron

                                     Working Paper 28880
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28880


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We thank Wesley Cohen, Alon Brav, Ronnie Chatterji and seminar participants at NBER
Productivity Seminar, Purdue, Columbia, Washington and Colorado for helpful comments. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, Matt Marx, and Dror Shvadron. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
(When) Does Patent Protection Spur Cumulative Research Within Firms?
Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, Matt Marx, and Dror Shvadron
NBER Working Paper No. 28880
June 2021
JEL No. O30,O32,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of patent protection on follow-on investments in corporate scientific
research. We exploit a new method for identifying an exogenous reduction in the protection a
granted patent provides. Using data on public, research-active firms between 1990 and 2015, we
find that firms decrease follow-on research after a reduction in patent protection, as measured by
a drop in internal citations to an associated scientific article. This effect is stronger for smaller
firms and in industries where patents are traded less frequently. Our findings are consistent with a
stylized model whereby patent protection is a strategic substitute for commercialization
capability. Our results imply that stronger patents encourage follow-on research, but also shift the
locus of research from big firms toward smaller firms and startups. As patent protection has
strengthened since the mid-1980s, our results help explain why the American innovation
ecosystem has undergone a growing division of innovative labor, where startups become primary
sources of new ideas.

Ashish Arora                                      Matt Marx
Fuqua School of Business                          Cornell University
Duke University                                   137 Reservoir Avenue
Box 90120                                         Ithaca, NY 14853
Durham, NC 27708-0120                             and NBER
and NBER                                          mmarx@cornell.edu
ashish.arora@duke.edu
                                                  Dror Shvadron
Sharon Belenzon                                   Duke University
Fuqua School of Business                          100 Fuqua Drive
Duke University                                   Durham, Nort 27708
100 Fuqua Drive                                   United States
Durham, NC 27708                                  ds452@duke.edu
and NBER
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu
1       Introduction

According to the National Science Foundation, firms account for 43% of U.S. investments in scientific

research.1 At least since Rosenberg (1990), scholars have sought to understand what motivates firms to

invest in scientific research. Patent protection is one route, among many, that enables firms to secure

their returns on scientific findings. In this paper we explore how changes in the level of patent protection

affect investments in research, and how this effect varies across firms with different commercialization

capabilities. If patents substitute for commercialization capability, firms lacking these capabilities will be

more sensitive to changes in patent protection. Markets for technology enable firms to sell their inventions

to others with superior commercialization capability, and hence would dampen the response to changes

in patent protection. Our results indicate that patents are more valuable for firms who lack the ability

to commercialize independently.

        A large, influential literature has argued that firms can benefit from publishing research findings

even if they never profit directly from commercializing the focal scientific discovery. Broadly speaking,

this stream of research argues that firms invest in scientific research as a "ticket to the game" whereby

the firm is able to absorb external knowledge (Cockburn & Henderson, 1998; Cohen & Levinthal, 1989;

Rosenberg, 1990), attract talented researchers (Stern, 2004), and maintain a reputation with stakeholders

or regulatory agencies (Azoulay, 2002; Hicks, 1995).2 In this view, research investments are not sensitive

to patent protection.

        A parallel stream of research, and the point of departure for this paper, holds that firms may invest

in scientific research in order to profit directly from innovation (Arora et al., 2021; Teece, 1986). The

prospect of stronger patent protection would encourage research investment insofar as the inventions

arising from their scientific discoveries can be patented, for example as patent-paper pairs (Murray &

Stern, 2007). The value of patent protection in driving investments in scientific research could vary by firm

characteristics, such as the ability to independently commercialize innovations. Teece (1986) suggested

that patents can substitute for commercialization capabilities in appropriating value from innovation.
    1
      National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics 2019. National Patterns of R&D
Resources: 2017-18 Data Update. NSF 20-307. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf20307
    2
      Prior studies of the effectiveness of patents have focused on follow-on patenting by the inventing firm (Farre-Mensa
et al., 2019; Galasso & Schankerman, 2018). However, less than one-quarter of patents reference the scientific literature
(Marx & Fuegi, 2020a), and only 10% of research is patented (Belenzon & Schankerman, 2013). Studies that do examine
the relationship between patent protection and the production of research (Murray & Stern, 2007; Sampat & Williams,
2019) typically do so by counting citations to a focal scientific article from any organization (sometimes entirely omitting
"internal" citations to the firm's own research). Moser (2005) focuses not on patenting but the creation of underlying
inventions. Arguably this is somewhat akin to scientific research. However, this analysis also focuses on general effects and
not the firm's decision.


                                                             1
By excluding imitators, patents give inventors the time needed to develop the missing capabilities or

facilitate technology licensing. In this formulation, patents are more important when firms lack relevant

commercialization capabilities. On the other hand, large firms may have the expertise and experience to

reduce the costs of information disclosure compared to small firms (Horstmann et al., 1985; Somaya et al.,

2007), or the resources required to enforce their patents (Galasso et al., 2013; Lanjouw & Schankerman,

2004).

       A natural question is whether patent protection and commercialization capability are more valuable

when deployed together or separately. Put differently, the question is whether they are strategic substi-

tutes or complements.3 If patents and commercialization capabilities are complements, then strengthening

patent rights would imply the locus of research and invention would shift toward bigger firms with greater

commercialization capabilities.4 Conversely, if they are substitutes, then stronger patents would shift the

locus of research to smaller firms.

       The empirical evidence on the substitutability vs. complementarity of protection and commercial-

ization capability is decidedly mixed. Capponi et al. (2019), Clarkson and Toh (2010), Fischer and

Henkel (2013), Hall et al. (2013), Leiponen and Byma (2009) and Mansfield (1986) all present evidence

suggesting that patent protection and commercialization capability are complements. At the same time,

Helfat (1994) and Cockburn and MacGarvie (2011) find support for substitutability.5 These conflicting

results, coupled with the fact that most empirical work on this topic is descriptive, makes it difficult to

be confident about whether patents and commercialization capability are substitutes or complements.

       As Teece (1986) implies, the relationship depends in part on whether the inventor can trade the

invention in the market for technology to access the commercialization capability of the buyer. Because

the buyer will have a greater commercialization capability, a sale can partially offset the impact of a re-

duction in patent protection if commercialization capability is a strategic substitute for patent protection.

Conversely, if they are strategic complements, the buyer will value patents even more than the inventor,

amplifying the impact of a loss of patent protection. Therefore, the ability to license or sell inventions will
   3
      Formally, complementarity is defined in the context of supermodularity theory (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990; Milgrom
and Roberts, 1995). When two activities (or assets) are strategic complements, the presence of the first increases the effect
of the second on a given outcome. In the opposite case, the two activities are defined as strategic substitutes.
    4
      Some commercialization capabilities may, however, be specific to research trajectories. Others, such as relationships
with regulators, financiers, and suppliers; logistics and distribution; and manufacturing are typically broader in scope. Such
capabilities are likely to be strongly correlated with firm size. In the discussion that follows, and in the empirical analysis,
we will use firm size as a proxy for commercialization capability.
    5
      Following Teece (1986), the innovation and management literature has explored the relationship between patents and
other means of appropriating returns. For instance, Anton and Yao (2004) analyze the relationship between patents and
secrecy. Others have examined the relationship in the context of bringing products to the market (e.g., Rothaermel and
Hill (2005); Gans and Stern (2003)); licensing (Arora & Ceccagnoli, 2006; Cassiman & Veugelers, 2006), and acquisitions
(Grimpe & Hussinger, 2014).


                                                               2
dampen the response under strategic substitutability, but amplify it under strategic complementarity.

      Our approach is to assess whether the firm continues an existing program of research where patent

protection is exogenously weakened. Following Murray and Stern (2007), we examine patent-paper pairs,

i.e., where the firm obtains patent protection over a research discovery that is also published. Instead of

comparing citation rates to the focal paper before vs. after the granting of a patent, we take advantage

of an exogenous de facto reduction in the strength of patent protection due to the emergence of prior art

after the focal patent was granted. Comparing the effect of such reduction to papers--in matched patent-

paper pairs published by the same firm that did not experience such a reduction--allows us to infer

whether the firm's continued investment in that program of research is affected by the sudden weakening

of patent protection.

      To distinguish patents that experience a de facto reduction in protection, we use a method first

introduced by Lee (2020). The intuition is as follows. It is common for similar discoveries to happen

independently at the same time (Bikard and Marx, 2019; Merton, 1961; Thompson and Kuhn, 2020).6

Patent applications for similar inventions may be processed concurrently. Yet, patents with later priority

dates may be granted before their prior art.7 Thus, there are cases when patent grants are followed by

the appearance of similar patents that count as prior art for the focal patent. When this happens, we

argue that the de facto protection provided by the focal patents is reduced. We call these events "priority

disclosures" and designate them as the treatment.

      We confirm that the arrival of a closely related patent before the grant of the focal patent results in a

reduction in scope of the focal patent, as indicated by an increase in the number of words in the principal

independent claim (following Kuhn and Thompson (2019)). When the related patent arrives after the

grant, the claims cannot be modified. However, because courts interpret the actual protection offered

by a patent in light of the relevant prior art, the de facto protection offered by the focal patent shrinks.

Consistent with this, Lee (2020) shows that these priority disclosures are associated with a decline in firm

value.8
    6
      For example, the infamous patent dispute between the University of California and Broad Institute regarding who first
developed the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technologies is still being litigated (Cohen, 2018).
    7
      A note by Moderna Inc. in a recent 10-Q report provides a good example: "Because certain U.S. patent applications are
confidential until the patents issue. . . third parties may have filed patent applications for technology covered by our pending
patent applications without our being aware of those applications, and our patent applications may not have priority over
those applications. In addition, publications of discoveries in the scientific literature often lag behind the actual discoveries,
and patent applications in the United States and other jurisdictions are typically not published until 18 months after filing,
or in some cases not at all. Therefore, we cannot be certain that we were the first to make the inventions claimed in our
patents or pending patent applications, or that we were the first to file for patent protection of such inventions, including
mRNA-1273." (Moderna (2020), emphasis ours)
    8
      Our method identifies changes to patent protection that occur after patent grant. Thus, this paper differs from previous
work that focused on changes to patent scope that happen during the examination process (e.g., Kuhn and Thompson, 2019).


                                                                3
     To account for possible unobserved differences in patents that experience such priority disclosures,

we develop a control group of scientific papers, each paired to a patent. These papers belong to the same

firm and experience similar disclosures, except that they do not suffer from a reduction in protection

because the potentially protection-reducing patent has a later priority date, and thus is not prior art.

Of course, the decision to study patent-paper pairs limits our investigation to firms and research areas

where patents are effective. Not all research conducted within firms is protected by patents, so we are

likely studying research the firm deemed important enough to patent. On the other hand, an advantage

of our approach is that one can compare outcomes within the same firm. That is, one can estimate the

impact on follow-on research at the scientific trajectory level within a firm, rather than across firms.

     We use data on patents and papers related to U.S.-based public firms between 1990 and 2015 from

Arora, Belenzon, and Sheer (2019), which yields two main findings. First, we find that firms move away

from research trajectories where their related patent protection is weakened. On average, the appearance

of protection-reducing prior art for a patent is related to a 19% reduction in scientific citations from

within the firm to the paired scientific paper. Importantly, there is no effect for citations from outside

the firm.

     Second, firms in thinner technology markets are affected more by the loss of patent protection (i.e.,

invest less in research) whereas those in thicker markets can compensate more easily by transacting with

other firms. This evidence favors substitution over complementarity. When we compare the response of

small and large firms (measured by sales), we find qualitatively similar effects, although the differences

are not statistically significant. This may reflect the weakness of firm size as a measure of commercial-

ization capability, which is likely to be innovation-specific. Furthermore, if complementary capabilities

are important, small firms are more likely to invest in research when they can capture rents even without

having to commercialize themselves, i.e., in fields with thick and well-functioning markets for technology.



2    Analytical framework

Consider a firm that has made a scientific discovery and is deciding on investment in follow-on research.

Follow-on research enhances the value of the initial discovery. Specifically, the value of discovery is vr,

where r is the follow-on research and v indexes the quality of the discovery. The fraction of the value
                                                       
that the firm captures is represented by (X, m), X  0; m  0, where X represents protection from

the patent on the initial discovery, and m represents the firm's commercialization capability. If there is a



                                                     4
market for technology, the firm may also license the innovation to a buyer with superior commercialization

capability.9


2.1    Baseline model

Let (r; X, m, q ) be the profit of the inventor,  = vr(X, m) - 1         2
                                                                     2 cr , where c is the cost of one unit
                                                                                v (X, m)
of follow-on research. The optimal level of follow-on research, r, is given by             . If the effective
                                                                                     c
patent protection declines from X to X - x, follow-on research will fall:10


                                               r    v  (X, m)
                                                 =-           0                                                            (1)
                                               x    c  X

The fall in follow-on research is smaller for firms with greater commercialization capability if commer-
                                                                                                   2
cialization capability m and patent protection X are strategic substitutes (i.e., if               Xm     < 0) and greater

otherwise. Formally,

                           2r    v  2 (X - x, m)                                  2 (X, m)
                              =-                                      0                    0                               (2)
                           xm    c     xm                      x=0                 Xm

Equation 2 formalizes the intuition that if patent protection is more valuable to smaller firms with weaker

commercialization capability, then follow-on research by smaller firms will respond more to changes in

patent protection. If commercialization capability is a strategic complement for patent protection, then

the reverse will be true.


2.2    Commercialization with market for technology (MFT)

The firm commercializes internally if the value from internal commercialization exceeds the value any

potential buyer can derive from the invention, net of transaction costs. That is, the invention will be

licensed or sold to another firm if net gains from trade are positive. Denote by the subscript 0 the buyer

representing the highest gains from trade. The value to the buyer is vr(X, m0 ), where m0 is the buyer's

commercialization capability. Let  represent transaction costs, including the cost of transferring tacit

know-how in the transfer and any costs due to imperfect contracting. We assume transaction costs are
   9
      Galasso et al. (2013) argue that trade in patents invented by individuals may also be driven by differences in ability to
enforce patents.
   10
      In equation 1, we are evaluating the derivative of (X - x, m) at x = 0, and shall do so throughout.




                                                              5
proportional to the value of the invention.11 Ignoring potential rent-dissipation from product market

competition, the gains from trade are simply vr{(1 -  )(X, m0 ) - (X, m)}. The inventor licenses

if (1 -  )vr(X, m0 )  vr(X, m). Let m (X, m) represent the minimum level of commercialization

capability of the buyer such that gains from trade are non-negative. That is, (1 -  )(X, m ) = (X, m)

        If the inventor appropriates 1    0 share of the gains from trade, its payoff from licensing is as

follows:
                                       
                                                                                                      if m0  m
                                       
                                       vr(X, m) + vr{(1 -  )(X, m0 ) - (X, m)}
                                       
           Expected payoff =  =
                                       
                                       vr(X, m)
                                                                                                      otherwise


When the inventor decides on its follow-on investment, it is uncertain about licensing possibilities. For-

mally, we assume that m0 is a random variable with distribution function G(m0 ). The expected profits

are:

                                            1
                                                                                         cr2
                = vr(X, m) + vr                 {(1 -  )(X, m0 ) - (X, m)}dG -
                                           m                                              2
                                                                     1
                                                                                                                          (3)
                             cr2
                 = vrA -           ,   where A = (X, m) +                {(1 -  )(X, m0 ) - (X, m)}dG
                              2                                     m

                                         vA
The optimal follow-on investment is r =     . Notice that expected profits are always higher when
                                          c
commercialization through a market for technology is possible. As a result, follow-on investment is

always greater with a market for technology. Intuitively, the market is like an option, which is always

beneficial. Indeed, the expression for A has two parts. The first corresponds to internal commercialization.

The second represents the option value of commercializing through the market. The first increases with

the firm's commercialization capability, whereas the second decreases with the firm's commercialization

capability.12 Equation 3 also implies that expected profits fall with transaction costs  . In what follows,

we focus on the limiting case of   0, which also implies m  m.


2.2.1      Reduction in patent protection
                                         1
                r   v A    v  (X, m)                 (X, m0 )  (X, m)
                  =     =-           +      (1 -  )          -                                                 dG
               x    c x    c    X       m             X        X
                                   1
                                                                                                                          (4)
             r        v  (X, m)        (X, m0 )  (X, m)
           =      =-            +              -            dG
             x  0     c  X        m     X            X
   11
      It is plausible that these costs are higher when patent protection is narrower (e.g., Arora (1995, 1996), Lee (2020)) so
      
that        0. This effect tends to amplify the response of follow-on research to patents.
   12
      x
      Firms with greater commercialization capability have a lower value of using the market for technology.


                                                              6
        Comparing equation 4 to equation 1 shows one additional term. The second term corresponds to

how a reduction in patent protection affects the gains from trade. This term is zero under independence,

negative under complementarity and positive under substitutability. The potential buyer, with greater

commercialization capability, has a lower marginal value for patent protection under substitutability.

Therefore, markets for technology dampen the reduction in follow-on research under substitutability.


2.3      Transaction costs and patent protection

Arora (1995) argues that broader patents can support contracts for transfer of tacit knowledge. More

efficient contracts reduce the loss in value suffered by transactions in the market for technology. Simply

put, it is plausible that  is reduced by broader patents. Lee (2020) shows, in a large sample setting, that
                                                                                                  
a reduction in patent protection reduces the likelihood that the patent is licensed. Assuming           0,
                                                                                                  X
there is an extra positive term, as shown in equation 5 below. If transaction costs fall with patent

protection, then follow-on research is more responsive to changes in patent protection under markets for

technology, all else held constant.



                                              1                                                    1
         r            v    (x, m)                   (x, m0 )  (x, m)                      
                  =               +                         -                     dG -                 ((x, m0 )dG            (5)
         x    0       c    x                 m       x        x                           X       m



2.4      Discussion

The setup described here can be thought of as a reduced-form version of the model described in Galasso

and Schankerman (2018), in which the invalidation of a patent sets off a rent-dissipating patent race on

the follow-on invention and reduces the expected payoff of the patent holder. The reduction in incentive

for follow-on investment is potentially counteracted by a strategic incentive to win the race by increasing

follow-on investment. This strategic incentive is absent in our decision-theoretic model. Consequently, the

incentive to invest is directly related to the value of patent protection.13 The other important difference

has to do with markets for technology. In our setup, an invention whose patent has been weakened may

still be traded. In Galasso and Schankerman (2018), an invention without a patent is assumed to be in

the public domain, and has zero trade value.
   13
      Galasso and Schankerman (2018) also assume that larger inventors (as measured by the size of their patent portfolio)
have more productive research, although the incremental benefits diminish. The productivity of research if the focal patent
is invalidated is potentially non-monotonic in the size of the portfolio. Thus, if competition in the patent race is very intense,
then patents and size are strategic substitutes.




                                                                7
      The main predictions of the model are summarized as follows. A reduction in patent protection

reduces follow-on research within the firm. Further, if patent protection and commercialization capabil-

ity are strategic substitutes, greater commercialization capability will make the firm less responsive to

changes in patent protection, while the opposite is true if the two are strategic complements. Markets

for technology provide the inventor a valuable option and therefore increase follow-on research. If patent

protection is more valuable to larger firms (i.e., strategic complementarity), markets for technology will

amplify how follow-on research responds to changes in patent protection and dampen the response if there

is strategic substitution. An important empirical implication is that if the reduction in follow-on research

is smaller when the firm operates in an active market for technology, this is inconsistent with patent

protection being a strategic complement to commercialization capability. Instead, this is consistent with

strategic substitutability.



3     Methodology

Following Lee (2020), we assume the effective protection provided by a focal patent is reduced when a

closely related patent with an earlier priority date is disclosed after the grant of the focal patent. We

label this event as a "priority disclosure." We use textual similarity measures to assess similarity between

patents. We identify patent-paper pairs using the textual overlap between the patent claims text and

scientific paper abstracts. We create a matched control group by identifying patent-paper pairs that

experience similar sequences of disclosure, save only that the related patent has a later priority date and

is therefore not prior art for the focal patent. Lastly, we compare levels of internal patent and scientific

citations received by the treated and control papers.


3.1    Patent-paper pairs

When firms publish a scientific discovery but also file for a patent on related inventions, it results in

a patent-paper pair (Ducor, 2000). Murray (2002) introduced the method of observing citations to

patent-paper pairs to analyze the commercialization of science. Murray and Stern (2007) used a similar

approach to test whether patents hinder the overall levels of follow-on scientific research. Fehder et al.

(2014) further examined how the effect of patents is moderated by the type of institutions. Thompson

et al. (2018) used inventor names to match patents to scientific papers and examined the effect of patent

licensing on follow-on scientific research by others.



                                                        8
       We use automated textual methods for matching patents and scientific papers. We clean the text

using stemming and stop words and revert abbreviations to their original content. We then use a "term

frequency-inverse document frequency" (TF-IDF) to calculate weights for each word. One key challenge

is that inventors tend to demonstrate patent novelty by expressing similar ideas using different words. To

address this challenge, we calculate word-stem pair distances based on patent examiner rejection letters.

When a patent is rejected due to lack of novelty or for obviousness, examiners cite the relevant prior

art that is technically similar. Using these citations, we can identify different word stems that are likely

to describe the same technical invention. We compute a similarity score between a patent and a paper

abstract using cosine similarity between the word vectors, while taking into account the word-stem pair

distances described above. We then use a cutoff score to identify highly similar patents and papers.

       When a patent and a paper are similar and associated with the same firm, we consider them a

patent-paper pair. To further improve the match, we limit the absolute gap to seven years between

the patent and paper publication years. Note that we do not constrain our matches on author names

or crosswalks between patent categories and scientific research topics. We argue that when a patent is

providing protection to the contents of a scientific paper, derivative findings and applications by the firm

are likely to benefit from some level of protection by the focal patent. Thus, the focal patent is assumed

to provide protection to follow-on research that is related to the focal paper.


3.2     Identification strategy

When two related discoveries are patented, the earlier invention is considered as relevant prior art to the

later invention.14 Yet, since patent examination periods vary, there are frequent cases where a proximate

prior-art patent is filed earlier than the focal patent, but is not disclosed to the public until after the

focal patent is granted. Since it has not yet been disclosed at the time of the grant of the focal patent,

the prior-art patent could not have been officially recognized as such. These cases are especially prevalent

when patents are continuations of undisclosed foreign patent applications. In these cases, the gap between

the priority date and the first public disclosure could be longer than the standard 18-month gap enacted

by the American Inventors Protection Act (AIPA) since November 2000.

       Once the prior-art patent is disclosed, the focal patent arguably experiences an ex-post reduction

of the protection it provides (see also section 4). We label such patents as treated patents. The earliest
  14
     Bikard and Marx (2019) document many cases of scientific multiples. Thompson and Kuhn (2020) document similar
overlaps in patent applications.




                                                        9
disclosure date for any given patent is defined as the earliest disclosure date within a DOCDB15 patent

family. Thus, information disclosed by patents outside the U.S. is taken into account. A disclosure date

might be either the grant date of the patent or a pre-grant disclosure of a patent application that has

priority.

        To identify proximate prior art, Lee (2020) uses a similarity measure between patents based on their

textual content, employing the same methodology that was described above for identifying patent-paper

pairs. When a similar prior-art patent that is not owned by the same firm as the focal patent is disclosed

after the publication of the focal paper, we consider it as a priority disclosure event. We argue that once

a patent-paper pair is hit by a priority disclosure, the IP protection that the focal patent provides to the

related research trajectories is reduced.


3.3      Sample construction

A direct comparison of treated patents and untreated patents might pick up relevant heterogeneity across

research trajectories. Patents in research areas with high levels of competitive investment might have a

higher probability of receiving a priority disclosure compared to patents that are less central to current

research agendas. In addition, the appearance of a textually similar patent held by a competitor might

affect follow-on investment not only through changes in patent protection, but also through the perceived

competitive landscape. Once it is disclosed that a competitor is working in a similar research area, a firm

might respond by speeding up research in this area or by shifting to other research areas (e.g., Clarkson

and Toh, 2010).

        We therefore construct a control patent-paper pair belonging to the same firm as the treated patent-

paper pair. Similar to the treatment group, patents in the control group experience the disclosure of a

textually similar patent by a competitor. However, unlike the treatment group, the disclosed patent was

filed after the focal patent and therefore does not hold priority over it. Consequently, the disclosure of

the competing patent does not change the effective protection offered by the patent in the control pair.

Because both the treated and the controls experience a post-grant disclosure of a competing patent, we

are controlling for effects related to the competitive landscape while focusing the analysis on the the

effects of changes in the levels of patent protection. Since both the treated and the control pairs are from

the same firm, we are also minimizing the effects of differences in citation or publication practices across

firms.
  15
       European Patent Office worldwide bibliographic data



                                                             10
4      Validation of priority disclosure events

To support our argument that priority disclosures tend to reduce focal patent protection and could be used

as exogenous shocks, we provide several validation tests. The evidence suggests that priority disclosures

are associated with a reduction in patent scope and that these events are not anticipated by the firm, nor

by investors. Taken together, we argue that these results back our use of priority disclosures as exogenous

shocks to post-grant focal patent protection.


4.1    Effect of priority disclosures on patent scope

According to Kuhn and Thompson (2019), a good and widely available measure of patent scope is the

word count of the first independent claim of the patent. Patents with shorter claims provide more general

protection, presumably because there are fewer restrictions on the claim. The authors argue that this

measure is superior to previously used measures in the literature, such as the number of claims, the

number of future citations and the number of patent classes associated with the patent. Compared to

these measures, the word-count measure is better aligned with the law and the practice. It is also the

only measure that is highly predictive for the scope of a set of patents as assessed by experts.

      Thompson and Kuhn (2020) use the word-count measure to test the effect of winning a patent race

on a set of outcomes. The authors identify "patent twins," in which two competing patents are filed at

nearly the same time (6 or 18 months apart, per the specifications in the paper). Among these twins,

one patent ("the leader") has priority over the other ("the follower"). The twins are connected through

a mention by a patent examiner in a novelty rejection issued to the follower as a result of the disclosure

of the leader. Described in another way, the leader is disclosed within the examination process of the

follower and causes a patent examiner to reject the follower's claims. The authors show that losing the

race is associated with a larger increase in the length (number of words in the first claim) of the follower

relative to the leader.

      Priority disclosures are a generalization of the "patent-twins" approach by relaxing the requirement

for an explicit mention by a patent examiner. Using textual similarity, we identify closely related patents

that would likely result in a novelty rejection if examined. This enables us to explore the effect of post-

grant disclosures that are not visible to examiners during the examination process and compare citation

outcomes in the periods before and after the appearance of the shocks.

      To validate our measure, we first test whether pre-grant priority disclosures are associated with a


                                                    11
greater reduction in patent scope, measured by the number of words in the first independent patent claim

(longer claims are associated with smaller scope). Using data on patents filed by U.S.-based firms between

the years 2000 and 2015, we identify patents that experience pre-grant priority disclosures. These events

occur when there exists another patent that is textually similar to the focal patent, is not assigned to

the same firm, is filed before the focal patent, but is disclosed before the grant of the focal patent. The

disclosure of the priority patent should potentially result in a reduction of the final scope of the focal

patent by expanding the claim wording.

     Due to the American Inventor's Protection Act, the original filing text and the final granted patent

text are publicly available for a large portion of patents filed after November 2000. We count the number

of words in the first patent claim, in both the original filing and the granted patent. Out of about

625,000 patents for which we have both measures, we identify about 98,000 treated patents (15%).16 For

each treated patent, we find another patent assigned to the same firm, within the same 4-digit IPC and

published in the same year. Our final sample includes 33,058 patents, of which half are treated and the

rest are controls. Our panel for analysis includes two observations for each patent: one observation for

the number of words in the first claim of the original filing and another for the number of words in the

first claim of the final granted patent.

     Our econometric model for this validation test takes the form:



                          Wit = 0 + 1 Finalit + 2 Treati + 3 Finalit × Treati +          it                       (6)

     In this specification, the dependent variable, Wit , is a word count of the first patent claim, for the

ith patent at stage t (either initial filing or granted patent). F inalit is an indicator variable that is equal

to 1 for final granted patent text and 0 for initial filing. T reati is an indicator variable for patents that

received a pre-grant disclosure shock.      it   is an i.i.d. error term. Standard errors are clustered at the firm

level. We expect 3 > 0, implying a reduction in the patent scope following a pre-grant disclosure shock.

     Table 1 presents the estimation results. The patents in our sample have, on average, 134 words in

the first claim of their initial filing, without a significant difference between treated and the controls. By

the final grant, on average, 30 words are added to the first claim of the control patents, and 40 words are

added to the treated patents. The difference is statistically significant. In general, the scope of protection

a patent provides tends to shrink during the examination process. The results in table 1 show that the
   16
      Thompson and Kuhn (2020) use explicit patent mentions by examiners and find that 10-11% of patents are part of a
patent race.



                                                           12
appearance of a previously undisclosed patent, flagged as "similar" (prior art) by our algorithm, further

reduces the focal patent scope. We infer that our textual similarity measure is a plausible proxy for what

a patent examiner would have considered prior art. Therefore, though post-grant priority disclosures

cannot change the focal patent text, we argue that they do reduce the de-facto protection provided by

the focal patents.


                                           Insert Table 1 here.




4.2   Priority disclosures are not anticipated

Our identification strategy assumes that priority disclosures are not anticipated. We use the Kogan et al.

(2017) measure of private patent value to compare the value of the treated and control patents at grant

date. We expect an insignificant difference in patent value between treated and control patents. Using

our baseline sample (as described in section 5), we test for an observed difference in patent value between

treated and control patents. Table 2 shows that there is no statistically significant difference between the

private value of treated and control patents.


                                           Insert Table 2 here.




4.3   Market reaction to priority disclosures

Arora, Belenzon, and Lee (2020a) conduct an event study to test the effect of priority disclosures on

stock-market returns of the focal firm. Disclosure shocks, happening at some date after the grant of

the focal patents, should reduce their private value. The event study tested whether the stock market

can pick up this reduction in value. The authors use daily stock returns of 972 firms (holding 1,858

treated patents). Using a three-factor model on a 40-day window, they found that, following a priority

disclosure event, firms experience an average cumulative abnormal return of -1%. The authors found

that, on average, smaller firms got a stronger reaction compared with larger firms, of -1.5% and -0.75%

respectively. Larin et al. (2020) provide an external replication of these results. Using data provided by

the original authors, the technical report conducts an independent test and finds similar results. Based on

an event window of 5 days prior to the event and 31 days afterward, the authors found a small cumulative



                                                    13
under-performance (less than 1%). By limiting the sample to small firms, the effect intensifies and is

estimated at about 4%.

         Taken together, these validation tests support our claims that priority disclosures are generally

unpredicted by either the focal firm or the market, that they are associated with a decrease in de-facto

patent protection and that this decrease has economic implications for the affected firms.



5        Data

We use a dataset on U.S.-based corporate utility patents and scientific papers provided by Arora, Be-

lenzon, and Sheer (2021).17 We start our analysis in 1990, the first year for which we have reliable

data on scientific paper abstracts. The initial dataset consists of approximately 1.34 million patents

and 821,000 scientific papers associated with 4,323 firms. This yielded 3.2 million possible pairs relating

to 1,372 firms, composed of approximately 213,000 unique papers, and 448,000 unique patents. After

further cleaning, we are left with approximately 16,000 unique scientific papers whose matching patents

experienced a priority disclosure and approximately 13,000 papers with a "fake" priority disclosure.18 We

allow multiple papers to match with the same patent, both in the treatment and the control group. We

mark a patent-paper pair as treated when the focal patent experienced a priority disclosure two or three

years after the scientific paper was published. When multiple treated patents are paired with the same

scientific paper, we choose the earliest priority disclosure date as the treatment date for the paper.

         The final step is to match the treated and control pairs based on the characteristics of the scientific

papers. For each treated pair, we match a corresponding control pair originating in the same firm. The

pairs share a common publication year (year of publication of the scientific papers) and a common research

topic based on the Web of Science list of research subjects. We allow control pairs to be matched with

replacement with multiple treated pairs. Following this match, we end up with 4,387 unique scientific

papers that are paired with 3,003 unique treated patents. The control group has 1,362 unique scientific

papers and 1,189 unique control patents.
    17
      The authors relied on data obtained from several sources: (i) Compustat for U.S. company data; (ii) BvD Orbis for
subsidiary data; (iii) SDC Platinum for acquisitions and alliances data; (iv) Clarivate Web of Science (WoS) for scientific
papers metadata; (v) PATSTAT 2016b for patent metadata. This dataset extends the older NBER patent dataset and
provides a comprehensive source for corporate patents and scientific papers between 1980 and 2015. The data account for
dynamic reassignment and changes in ownership structure (e.g., company name changes, mergers and acquisitions, spin-offs
and divestitures). A dynamic association between patents and scientific papers to firms is critical for measuring internal
citations correctly.
   18
      We follow Lee (2020) in setting the similarity measure threshold for identifying disclosure shocks. Our results are robust
for a set of alternative threshold levels.




                                                              14
5.1     Variable description

5.1.1    Scientific citations

We use Web of Science citations data to identify scientific papers by the same firm that cite the focal

paper over the sample years of 1990-2015. These citations are labelled internal citations. All other

citations, either by other firms or by researchers at universities and government labs, are identified as

external citations. For our regression analysis, we keep annual citation counts for eight years from

the publication of the paper, provided that Compustat data exists for the given firm in that year. We

aggregate observations for pre- and post-treatment, such that each patent-paper pair has two observations

in the panel. For OLS models, we calculate the average annual citations for the pre- and post-treatment

periods. For negative binomial models, we sum over these years to keep the dependent variable as a count

variable.


5.1.2    Patent citations to scientific papers

To further explore the firm's response to priority disclosures, we construct a measure of follow-on inventive

activity that is related to the focal scientific paper. This measure consists of citation counts from patents

by the same firm to the focal scientific papers in our sample. These citations, which are referred to as

non-patent literature (NPL) citations, are provided by Marx and Fuegi (2020b).


5.1.3    Commercialization capability and markets for technology

Following our analytical model, we explore how the value of patent protection varies by the availability

of commercialization capability. Since the latter is largely unobserved and innovation-specific, we begin

by exploring how the effect varies by the thickness of markets for technology. Our measure of market

thickness is based on Arora, Belenzon, and Suh (2020b), who identify patent sales by purging the USPTO

Patent Assignment Dataset (PAD) of patent reassignments due to mergers, name changes and record

corrections. For each IPC-4 (International Patent Classification) in our data, we calculate the percentage

of patents that were reassigned between 1990 and 2015. We then use this measure to split our sample

into (a) patents in technological areas with "thick" markets for technology and (b) patents that are part

of "thin" markets. Next, we provide additional evidence by using average annual sales as a proxy for the

presence of commercialization capability. The annual sales for firms in our sample range from $17M to

$233B, and the average annual sales of the median firm in the sample is $2.1B.


                                                     15
5.2    Descriptive statistics

Arora et al. (2021) identify a total of 3,889 U.S.-based public firms active between the years 1990 and

2015. There are 2,611 firms with at least one associated scientific paper. Due to our extensive matching

procedures, our final sample consists of pairs originating from 81 of these firms. Table 3 presents summary

statistics at the firm level. Though firms in our sample are larger than the overall population of innovative

firms, our sample includes a wide range of firms in terms of size and R&D inputs and outputs.


                                             Insert Table 3 here.



      Table 4 presents descriptive statistics over the sample period. Our baseline scientific citations sample

consists of 17,388 observations, split between treatment and control groups before and after treatment.

The distribution of papers among firms is highly skewed, with 2,842 papers associated with the biggest

firm. The average firm has 71 papers matched with 52 patents. Comparing average citations between the

treatment and control group reveals some differences. While internal paper citations are similar at an

annual average of about 0.4 citations, treated patents tend to have slightly more annual internal citations

than the controls, with 0.26 and 0.2 annual citations respectively. Similarly, treated papers have on

average 3 external annual citations, while the controls have 3.74. Lastly, treated patents receive slightly

less external citations compared to the control patents.


                                             Insert Table 4 here.




6     Estimation results

6.1    Econometric specification

Our baseline econometric specification takes the form:


                             Cit = 1 Postit + 2 Treati + 2 Postit × Treati +    it                        (7)


      The dependent variable, Cit , is an average of annual internal citations between scientific papers,

where i designates a patent-paper pair and t designates the time period (either pre- or post-treatment).

For the negative binomial specification, we sum the citations over the same time period. P ostit is an

                                                      16
indicator variable that is equal to 1 in the post-treatment period and 0 otherwise. T reati is an indicator

variable for patent-paper pairs that received a priority disclosure.      it   is an i.i.d. error term. The pre-

treatment period is either two or three years long and starts with the papers' publication year. The

post-treatment period is the remaining years, up to eight years from publication, or the last year for

which we have Compustat records for the given firm. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are

reported. According to our analytical model, we expect 3 < 0, suggesting a reduction in the firm's

research investments following a reduction in patent protection.

      In addition, we estimate similar specifications in which the dependent variable is a count of annual

internal non-patent literature citations (i.e., NPL, citations from a patent to a scientific paper). For both

specifications, we also provide analyses where the dependent variables are counts of external citations,

which are all citations originating outside the focal firm.


6.2    Baseline results: Patent protection and follow-on research

Table 5 presents the estimation results for the baseline specification. We observe a statistically significant

difference between the treated and control observations following a reduction in patent protection. Ac-

cording to the point estimates in the OLS specification (Column 3), the average annual internal citations

for the controls post-treatment is 0.321 (0.486-0.165). For the treated, the average is 0.26 (0.321-0.061),

a reduction of 19%. This result persists in the negative binomial specification. In contrast, a reduction

in patent protection does not seem to significantly affect the number of external citations (columns 1

and 2). This is consistent with Sampat and Williams (2019), who also find no effect of patent denial on

follow-on research by others.

      Columns 5-7 explore the heterogeneity of the effect by industry. The strongest effect is observed

for life biomedicine research, followed by ICT & engineering. In life biomedicine, a reduction in patent

protection is associated with a 35% reduction in average annual internal citations ( - 0.307
                                                                                      0.473 ). In ICT &
                                           -0.072
engineering, there is a 21% reduction ( 0.429 -0.097 ). In the physical sciences, we do not observe a significant

difference between treated and controls.

      The estimation results confirm that a reduction in patent protection reduces follow-on investment

in related scientific research trajectories by the focal firm. The heterogeneity of the results by industry

are consistent with findings in the literature that patents are more effective at protecting inventions in

the life sciences (e.g., Cohen et al. (2000)).

                                             Insert Table 5 here.

                                                       17
6.3     Patent protection and follow-on invention

Patent citations are frequently used as a measure of follow-on invention. Given the nature of our sample,

we estimate follow-on inventive activity by observing the effect of change in patent protection on patent

to paper (NPL) citations.19 Table 6 presents an analysis for patent to paper citations. The reduction in

NPL citations indicates that, on average, following a reduction in patent protection, firms reduce their

follow-on inventive activity related to the focal research trajectories. Specifically, the estimates in table
                                                                                   -0.025
6 imply a 42% reduction in average internal NPL citations to treated papers ( 0.046+0.022-0.016 ).


                                                  Insert Table 6 here.


       A possible objection to our interpretation of the baseline results is that a reduction in citations might

not be driven by reduced investments, but rather by a reduction in publishing. While we cannot refute

this possibility completely, that we find a reduction in follow-on patents that cite the treated patent, as

well as fewer follow-on patents that cite the paper paired with the treated patent, makes it more likely

that the firm reallocates resources away from the research area that has lost some patent protection. In

summary, the evidence presented in tables 5, 9 and 6 implies that firms decrease their investments in

research trajectories that have been affected by a reduction in patent protection.


6.4     Markets for technology

Columns 1-3 in table 7 present subsets of the sample, split by our measure of market thickness. The

dependent variable is average annual paper-to-paper citations. We compare firms operating in 4-digit

IPCs where patents are less likely to be traded (Column 1, thin markets for technology) with firms

operating in areas with a higher share of traded patents (column 2, thick markets for technology).20 We

observe that firms operating in a thinner market for technology are more responsive than firms operating

in thicker markets. In thin markets, we estimate a 37% reduction in follow-on research compared to the
                -0.164
controls ( 0.442- 0.059+0.054 ), while in thick markets the estimated reduction is statistically insignificant.

This is consistent with patent protection being a strategic substitute for commercialization capability.

                                                  Insert Table 7 here.


  19
     Section 7 provides estimates of the effect on patent-to-patent citations.
  20
     On average, patents in thick markets are twice as likely to be reassigned (5.2% reassignment level), compared to patents
in thin markets (2.5% reassignment level).


                                                             18
6.5    Commercialization capability

Commercialization capability is typically innovation-specific and cannot be directly observed in our data.

We proxy for the presence of commercialization capability by observing firm size (measured as average

annual sales). Recall that if commercialization capability and patents are strategic substitutes, then

smaller firms should be more responsive to reductions in patent protection. On the other hand, if

commercialization capability and patent protection are complements, then firm size should amplify the

response.

      Columns 4-6 in table 7 present an analysis of the changes in internal citations by firm size. Observing

the interaction terms in columns 4 and 5, we find a stronger response in small firms. However, the

difference between the two is not statistically significant (column 6). We conduct a complementary

regression analysis of the interaction between treatment, paper age and firm size (see figure A1). The

results suggest that by the third year after treatment there is a statistically significant difference between

small and large firms in the level of the response.

      Table 8 provides additional analysis of the effect by subsetting the sample into four groups based on

firm size and market thickness. Both within small firms and large firms, we notice a significant difference

in response between thin and thick markets. The positive coefficient estimate for large firms in thick

markets does not fit with our predictions. Among the four groups, the strongest effect is observed in

small firms operating in thin markets for technology.

                                            Insert Table 8 here.


      Our analysis of the effect by firm size and market thickness provides an indication that research

trajectories in smaller firms, and firms operating in thin markets, are more affected by the level of patent

protection. Our theoretical predictions state that markets for technology could dampen the responsiveness

to changes in patent protection only if patents and commercialization capability are strategic substitutes.

Therefore, taken together, our results on responsiveness by firm size and the market thickness suggest

that patents and commercialization capability are strategic substitutes.



7     Robustness

The construction of the sample in the previous sections includes multiple filtering steps and matching

procedures. First, patents are paired with publications within the same firm. Then pairs are tagged as

                                                      19
either treatment or control, and lastly these pairs are matched to create a balanced sample. The downside

to this process is that it results in a rather limited sample of patents and papers originating from only

81 firms (out of about three thousand public firms who publish scientific papers).

          To provide additional evidence for the effect of patent protection on follow-on investments in innova-

tion, we construct a second sample. Here, we match patents without requiring a pairing with a scientific

paper. A central benefit of this sample is that we can match treated and control patents based on their

characteristics. We then compare follow-on internal patent citations to the focal patents in the sample.

          As in previous sections, we use data from Arora, Belenzon, and Sheer (2021). Since most disclosure

shocks happen within the first year following patent grant, we filter on patents with a disclosure shock (or

fake disclosure shock) within that year. This increases the sample size, at the cost of a short pre-treatment

term.21 We match a treated patent with a control patent originating in the same firm, granted in the

same year and sharing a 4-digit IPC over the years 1980-2012. We allow matching with replacement.

Our matched sample consists of 45,401 treated patents matched with 24,888 controls, originating from

766 distinct firms.

          Table 9 presents the estimation results. We observe a statistically significant difference between the

treated and control patents following a reduction in patent protection. On average, the treated receive
                                        -0.017
4% less citations post-treatment ( 0.315+0 .02-0.089 ). We also attempt to explore how our results vary by

firm size and the thickness of the market for technology. The sample is split at the median firm size

and market thickness. Results in columns 3 and 6 are not statistically significant, possibly due to small

sample size. However, the magnitudes of the interaction coefficients in all columns are consistent with

our previous results: small firms are more responsive to changes in patent protection. In contrast to our

previous results, here there is no clear difference between firms in thin and thick markets.

          Overall, these results provide some additional evidence, over a larger sample of U.S.-based public

firms, for the importance of patent protection for follow-on investments in innovation.



8         Conclusions

In this paper, we tackled a question fundamental to the management of science and technology: does

intellectual property protection spur firms to invest in scientific research, and under which conditions is

this effect strongest? Answers to these questions matter for the strategic management of firms as well as
    21
         Our results are qualitatively robust to several other filtering choices.




                                                                   20
understanding the distribution of nearly half of U.S. investments in scientific research that is conducted

outside of universities or government labs. Although past work has investigated the impact of patents on

whether individual firms continue to patent (Farre-Mensa et al., 2019; Galasso & Schankerman, 2018),

or whether scientific inquiry proceeds in the industry more generally (Murray & Stern, 2007; Sampat &

Williams, 2019), no work, to our knowledge, has shown whether firms are motivated to invest in scientific

research when they can claim temporary monopoly over their discoveries.

     Although this relationship might seem self-evident, the literature has largely focused on indirect

motives for firms to conduct research with their own money: developing absorptive capacity (Cockburn

& Henderson, 1998; Cohen & Levinthal, 1989; Henderson & Cockburn, 1994), attracting scientists (Stern,

2004) and impressing investors, regulators and customers (Azoulay, 2002; Hicks, 1995). Our result sug-

gests a direct relation between scientific findings and inventive activity and spotlights original formulations

by Bush (1945) and Teece (1986), who viewed science as a direct input into innovation. The incentives

that patents provide firms to conduct research also stand as a positive effect of the much-maligned patent

system.

     We also provide identifying evidence that patents and commercialization capabilities are substitutes

rather than complements. Our finding that patents matter more in "thin" markets for technology,

where the focal firm cannot easily import commercialization capabilities by trading with other firms,

contradicts the notion that patent protection and commercialization capability are complements. This

result also helps resolve conflicting results in the literature regarding the relationship between patents

and commercialization capability (Cockburn & MacGarvie, 2011; Fischer & Henkel, 2013; Hall et al.,

2013; Helfat, 1994; Leiponen & Byma, 2009), which have largely been produced by comparing firms by

size--the identifying assumption being that smaller firms lack commercialization capabilities. We too find

very limited differences by firm size, but this is because considering only the firm's internal capabilities

ignores the potential to augment its own capabilities by transacting in "thick" technology markets. Only

when considering the full range of commercialization capabilities available to the firm--including those

of other firms--is this tension resolved.

     Our results help to explain why the innovation ecosystem is characterized by a growing division

of innovative labor with startups as sources of new ideas, as patent protection has strengthened since

the mid-1980s. Our results imply that there are strategic substitutes for commercialization capability:

Patent protection is more valuable for smaller firms lacking commercialization capability. Markets for

technology further encourage even firms lacking commercialization capability to invest in research with


                                                      21
the confidence that they can profit from it by licensing or selling their inventions to others. Stronger

intellectual property rights help, especially if they facilitate such transactions. Thus, stronger patents

encourage research but can also shift the locus of research.




                                                    22
References

Anton, J. J., & Yao, D. A. (2004). Little patents and big secrets: Managing intellectual property. RAND

       Journal of Economics, 1­22.

Arora, A. (1995). Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights And The Market For Know-

       How. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 4 (1), 41­60. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 /

       10438599500000013

Arora, A. (1996). Contracting for tacit knowledge: The provision of technical services in technology

       licensing contracts. Journal of Development Economics, 50, 233­256.

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., & Lee, H. (2020a). Do Broader Patents Block Follow-on Invention?

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., & Sheer, L. (2019). DISCERN: Duke Innovation & SCientific Enterprises Research

       Network. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3709084

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., & Sheer, L. (2021). Knowledge spillovers and corporate investment in scientific

       research. American Economic Review, 111 (3), 871­98.

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., & Suh, J. (2020b). Science and the Market for Technology.

Arora, A., & Ceccagnoli, M. (2006). Patent Protection, Complementary Assets, and Firms' Incentives

       for Technology Licensing. Management Science, 52 (2), 293­308. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.

       1050.0437

Azoulay, P. (2002). Do pharmaceutical sales respond to scientific evidence? Journal of Economics &

       Management Strategy, 11 (4), 551­594.

Belenzon, S., & Schankerman, M. (2013). Spreading the word: Geography, policy, and knowledge spillovers.

       Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (3), 884­903.

Bikard, M., & Marx, M. (2019). Bridging Academia and Industry: How Geographic Hubs Connect Uni-

       versity Science and Corporate Technology. Management Science.

Bush, V. (1945). Science, The Endless Frontier (tech. rep.). United States Government Printing Office.

Capponi, G., Criscuolo, P., Martinelli, A., & Nuvolari, A. (2019). Profiting from innovation: Evidence from

       a survey of Queen's Awards winners. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 49, 155­169.

       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.strueco.2019.02.002

Cassiman, B., & Veugelers, R. (2006). In Search of Complementarity in Innovation Strategy: Internal

       R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition. Management Science, 52 (1), 68­82. https://doi.org/

       10.1287/mnsc.1050.0470


                                                    23
Clarkson, G., & Toh, P. K. (2010). `Keep out' signs: The role of deterrence in the competition for resources.

       Strategic Management Journal, 31 (11), 1202­1225. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.853

Cockburn, I. M., & Henderson, R. M. (1998). Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and the

       Organization of Research in Drug Discovery. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46 (2), 157­182.

       https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-6451.00067

Cockburn, I. M., & MacGarvie, M. J. (2011). Entry and Patenting in the Software Industry. Management

       Science, 57 (5), 915­933. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1110.1321

Cohen, J. (2018). Federal appeals court hears CRISPR patent dispute.

Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1989). Innovation and learning: The two faces of R & D. The economic

       journal, 99 (397), 569­596.

Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability

       Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not) (Working Paper No. 7552).

       National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w7552

Ducor, P. (2000). Coauthorship and coinventorship. Science, 289 (5481), 873­875.

Farre-Mensa, J., Hegde, D., & Ljungqvist, A. (2019). What Is a Patent Worth? Evidence from the U.S.

       Patent "Lottery". The Journal of Finance, n/a (n/a). https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12867

Fehder, D. C., Murray, F., & Stern, S. (2014). Intellectual property rights and the evolution of scientific

       journals as knowledge platforms. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 36, 83­94.

Fischer, T., & Henkel, J. (2013). Complements and substitutes in profiting from innovation--a choice

       experimental approach. Research Policy, 42 (2), 326­339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.

       06.004

Galasso, A., & Schankerman, M. (2018). Patent rights, innovation, and firm exit. The RAND Journal of

       Economics, 49 (1), 64­86.

Galasso, A., Schankerman, M., & Serrano, C. J. (2013). Trading and enforcing patent rights. The RAND

       Journal of Economics, 44 (2), 275­312.

Gans, J. S., & Stern, S. (2003). The product market and the market for "ideas": Commercialization

       strategies for technology entrepreneurs. Research policy, 32 (2), 333­350.

Grimpe, C., & Hussinger, K. (2014). Resource complementarity and value capture in firm acquisitions:

       The role of intellectual property rights. Strategic Management Journal, 35 (12), 1762­1780. https:

       //doi.org/10.1002/smj.2181




                                                     24
Hall, B. H., Helmers, C., Rogers, M., & Sena, V. (2013). The importance (or not) of patents to UK firms.

       Oxford Economic Papers, 65 (3), 603­629. https://doi.org/10.1093/oep/gpt012

Helfat, C. E. (1994). Firm-Specificity in Corporate Applied R&D. Organization Science, 5 (2), 173­184.

Henderson, R., & Cockburn, I. (1994). Measuring competence? Exploring firm effects in pharmaceutical

       research. Strategic management journal, 15 (S1), 63­84.

Hicks, D. (1995). Published papers, tacit competencies and corporate management of the public/private

       character of knowledge. Industrial and corporate change, 4 (2), 401­424.

Horstmann, I., MacDonald, G. M., & Slivinski, A. (1985). Patents as Information Transfer Mechanisms:

       To Patent or (Maybe) Not to Patent. Journal of Political Economy, 93 (5), 837­858. https://doi.

       org/10.1086/261338

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., & Stoffman, N. (2017). Technological innovation, resource allo-

       cation, and growth*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132 (2), 665­712. https://doi.org/10.

       1093/qje/qjw040

Kuhn, J. M., & Thompson, N. C. (2019). How to Measure and Draw Causal Inferences with Patent

       Scope. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 26 (1), 5­38. https : / / doi . org / 10 .

       1080/13571516.2018.1553284

Lanjouw, J. O., & Schankerman, M. (2004). Protecting Intellectual Property Rights: Are Small Firms

       Handicapped? The Journal of Law and Economics, 47 (1), 45­74. https://doi.org/10.1086/380476

Larin, A., Bodrov, O., & Mamedov, Z. (2020). Patents disclosure effects: Preliminary results (tech. rep.).

       Signet Financial Management, LLC. https://signetfm.com/blog/insights/149-patents-disclosure-

       effects-preliminary-results.html

Lee, H. (2020). Compete or Cooperate? The Effect of Patent Protection on Licensing Decisions of Inven-

       tors.

Leiponen, A., & Byma, J. (2009). If you cannot block, you better run: Small firms, cooperative innovation,

       and appropriation strategies. Research Policy, 38 (9), 1478­1488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.

       2009.06.003

Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study. Management Science, 32 (2), 173­181.

       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.32.2.173

Marx, M., & Fuegi, A. (2020a). Reliance on science by inventors: Hybrid extraction of in-text patent-to-

       article citations (tech. rep.).




                                                    25
Marx, M., & Fuegi, A. (2020b). Reliance on science: Worldwide front-page patent citations to scientific

       articles. Strategic Management Journal, n/a (n/a). https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3145

Merton, R. K. (1961). Singletons and Multiples in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of

       Science. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 105 (5), 470­486.

Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1990). Rationalizability, Learning, and Equilibrium in Games with Strategic

       Complementarities. Econometrica, 58 (6), 1255­1277. https://doi.org/10.2307/2938316

Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1995). Complementarities and fit strategy, structure, and organizational

       change in manufacturing. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19 (2), 179­208. https://doi.

       org/10.1016/0165-4101(94)00382-F

Moderna. (2020). June 2020 10-q form (tech. rep.). https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/

       1682852/000168285220000017/mrna-20200630.htm#i8ebe2c9c2ccd487c851f72dd23b1630b 103

Moser, P. (2005). How do patent laws influence innovation? Evidence from nineteenth-century world's

       fairs. American economic review, 95 (4), 1214­1236.

Murray, F. (2002). Innovation as co-evolution of scientific and technological networks: Exploring tissue

       engineering. Research Policy, 31, 1389­1403.

Murray, F., & Stern, S. (2007). Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of scientific

       knowledge?: An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis. Journal of Economic Behavior &

       Organization, 63 (4), 648­687.

Rosenberg, N. (1990). Why do firms do basic research (with their own money)? Research Policy, 19 (2),

       165­174. https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(90)90046-9

Rothaermel, F. T., & Hill, C. W. L. (2005). Technological Discontinuities and Complementary Assets:

       A Longitudinal Study of Industry and Firm Performance. Organization Science, 16 (1), 52­70.

       https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1040.0100

Sampat, B., & Williams, H. L. (2019). How Do Patents Affect Follow-On Innovation? Evidence from the

       Human Genome. American Economic Review, 109 (1), 203­236. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.

       20151398

Somaya, D., Williamson, I. O., & Zhang, X. (2007). Combining Patent Law Expertise with R&D for

       Patenting Performance. Organization Science, 18 (6), 922­937. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.

       1070.0292

Stern, S. (2004). Do Scientists Pay to Be Scientists? Management Science, 50 (6), 835­853. https://doi.

       org/10.1287/mnsc.1040.0241


                                                   26
Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,

       licensing and public policy, In Transfer and Licensing of Know-How and Intellectual Property,

       The: Understanding the Multinational Enterprise in the Modern World. World Scientific.

Thompson, N. C., & Kuhn, J. M. (2020). Does winning a patent race lead to more follow-on innovation?

       Journal of Legal Analysis, 12, 183­220. https://doi.org/10.1093/jla/laaa001

Thompson, N. C., Ziedonis, A. A., & Mowery, D. C. (2018). University licensing and the flow of scientific

       knowledge. Research Policy, 47 (6), 1060­1069.




                                                   27
Table 1: Impact of Pre-grant Priority Disclosures on Length of Patent's First Claim

                     Word Count     log(Word Count)             Word Count
                        All               All            Small Firms Large Firms
  Model:                (1)               (2)               (3)           (4)
  Family                OLS              OLS                OLS          OLS
  Post × Treated        9.97             0.078               7.03          11.6
                        (2.93)           (0.011)            (4.62)          (3.77)
  Post                  29.4             0.278              26.6            31
                        (1.98)           (0.007)            (3.23)           (2.5)
  Treated                2.66            -0.013              3.55            2.16
                        (2.29)           (0.008)             (3.6)          (2.95)
  (Intercept)          134.7             4.62              145.4           128.7
                        (1.51)           (0.006)            (2.46)          (1.92)
  Observations          66,116            66,116            24,012          42,104
  R2                   0.00883            0.0533           0.00752         0.00961
  White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
  The table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the effect of pre-grant dis-
 closure shocks and final patent scope. We use corporate patents that are filed
 after November 2000, for which we have the texts of the initial application and the
 final granted patent. Patent scope is proxied by counting the number of words in
 the first patent claim. For each patent, words are counted in the original patent
 application and again in the final publication of the granted patent. Treated is
 an indicator variable for patents that experienced a pre-grant priority disclosure
 shock. This shock is caused when a proximate prior-art invention is disclosed af-
 ter the focal patent is filed, but before the examination process ends. Post is an
 indicator variable that distinguishes between the initial application and the final
 patent text. In columns 3 and 4 the sample is split based on the average firm sales.




                                          28
            Table 2: Private Value of Patents at Grant

                                        Patent Value
                                   Life &      Physical          ICT &
                      All
                                Biomedicine Sciences           Engineering
 Model:               (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)
 Family               OLS           OLS         OLS               OLS
 Treated              1.48           18.7           1.05           -0.658
                     (1.87)         (13.4)         (1.32)         (0.860)
 Fixed-effects
 Firm                 Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
 Observations        8,627          1,040          3,948          6,269
 R2                 0.45782        0.32748        0.61348        0.20889
Standard-errors clustered by firm
 The table presents an analysis of the difference between the estimated private
value of patents at grant (Kogan et al., 2017) between treated and control
patents in our sample. We add firm fixed-effects to control for possible endo-
geneity of some missing values. Columns 2-4 present subsamples by research
area. Note that some observations are tagged with multiple areas.




                                      29
                                      Table 3: Firm Level Summary Statistics

                                                                                          Distribution
 Variable                    Num. Obs.          Mean           SD       Min        p25         p50          p75         Max
 All innovative firms
  Annual Patents                     3889       14.96       86.58         0        0.5        1.55         5.42     3506.84
  Annual Papers                      3889        8.73       57.23         0          0        0.33         2.44     1805.57
  Market Value ($mm)                 3889     2249.96    13891.73     0.056       33.6      132.51        649.9   531425.99
  Assets ($mm)                       3889     1063.23     6364.05     0.001       8.58        41.4       267.56    210050.5
  Sales ($mm)                        3889     1416.34     7840.34         0      16.11        82.4       425.98   233668.31
  R&D exp. ($mm)                     3889       65.02      331.62         0       2.18        8.94        30.55      6969.4
 Publishing firms
  Annual Patents                     2611       21.46      105.02         0       0.83        2.53         8.84     3506.84
  Annual Papers                      2611       13.01       69.45     0.016       0.31        1.23         5.23     1805.57
  Market Value ($mm)                 2611     3135.44     16746.9     0.062      60.82      230.53       1066.2   531425.99
  Assets ($mm)                       2611     1493.89     7709.02    0.0035      11.72       64.59        462.6    210050.5
  Sales ($mm)                        2611     1993.77     9505.95         0      20.31      116.67       713.19   233668.31
  R&D exp. ($mm)                     2611       91.35      398.59         0       4.45       16.17        46.12      6969.4
 Sample firms
   Annual Patents                      81     330.81       468.88       5.2      61.23      201.45      416.79      3506.84
   Annual Papers                       81     244.99       303.55      1.16      55.35      141.56      311.41      1805.57
   Market Value ($mm)                  81   43083.07     73959.42     39.21     5263.7    16579.13    43013.81    531425.99
   Assets ($mm)                        81   16890.79     31642.71      9.47    1410.66     7134.27     17001.5     210050.5
   Sales ($mm)                         81   21278.69     38094.49     17.67    1972.47     6309.44    23937.98    233668.31
   R&D exp. ($mm)                      81       1392      1614.19      4.45     310.17      787.76     1666.58       6969.4
 Notes: The table presents summary statistics for firms in our data. The first part presents statistics for all US-based public
firms in the data between 1990 and 2015. The second part presents statistics conditional on publishing at least one scientific
paper. The third part presents statistics for the firms in our final sample. Variables are first averaged across firm-years and
then averaged between firms.




                                                             30
                                       Table 4: Summary Statistics

                                                                                   Distribution
 Variable                         Num. Obs.         Mean        SD     Min     p25     p50     p75      Max
 Papers per firm                            81      70.98     319.8       2       3       9       26    2842
 Patents per firm                           81      51.75    220.01       2       2       7       23    1948
 Treatment Group
   Paper publication year                 4387   2001.16       5.33   1990    1998    2002    2005       2010
   Patent grant year                      3003    2003.1        5.3   1989    1999    2003    2008       2012
   Disclosure year                        4387   2003.57       5.29   1992    2000    2004    2008       2012
   Internal paper citations               4387      0.37       0.42      0    0.11    0.22    0.44       5.67
   External paper citations               4387         3       8.69      0    0.44    1.33    3.22     336.78
   Internal patent citations              3003      0.26       0.52      0       0    0.11    0.33       6.56
   External patent citations              3003       1.8       2.88      0    0.38       1       2         38
 Control Group
  Paper publication year                  1362   1999.85       5.32   1990    1996    1999    2004       2010
  Patent grant year                       1189   2001.58       5.46   1989    1998    2001    2006       2012
  Disclosure year                         1362   2002.29       5.28   1992    1998    2002    2006       2012
  Internal paper citations                1362      0.41       0.45      0    0.11    0.22     0.5          5
  External paper citations                1362      3.74       6.57      0    0.67    1.67    4.11     117.38
  Internal patent citations               1189       0.2       0.42      0       0       0    0.22       3.78
  External patent citations               1189      1.97        3.2      0    0.44       1    2.22      52.67
 Notes: The table presents summary statistics for the treatment and control observations used in the following
analysis. Matching is done through publication year and subject pairing within the same firm. Citations are
presented as an average across six years following publication. Internal citations are forward citations by the
same firm. External citations are forward citations by authors outside the firm.




                                                     31
                            Table 5: Baseline Results: Paper-to-paper Citations

                     External Citations                              Internal Citations
                                                                         Life &      Physical     ICT &
                      All          All        All            All
                                                                      Biomedicine    Sciences   Engineering
 Model:               (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)
 Family               OLS       Neg. Bin.    OLS       Neg. Bin.          OLS          OLS         OLS
 Post × Treated       -39.6       -0.087      -6.07         -0.157        -30.7       -0.609        -7.22
                     (24.2)      (0.074)     (1.71)        (0.048)        (5.5)       (2.64)       (1.94)
 Post                168.8         0.930      -16.5         -0.046         7.12        -35.7        -9.67
                     (13.1)      (0.038)     (1.31)        (0.036)       (4.79)       (1.89)       (1.52)
 Treated              -25.2       -0.107       1.51          0.030        3.21         0.635         1.15
                      (8.5)      (0.037)     (1.19)        (0.024)        (2.7)       (2.08)       (1.29)
 (Intercept)         247.7          2.14       48.6          0.502         47.3         62.8         42.9
                     (6.06)      (0.025)    (0.858)        (0.018)       (1.85)        (1.5)      (0.934)
 Overdispersion                 0.534001                   1.0118
 Observations        17,388       17,388     17,388         17,388       2,212        7,908       12,555
 R2                 0.00968         ­       0.03008           ­          0.0243      0.08507      0.01609
 Pseudo R2           6e-04       0.01382    0.00279        0.00103      0.00219      0.00802      0.0015
 White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
 The table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the relationship between the scope of patent
protection and forward scientific citations. For each firm, we keep all observations with available
Compuststat data between 1990 and 2015. Treated is an indicator variable for papers with paired
patents which experienced a priority disclosure shock. This shock is caused when a proximate prior-art
invention is disclosed after the focal patent is published. Post is an indicator variable for observations in
the post-disclosure period. For each patent, observations are aggregated to the pre- and post- periods,
up to 8 years from publication. For OLS models, the dependent variable is average annual citations
by scientific papers to the focal paper, multiplied by 100 for clarity. For negative binomial models, the
dependent variable is the summation of citations across the relevant years. Internal citations (columns
3-7) are citations where both the citing paper and the focal paper belong to the same firm. External
citations (columns 1 and 2) are all other citations. In columns 5-7, research areas are defined by
aggregating the Web of Science "subheading" field (note that some papers are tagged with multiple
areas).




                                                      32
Table 6: Patent to Paper (Non-patent Literature) Citations

                    External Citations      Internal Citations
                     All         All        All         All
 Model:              (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
 Family              OLS      Neg. Bin.     OLS      Neg. Bin.
 Post × Treated      -1.06      0.114       -2.52       -0.504
                    (4.18)     (0.217)     (0.725)     (0.182)
 Post                -5.98      0.066       -1.64        0.072
                    (1.61)     (0.092)     (0.455)     (0.126)
 Treated             6.36       0.259       2.24         0.384
                    (2.46)     (0.100)     (0.601)     (0.105)
 (Intercept)          19.9       4.21        4.6          2.74
                    (1.33)     (0.066)     (0.350)     (0.076)
 Overdispersion               0.027083                0.009272
 Observations       17,420      17,420      17,420     17,420
 R2                 0.00101        ­       0.00474        ­
 Pseudo R2           8e-05     0.00021     0.00052    0.00019
 White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
 The table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the re-
lationship between the scope of patent protection and forward
patent citations to scientific papers. For each firm, we keep
all observations with available Compuststat data between 1990
and 2015. Treated is an indicator variable for papers with
paired patents that experienced a priority disclosure shock.
This shock is caused when a proximate prior-art invention is
disclosed after the focal patent is published. Post is an indica-
tor variable for observations in the post-disclosure period. For
each paper, observations are aggregated to the pre- and post-
periods, up to 8 years from publication. For OLS models, the
dependent variable is average annual citations by patents to
the focal patent, multiplied by 100 for clarity. For negative
binomial models, the dependent variable is the summation of
citations across the relevant years. Internal citations (columns
3-4) are citations where both the citing patent and the focal
patent belong to the same firm. External citations (columns 1
and 2) are all other citations.




                               33
                          Table 7: Responsiveness by Firm Size and MFT

                                        Internal Paper Citations           Internal Paper Citations
                                         Market for Technology                    Firm Size
                                   Thin MFT      Thick MFT       All       Small     Large      All
 Model:                               (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
 Family                              OLS            OLS          OLS       OLS       OLS        OLS
 Post × Treated × Thick MFT                                      20.4
                                                                (3.47)
 Post × Treated × Large                                                                          4.86
                                                                                               (4.29)
 Post × Treated                       -16.4          4.02        -16.4      -10.2     -5.34     -10.2
                                     (2.46)         (2.45)      (2.46)     (3.85)    (1.89)    (3.85)
 Post × Thick MFT                                                -21.1
                                                                (2.61)
 Treated × Thick MFT                                             -7.37
                                                                (2.41)
 Post × Large                                                                                   -3.94
                                                                                               (3.46)
 Treated × Large                                                                                -1.84
                                                                                                (2.7)
 Large                                                                                           5.45
                                                                                               (1.93)
 Thick MFT                                                       8.71
                                                                (1.71)
 Treated                               5.39          -1.98        5.39      3.07      1.23       3.07
                                     (1.57)         (1.82)      (1.57)     (2.35)    (1.34)    (2.34)
 Post                                 -5.94           -27        -5.94      -13.2     -17.1     -13.2
                                     (2.04)         (1.63)      (2.04)     (3.15)    (1.44)    (3.15)
 (Intercept)                           44.2           53         44.2        44        49.5       44
                                     (1.18)         (1.24)      (1.18)     (1.67)   (0.968)    (1.67)
 Observations                         9,796         7,592       17,388     2,640    14,748    17,388
 R2                                  0.02149       0.05423     0.0345     0.03644   0.02945   0.03073
 Pseudo R2                           0.00197       0.00515     0.00321    0.00348   0.00272   0.00286
 White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
 The table presents an analysis of the baseline effects on paper to paper citations by firm size and
thickness of the markets for technology. We proxy for size by measuring average sales and split the
sample at the firm level using the mean. We keep the first 8 years of observations after publication of
the paper or patent with available firm-level Compuststat data between 1990 and 2015. Thickness of
the markets is proxied by a measure of the annual level of patent reassignment by IPC4. We define
"thick" markets by splitting the sample at the mean. Columns 1-3 explore differences in market
thickness, while columns 4-6 explore differences by firm size. Observations are at the pre- and post-
treatment level for each paper. The dependent variable is average internal paper citations to the focal
papers, multiplied by 100 for clarity. Treated is an indicator variable for pairs that experienced a
priority disclosure shock. Post is an indicator variable for observations in the post-disclosure period.



                                                  34
                Table 8: Responsiveness by Market Thickness in Small and Large Firms

                                        Internal Paper Citations              Internal Paper Citations
                                              Small Firms                           Large Firms
                                  Thin MFT      Thick MFT       All      Thin MFT     Thick MFT       All
 Model:                              (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
 Family                             OLS            OLS          OLS        OLS           OLS          OLS
 Post × Treated × Thick MFT                                     18.3                                   22.5
                                                               (9.21)                                (3.91)
 Post × Treated                       -23.7         -5.44       -23.7       -15.8         6.7         -15.8
                                     (8.09)        (4.42)      (8.08)      (2.58)        (2.94)      (2.58)
 Post × Thick MFT                                               -15.8                                 -23.4
                                                               (8.22)                                (2.83)
 Treated × Thick MFT                                            -9.87                                 -7.65
                                                               (4.42)                                (2.79)
 Thick MFT                                                       18.6                                  8.64
                                                                (3.1)                                (1.95)
 Treated                               10.9         1.03         10.9       4.89          -2.77        4.89
                                     (3.24)          (3)       (3.24)      (1.68)        (2.22)      (1.68)
 Post                                 -1.63         -17.4       -1.63       -6.39         -29.8       -6.39
                                     (7.53)        (3.32)      (7.52)      (2.12)        (1.88)      (2.12)
 (Intercept)                           30.3          49          30.3       45.5           54.1        45.5
                                     (2.31)        (2.07)      (2.31)      (1.26)        (1.49)      (1.26)
 Observations                         766          1,874       2,640       9,030         5,718        14,748
 R2                                  0.033        0.04273     0.04794     0.02117       0.05879       0.0348
 Pseudo R2                          0.00313       0.00411     0.00461     0.00194       0.00556      0.00323
 White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
 The table presents an analysis of the baseline effects on paper to paper citations by firm size and thickness
of the markets for technology. We proxy for size by measuring average sales and split the sample at the
firm level using the mean. We keep the first 8 years of observations after publication of the paper or patent
with available firm-level Compuststat data between 1990 and 2015. Thickness of the markets is proxied by
a measure of the annual level of patent reassignment by IPC4. We define "thick" markets by splitting the
sample at the mean. Columns 1-3 include small firms and columns 4-6 include large firms. Observations
are at the pre- and post-treatment level for each paper. The dependent variable is average internal paper
citations to the focal papers, multiplied by 100 for clarity. Treated is an indicator variable for pairs that
experienced a priority disclosure shock. Post is an indicator variable for observations in the post-disclosure
period.




                                                   35
               Table 9: Matched Patent Sample: Internal Patent Citations

                          All firms             Firm Size       Market for Technology
                                            Small     Large      Thin         Thick
 Model:               (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)
 Family               OLS      Neg. Bin.    OLS       OLS        OLS          OLS
 Post × Treated       -1.74      -0.054      -3.41    -1.67      -1.76         -1.64
                     (0.843)    (0.031)     (3.49)   (0.867)    (0.933)        (1.9)
 Treated              1.96       0.060        2.68     1.93      1.88          2.42
                     (0.667)    (0.021)     (2.67)   (0.687)    (0.732)       (1.61)
 Post                 -8.93        1.7       -5.99    -9.08      -9.11         -7.94
                     (0.565)    (0.021)     (2.41)   (0.580)    (0.626)       (1.26)
 (Intercept)           31.5       -1.15       26.3    31.8       32.3          27.3
                     (0.461)    (0.015)     (1.81)   (0.476)    (0.509)       (1.07)
 Overdispersion                0.207106
 Observations        180,306    180,306     8,040    172,266    153,288      27,018
 R2                  0.00304       ­       0.00253   0.00307    0.00303      0.00323
 Pseudo R2           0.00026    0.04028    0.00022   0.00026    0.00026      0.00028
 White-corrected standard-errors in parentheses
 The table presents difference-in-differences analysis of the relationship between patent
protection and forward internal patent citations. For each firm, we keep all observa-
tions with available Compuststat data between 1980 and 2015. Treated is an indicator
variable for patents which experienced a priority disclosure shock. This shock is caused
when a proximate prior-art invention is disclosed after the focal patent is published.
Post is an indicator variable for observations in the post-disclosure period. For each
patent, observations are aggregated to the pre- and post periods, up to 8 years from
grant. For OLS models, the dependent variable are average annual citations by patents
to the focal patent, multiplied by 100 for clarity. For negative binomial models, the
dependent variable is the summation of citations across the relevant years. Thickness
of the markets is proxied by a measure of the annual level of patent reassignment by
IPC4. We define "thick" markets by splitting the sample at the median. Columns 1
and 2 include all firms in our sample. Columns 3 and 4 compare small and large firms.
Columns 5 and 6 compare patent by thickness of MFT. Observations are at the pre-
and post-treatment level for each paper.




                                           36
Appendices
                          Figure A1: Internal Paper Citations Analysis by Firm Size




      The figure presents OLS coefficient estimates of the interaction between treatment and the distance (in years) from
the priority disclosure years. Dependent variable is annual internal paper citations. Age and publication fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are clustered by publication.




                                                            37
