                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DETERMINACY WITHOUT THE TAYLOR PRINCIPLE

                                  George-Marios Angeletos
                                         Chen Lian

                                     Working Paper 28881
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28881


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




For helpful comments and suggestions, we are grateful to Manuel Amador, Andy Atkeson, Marco
Bassetto, V.V. Chari, John Cochrane, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Patrick Kehoe, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Stephen Morris, Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, and seminar participants at Oxford
University, UC Berkeley and VEAMS. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Determinacy without the Taylor Principle
George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian
NBER Working Paper No. 28881
June 2021
JEL No. D8,E4,E5,E7

                                           ABSTRACT

A long-standing issue in the theory of monetary policy is that the same path for the interest rate
can be associated with multiple bounded equilibrium paths for inflation and output. We show that
a small friction in memory and intertemporal coordination can remove this indeterminacy. This
leaves no space for equilibrium selection by means of either the Taylor Principle or the Fiscal
Theory of the Price Level. It reinforces the logical foundations of the New Keynesian model's
conventional solution (a.k.a. its fundamental or MSV solution). And it liberates feedback rules to
serve only one function: stabilization.


George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics, E52-530
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Chen Lian
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chen_lian@berkeley.edu
1 Introduction
Can monetary policy regulate aggregate demand? The classic by Sargent and Wallace (1975) re-
minds why the answer to this question is complicated: the same path for the nominal interest
rate can be consistent with multiple equilibrium paths for inflation, and thereby for output too.
      To resolve this problem, the New Keynesian model lets monetary policy follow a feedback rule
from inflation (or output gaps) to interest rates, requires that this rule be sufficiently steep, and
shows that this pins down a unique bounded equilibrium.1 The aforementioned requirement,
known as the Taylor principle (Taylor, 1993) or as "active" monetary policy (Leeper, 1991), is often
described as follows: raise interest rates aggressively in response to inflationary pressures. But
this description confounds equilibrium selection with stabilization. Once these functions are
separated (King, 2000), it becomes clear that the Taylor principle regards only the former--and
this opens the pandora box of what the "right" approach to equilibrium selection is.
      Cochrane (2011) has argued that the Taylor principle amounts to an off-equilibrium threat to
"blow up" the economy, in the sense of triggering an explosion in inflation and the output gap;
and he has pushed for the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL), originally articulated by Sims
(1994) and Woodford (1995), as a superior alternative. But this theory, too, can be equated to a
threat to blow up the economy, now in the sense of violating the government's intertemporal bud-
get constraint. And because off-equilibrium assumptions cannot be refuted by data, the debate
is "a fundamentally religious, not scientific, issue" (Kocherlakota and Phelan, 1999, p.22)
      Cochrane (2005) objects to the above interpretation of the FTPL, arguing that the govern-
ment's intertemporal budget constraint must be re-read as an equilibrium condition akin to the
pricing of a stock; and Bassetto (2002) offers a game-theoretic foundation that, too, bypasses the
blow-up criticism. On the other hand, Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe (2010) offer a modification of
the conventional approach that allows monetary policy to achieve equilibrium selection without
a reliance on a blow-up threat. So the debate never ends, it only morphs in different forms.
      We offer a potential way out of this conundrum. We highlight how the possibility of mul-
tiple equilibria under "passive" policy depends on strong assumptions about memory and in-
tertemporal coordination. Once we perturb these assumptions appropriately, all bounded equi-
libria unravel except for one: that known as the model's fundamental or minimum-state-variable
(MSV) solution (McCallum, 1983, 2009). This is the same equilibrium as that selected by the
Taylor principle, except that now there is no need for it and no room for any other selection.
Determinacy obtains even with interest rate pegs.
  1
    In this paper we study exclusively the local determinacy issue. A separate issue, outside this paper's scope, is
the global indeterminacy issue and what policies rule out "unbounded" equilibria, i.e., self-fulfilling hyperinflation
(Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1983, 2021; Cochrane, 2011) and self-fulfilling liquidity traps (Benhabib et al., 2002).


                                                          1
Preview of results. Our first result, Proposition 2, establishes the above lesson as follows. The
economy is recast as a game among overlapping generations of players. Old players are replaced
by new ones at rate   [0, 1). Players' actions can be measurable in the shocks realized during
their life but not those before. The standard, full-information, New Keynesian model is nested
with  = 0 and is ridden with a continuum of sunspot and backward-looking equilibria. By con-
trast, only the fundamental/MSV solution survives for  > 0, even arbitrarily small.
      Strictly speaking, this result precludes direct observation of past outcomes such as inflation
and output. But because such outcomes are functions of the past shocks, in the limit as  
0 nearly all agents become nearly perfectly informed about long histories of both shocks and
outcomes. And yet, all sunspot and backward-looking equilibria unravel.
      Our second result, Proposition 5, offers a perturbation that works even when past outcomes
are observed perfectly. To zero in on the core issue, which is intertemporal coordination, we now
assume that there is a representative agent in each period, who observes perfectly past outcomes
but faces some uncertainty (or memory loss) about the shocks behind it. Such uncertainty, even
if minimal, causes all sunspot and backward-looking equilibria to unravel once again.
      Such unravellings are emblematic of frictions in coordination (e.g., Rubinstein, 1989; Morris
and Shin, 1998; Abreu and Brunnermeier, 2003) but not a universal implication of them: the
details of what is or is not common knowledge can matter greatly. Still, our results illustrate the
potential fragility of the "infinite chain" that supports the aforementioned equilibria.
      By this chain we mean the following: current agents are doing something against their in-
trinsic interest only because they expect to be rewarded appropriately by future agents, who
themselves must do something against their own intrinsic interest on the basis of a similar ex-
pectation about agents further into the future, and so on. Our first result breaks this chain by
precluding outcomes in the far future from responding to extrinsic impulses in the present; our
second breaks it by letting tomorrow's agents be uncertain about how to "reward" today's agents.
      Together, these results suggest that the distinction between "active" and "passive" monetary
policy may be less consequential than previously thought: determinacy is possible even with
interest rate pegs. By the same token, no space is left for equilibrium selection via the FTPL:
fiscal policy can matter for inflation and output only insofar as it enters the model's fundamental
solution.2 Last but not least, the potential conflict between macroeconomic stabilization and
equilibrium selection (e.g., Galí, 2008, p.101; Loisel, 2021) is eased: feedback rules can be used
solely for replication of the optimal contingencies on shocks.3
  2
     E.g., this could be because the monetary authority internalizes the fiscal implications of its actions, letting in
effect the the debt burden enter the intercept of Taylor rule.
   3
     This conflict is avoided in some works (e.g., Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe, 2010) by assuming that the planner a
priori knows the underlying shocks, or can fully separate the policy contingencies used for equilibrium selection


                                                          2
Related literature and additional discussion. Although Cochrane (2011, 2017, 2018) has been
the most vocal advocate of the FTPL recently, this theory and the associated debate on whether
equilibrium is selected by an "active" monetary policy or a "non-Ricardian" fiscal policy go back
to Leeper (1991), Sims (1994) and Woodford (1995). We refer the reader to Kocherlakota and
Phelan (1999) and King (2000) and for sharp explanations of, respectively, the non-Ricardian as-
sumption and the Taylor principle; to Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe (2010) for monetary policies
that avoid blow-up threats; and to Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2010) for a review of how this
debate fits in the broader context of the interaction between fiscal and monetary policy.4 What
distinguishes our contribution is the attempt to remove the need for equilibrium selection of any
kind, by allowing for imperfect intertemporal coordination within the private sector.
    Our first result (Proposition 2), in particular, brings to mind the literature on global games
(Morris and Shin, 1998, 2003). Although the application and the formal argument are different,
there is a resemblance in terms of the discontinuity of equilibria to perturbations of informa-
tion and the underlying role of higher-order beliefs. Our second result (Proposition 5), on the
other hand, is more closely connected to Bhaskar (1998) and Bhaskar, Mailath, and Morris (2012),
which show that only Markov Perfect Equilibria survive in a class of games when a purification
in payoffs is combined with finite social memory. Together, our results hint at deep connections
between seemingly disparate literatures, which deserve further exploration.
    A large literature has shown how informational frictions can improve the positive properties
of the New Keynesian model's fundamental solution,5 but has not addressed the determinacy
issue. We add to this literature by showing that a related friction can help rule out the model's
other solutions. A different literature has attempted to refine the model's solutions by requiring
that they are E-stable (McCallum, 2007; Christiano et al., 2018). This approach relies on specific
assumptions about what it means for an equilibrium to be "learnable" and has had mixed success
on the topic of interest.6 Still, we view this approach and ours as complementary in that they both
contribute towards reinforcing the logical foundations of the model's fundamental solution.
    Although we commit on REE, both the indeterminacy problem and our resolution of it extend
to a larger class of solution concepts, including cognitive discounting (Gabaix, 2020), diagnostic
expectations (Bordalo et al., 2018), and Bayesian equilibrium with mis-specified priors about one
from those used for stabilization. But such separation may not be possible in general.
   4
     Additional contributions include Buiter (2002), Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001), Christiano (2018), McCal-
lum (2001, 2007, 2009), McCallum and Nelson (2005), and Niepelt (2004).
   5
     By letting people be inattentive to fundamentals (Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Ma´      ckowiak and Wiederholt, 2009)
and/or by arresting higher-order beliefs (Woodford, 2003; Angeletos and Lian, 2018; Angeletos and Huo, 2021).
   6
     For example, sunspot equilibria can be E-stable if the interest rate rule is written as a function of expected in-
flation (Honkapohja and Mitra, 2004). And there is a debate on how the E-stability of backward-looking solutions
depends on the observability of shocks (Cochrane, 2011; Evans and McGough, 2018).



                                                          3
another's knowledge or rationality (Angeletos and Sastry, 2021). Relative to REE, these concepts
relax the perfect coincidence of subjective beliefs and objective distributions and, in the case of
Gabaix (2020), can shrink the indeterminacy region. But they do not fully resolve the problem
because they preserve a fixed-point relation between beliefs and behavior.
      By contrast, Level-K Thinking (García-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019; Farhi and Werning, 2019)
produces a unique solution precisely because it shuts down this fixed point relation. But when-
ever the environment admits multiple REE, the Level-K solution becomes infinitely sensitive to
the assumed Level-0 behavior as the depth of reasoning gets larger. In this sense, this concept
does not "really" resolve the indeterminacy issue; it only translates one free variable (animal spir-
its or equilibrium selection) to another free variable (the analysts' choice of Level-0 behavior).



2 A Simplified New Keynesian Model
In this section we introduce our version of the New Keynesian model. This contains a few simpli-
fications that ease the exposition but do not drive the results.


From three equations to one

Time is discrete and is indexed by t . Each period, a continuum of consumers--who may or may
not know the history of shocks--decide how much to spend. For the main analysis, we side-step
the micro-foundations and model consumer behavior in terms of the following, ad hoc, IS curve:

                                                ¯ t [t +1 ] + E
                                  c t = - i t - E             ¯ t [c t +1 ] +  t ,                              (1)

We similarly impose the following, also ad hoc, Phillips curve:

                                                  t = (c t + t ),                                               (2)

                          ¯ t [ ·] 
The notation is standard: E              i [0,1] E i ,t [·]d i   is the average expectation in the population as
of period t ; c t , i t , and t +1 are, respectively, aggregate spending (and output) at t , the nominal
interest rate between t and t + 1, and the rate of inflation between t and t + 1, all expressed as
log-deviations from a given steady state;  > 0 and   0 are fixed scalars;                     t   is an exogenous
"demand" or "discount-rate" shock; and t is an exogenous "supply" or "cost push" shock.7
      In the basic New Keynesian model, equation (1) follows directly from as the representative
                                                  ¯ t with that agent's expectation. With multi-
agent's Euler equation, modulo the replacement of E
ple, heterogeneously-informed agents (Angeletos and Lian, 2018; Angeletos and Huo, 2021), the
  7
    These shocks can, but do not have to, be independent from one other. Also note that the scale of t is normalized
          nat
so that c t   = -t corresponds to the flexible-price outcome.


                                                             4
appropriate IS equation is more complicated: it ties c t to the expectations of i  - +1 and c +1 at
all   t + 1, not just  = t + 1, capturing the intertemporal Keynesian cross. But as explained in
Section 5, our main result readily extends to such a more complicated IS curve, as well as to the
standard, forward-looking, New Keynesian Phillips curve in place of (2).
       As in the typical textbook treatment (Galí, 2008), we next assume that monetary policy sets
interest rates according to the following Taylor rule:

                                                     i t = z t + t ,                                                    (3)

where  is a fixed scalar, possibly zero, and z t is random variable, possibly correlated with                       t   and
t . Whenever  = 0, equation (3) defines a feedback from inflation to interest rates. We will later
   8

explain how this relates to equilibrium selection under the standard paradigm--but not under
our approach. Our results will indeed apply even if  = 0, which nests interest rate pegs.
       Replacing equations (3) and (2) into (1), we arrive at the following equation:

                                                            ¯ t [c t +1 ]
                                                 c t =  t + E                                                           (4)

where  is a fixed scalar and t is a random variable, defined by, respectively,
                    1 +                                   1
                                   and        t  -          z t -            t
                                                                                       ¯ t [t +1 ] .
                                                                                 + t - E
                   1 +                                1 + 
Clearly, solving the whole model is the same as solving (4), which is a single first-order, forward-
looking difference equation in c t alone.
       In comparison, the textbook New Keynesian model maps to a system of two such equations
in the vector (c t , t ). What affords the present reduction in dimensionality is the omission of a
forward-looking term in the Phillips curve. But as it will become clear in Section 5, this simpli-
fication is inconsequential for our results, just as it is for the Taylor principle. All we have done
here is to reduce the standard model's determinacy question from a two-dimensional eigenvalue
problem to the simpler question of whether  is within or outside the (-1, +1) interval.9


Sticky vs flexible prices

Note that equation (4) holds even when prices are perfectly rigid, or  = 0. What about the oppo-
site extreme, perfectly flexible prices?
  8
      Such correlation can be feasible conditional on t either because the monetary authority knows the underly-
ing shocks directly or because it extracts information about them from economic indicators other than inflation.
Whether such information is sufficient to separate the stabilization and equilibrium selection functions of monetary
policy is important for the existing literature but not for our purposes.
    9                                                                                              ¯ t [a t +1 ], where a t
      Equation (4) is mathematically identical to a "dynamic beauty contest" of the form a t = t + E
is some average action. Various papers (e.g., Angeletos and Huo, 2021; Morris and Shin, 2006; Nimark, 2008) have
studied such games under the restriction || < 1, which avoids the indeterminacy issue we are concerned with here.



                                                            5
                                                                              1
       As long as  > 0, we can use the Phillips curve (2) to replace c t with   (t - t ) and obtain the
following translation of equation (4) in terms of inflation:

                                                    t = ~ t + E
                                                              ¯ t [t +1 ],                                                     (5)

                                 ~t                                                     ¯ t [t +1 ] . Needless to say, this
where  is the same as before and                       1+
                                                                - z t -       t   + t - E
change of variables does not affect the analysis. But it helps nest flexible prices as the limit for
  . That is, suppose that prices are flexible, which means that the Phillips curve does not
apply any more and the IS curve reduces to the Fisher equation:

                                                    i t = r tnat + E
                                                                   ¯ t [t +1 ],

                         1 ¯
where r tnat        t   +         nat
                           E t [c t          nat
                                    +1 ] - c t
                                                       nat
                                                 and c t    -t are the natural rates of interest and output,
respectively. Combining the above equation with the Taylor rule (3) yields

                                                   t = r tnat + E
                                                                ¯ t [t +1 ],

which is the same as the limit of (5) for   .10
       Together with Section 5, where we take more "seriously" the micro-foundations of the IS and
Phillips curves, the above discussion illustrates that the specific form of equation (4), the short-
cuts behind it, and even the nominal rigidity are inessential. What is of essence is how the average
              ¯ t [·], are determined--which is what we will zero in on in the next few sections.
expectations, E


Fundamentals, sunspots, and the equilibrium concept

Aggregate uncertainty is of two sources: fundamentals and sunspots. The former are herein con-
veniently summarized in t .11 We assume that this variable is a stationary, zero-mean, Gaussian
process, admitting a finite-state representation.

Assumption 1 (Fundamentals). The fundamental t admits the following representation:

                                        t = q x t        with         x t = R x t -1 + x
                                                                                       t,                                      (6)

where q  Rn is a vector, R is an n × n matrix of which all the eigenvalues are within the unit circle
(to guarantee stationarity), x
                             t  N (0,  ) , and  is a positive definite matrix.

       This directly nests the case in which ( t , t , z t ) follows a VARMA of any finite length. It also
allows x t to contain "news shocks," or forward guidance about future monetary policy in the
sense of a signal about the future value of z t . We henceforth refer to x t as the fundamental state.
  10
     Note that equation (5) is well-defined for any , including  = 0, whenever  < . But the limit as    is well
defined only for  = 0. If  = 0 and prices are perfectly flexible, there is no equation to pin down t .
  11
     The fact that t contains an expectation term does interfere with our results. For instance, it suffices to assume
                                                                                            ¯ t [t +1 ]) and therefore also for t .
that the fundamental state x t , introduced below, is a sufficient statistic (z t , t , t , E


                                                                6
       We next introduce a sunspot variable:

Assumption 2 (Sunspots). The only aggregate uncertainty other than that associated with x t is a
sunspot realized in each period. This is represented by a random variable  t  N (0, 1), which is
independent of the fundamentals and is distributed independently and identically over time.12

       Let h t denote the state of nature in period t , that is, the history of all exogenous shocks up to
that point. This begs the question of whether history is finite, starting at a commonly known date
("t = 0"), or whether it is infinite. We opt for the latter in order to focus on stationary equilibria.
That is, we let h t  {x t -k ,  t -k }k =0
                                           and we define an equilibrium as follows:

Definition 1 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium is any solution to equation (4) along which: expecta-
tions are rational, although potentially based on incomplete information about h t ; the outcome is
a stationary, linear function of the underlying shocks, or
                                                                       
                                           ct =          a k  t -k +          k x t -k                              (7)
                                                  k =0                 k =0

where a k  R and k  Rn are known coefficients for all k ; and the outcome is bounded in the sense
that V ar (c t ) is finite.

       This definition maintains the rational expectations hypothesis but makes room for imperfect
and heterogenous knowledge of h t . This definition also embeds three additional restrictions:
stationarity, linearity, and boundedness. The stationarity restriction, which comes hand-in-hand
with the assumption of infinite history, can readily be relaxed. The linearity restriction is strictly
needed for tractability, but we do not have any reason to believe that it drives our results and is
commonplace in the literature. The last restriction, that the variance of c t is finite, is our version
of "local determinacy" or "bounded equilibria."
       This restriction implies the existence of a scalar M > 0 such that |a k |  M and k                   1    M for
all k , where     ·   1   is the L 1 -norm. Our upcoming result actually uses only this weaker form of
boundedness. Either way, the essence is that agents do not ever expect economy to drift far away
from the steady state. How policy can accomplish this in practice--e.g., by the commitments ar-
ticulated in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983, 2021) for ruling out hyperinflation or by other means--is
beyond the scope of our paper. The relevant observation, instead, is this: whereas the afore-
mentioned restriction is not sufficient for pinning down a unique equilibrium in the standard
paradigm, it will become so under our approach.
  12
     Even though  t is i.i.d., persistent sunspot fluctuations are possible, because c t may depend on the history of
 t . And as discussed at the end of Section 4, our results are robust to letting  t itself be persistent. The absence of
persistence in  t is merely a simplification that will help make abundantly clear how the model's backward-looking
solutions and sunspot equilibria are formally related--and how they all disappear with our perturbations.


                                                               7
3 The Standard Paradigm
In this section we review the standard, full-information, New Keynesian model, which herein
maps to a representative agent that knows the entire h t . We first identify the model's fundamen-
tal solution; we next show how its determinacy hinges on the Taylor principle; and we finally
contextualize our two, complementary departures from this benchmark.


The fundamental or MSV Solution

With a representative, fully-informed, rational agent, equation (4) rewrites

                                                c t = t + Et [c t +1 ],                               (8)

where Et [·]  E[·|h t ] is the rational expectation conditional on full information. Because this
equation is purely forward looking and x t is a sufficient statistic for t and its expected future
values, it is natural to look for a solution in which c t is a function of x t . Thus guess c t =  x t for
some   Rn ; use this to compute Et [c t +1 ] =  R x t ; and substitute into (8) to get c t = t +  R x t =
[q +  R ]x t . Clearly, the guess is verified if and only if  solves  = q +  R , which in turn is
possible if and only if I - R is invertible (where I is the n × n identity matrix) and  = q ( I - R )-1 .
   To guarantee the existence of this solution, we henceforth impose the following assumption:

Assumption 3. The matrix I - R is invertible.
                                      F
And we write this solution as c t = c t , where
                                                F
                                               ct  q ( I - R )-1 x t .                                (9)

This is known as the model's "fundamental" or "minimum-state-variable (MSV)" solution (Mc-
Callum, 1983). It is the solution customarily used to offer a structural interpretation of the data
or to guide policy. But it is not necessarily the model's only solution.
   We will address determinacy momentarily. But let us first note the following properties. Sup-
pose that the infinite sum        k =0
                                  
                                       k R k   exists. Then, ( I - R )-1 =    k =0
                                                                              
                                                                                   k R k   and
                                                       
                                                 F
                                                ct =          k Et [t +k ].
                                                       k =0
                         F
This illustrates that   ct   can depend on the economy's history only insofar as this pins down the
                                                                      F
current t or helps forecast its future values. And it verifies that c t maps to what Blanchard (1979)
calls the "forward-looking solution," namely the solution of iterating (8) forward.
   What if    
              k =0
                   k R k                                     F
                             does not exist? In this case, c t remains an REE but is no more solvable
by forward induction. This relates to whether the MSV solution can feature "neo-Fisherian" ef-
fects (Cochrane, 2017; García-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019), a question that is interesting but

                                                              8
separate from that considered here. For our purposes, the relevant quality of the MSV solution is
this: along it, history matters only insofar as it is part of x t , the fundamental state variable. This
contrasts with the model's other solutions, along which history serves as a correlation device.


Determinacy and the Taylor Principle

We now turn attention to the question of whether the fundamental solution is determinate and,
if not, what are the other solutions. Let us first fix language:

Definition 2 (Taylor principle). The Taylor principle is satisfied if || < 1.

                                                   2
   Note that || < 1 if and only if  > 1 or  < -1 -   . Had we restricted  to be positive, we
would have equated the Taylor principle to  > 1, which is more standard. Our definition shines
the spotlight on ||, which measures the absolute slope of today's average best response with
respect to tomorrow's average action. Intuitively, the equilibrium is unique if and only if this kind
of dynamic strategic complementarity is weak enough. This intuition is verified below.

Proposition 1 (Full-information benchmark). Suppose that h t is known to every i for all t , which
means in effect that there is a representative, fully informed, agent. Then:
                                                                                  F
   (i) There always exist an equilibrium, given by the fundamental/MSV solution c t , as in (9).
   (ii) When the Taylor principle is satisfied (|| < 1), the above equilibrium is the unique one.
   (iii) When this principle is violated || > 1), there exist a continuum of equilibria, given by
                                                         F      B       
                                         c t = (1 - b )c t + bc t + ac t ,                          (10)

where a , b  R are arbitrary scalars,
                                                                           
                           B                                        
                          ct -          -k t -k ,       and        ct           -k  t -k .          (11)
                                 k =1                                    k =0

   This result contains two lessons. The first is that, in the standard, full-information bench-
mark, || < 1 is necessary and sufficient for equilibrium uniqueness. The second is a characteri-
zation of the type of equilibria that emerge in addition to the fundamental solution once || > 1.
We already explained the first point, so let us focus on the second.
   Take equation (8), backshift it by one period, and rewrite it as follows:

                                        Et -1 [c t ] = -1 (c t -1 - t -1 ).                         (12)

Since  t is unpredictable at t - 1, the above is clearly satisfied with

                                        c t = -1 (c t -1 - t -1 ) + a  t ,                          (13)



                                                        9
for any a  R. Because || > 1, we can iterate backwards to obtain
                                                                      
                                        ct = -          -k t -k + a          -k  t -k ,                              (14)
                                                 k =1                 k =0
                        B          
or equivalently c t = c t + ac t . Note that this is both bounded, thanks to || > 1, and a solution to
(12), by construction, which verifies that it constitutes an equilibrium, for any a  R.13
                                               B
       When there are no fundamental shocks, c t = 0 and the solution obtained above reduces to a
pure sunspot equilibrium, of arbitrary aptitude a . Along it, agents respond to the current sunspot
because and only because they expect future agents to keep doing the same, in perpetuity.
       In the presence of fundamental shocks, the indeterminacy takes an additional, perhaps more
disturbing, form: the same path for interest rates and other fundamentals can result to different
paths for aggregate spending and inflation even if we switch off the sunspots. Consider, for exam-
                                   B
ple, the solution given by c t = c t . Along it, the outcome is pinned down by past fundamentals and
is invariant to both the current innovation in t and any news about future fundamentals--which
                                              F
is the exact opposite of what happens along c t , the MSV solution.
                          B
       The logic behind c t is basically the same as that behind sunspot equilibria: agents respond
to payoff-irrelevant histories only because they expect future agents to keep doing the same, in
perpetuity. This statement extends to any equilibrium of the form (10) for b = 0, and explains
why all such equilibria can be thought of as both non-fundamental and backward-looking.14


What's next: beyond the full-information benchmark

Cleary, (13) and (14) are equivalent representations of the same equilibrium: one is recursive, the
other is sequential. This equivalence itself hinges on perfect knowledge of past shocks and/or
past outcomes. But how can we understand equilibria if such information is imperfect?
       In general, such a friction can preclude simple recursive representations of REE because of
the familiar infinite-regress problem (Townsend, 1983). But in this paper we are not interested
in this issue. Instead, we are interested in the fact that both (13) and (14) represent an infinite
chain based on "think air," a self-fulfilling prophesy that must last in perpetuity. And we want to
illustrate how fragile this chain can be.
       To accomplish this goal, in the rest of the paper we follow two distinct but complementary
strategies. The first one, in Sections 4­5, takes off from (14); the second, in Section 6, circles back
to (13). Both strategies illustrate the fragility of all non-fundamental equilibria, each one from a
different perspective. And they both avoid the unwanted infinite-regress problem.
  13                                                                         B
    Part (iii) of the Proposition adds that the same is true if we replace c t with any mixture of it and the MSV solution.
  14                                               B
    Blanchard (1979) refers to the analogue of c t in his analysis as a "backward-looking fundamental equilibrium;"
but this is not really fundamental, in the sense we just explained.


                                                             10
Parenthesis: equilibrium selection vs stabilization

Before proceeding, it is useful to clarify that , or , has so far played a dual role: one in shaping
the MSV solution, via equation (9); and another in the argument about determinacy. The for-
mer relates to macroeconomic stabilization, the latter to equilibrium selection. But note that the
monetary authority can not only pick a value of  but also design the process of z t . To the extent
that the optimal policy response to the underlying demand and supply shocks can be achieved
via the design of z t , this leaves  free to serve only equilibrium selection.15
       Such a sharp separation of the stabilization and equilibrium selection functions may be hard
to accomplish in practice. We will return to this point in Section 7. But let us clarify the following
point about the upcoming analysis. Once we perturb the model below, the MSV solution will be
the unique equilibrium regardless of , indeed even if  = 0. This will not only remove the need
for equilibrium selection but also guarantee that  can matter only via the MSV solution.



4 Uniqueness with Fading Memory
We now depart from the standard paradigm by relaxing the assumption of full information. As
mentioned in the Introduction, this brings to mind a large literature on informational frictions,
but there is a crucial difference. The existing literature bypasses the equilibrium selection is-
sue, by explicitly or implicitly imposing the Taylor principle,16 and focuses instead on how the
MSV solution is "distorted" by removing perfect knowledge of the current value of x t . We abstract
from this familiar issue, and isolate our innovation, by introducing incomplete information solely
about the economy's payoff-irrelevant history, namely the past values of x t and  t .


The main assumption and the main result

For the purposes of this and the next section, we replace the assumption of a representative,
fully-informed agent with the following, incomplete-information variant:

Assumption 4 (Memory). In each period, a randomly selected fraction   (0, 1] of agents are re-
placed by newborn agents. Agents know the values of the fundamental state and the sunspot vari-
able during their lifetime but not those before: the period-t information set of an agent born s
periods ago is given by I ts  {(x t ,  t ), ..., (x t -s ,  t -s )}.

       Three elements of this assumption are worth emphasizing. The first was already anticipated:
the information set of every agent in period t contains x t , helping guarantee, as we will verify
  15
       Similar arguments can be found in King (2000), Atkeson et al. (2010) and Cochrane (2011).
  16
       In Angeletos and Lian (2018), e.g., the Taylor principle is imposed once the economy exits the ZLB.


                                                               11
shortly, that the frictionless MSV solution remains an equilibrium. If we relax this assumption,
the MSV solution itself has to be modified, but this does not interfere with our main point, which
is that all other solutions disappear. The second element is that an agent's information is com-
prised of only the exogenous shocks and not of any endogenous past outcomes. This relates to
the point made in the Introduction about whether memory of sunspots can be stored in the en-
dogenous state variables along a recursive equilibrium. We return to this point at the end of this
section. The last element to note that the OLG structure serves one and only one purpose: to
remove knowledge of past shocks from an increasing fraction of the population as time passes.17
       This form of friction in "aggregate memory" is consistent with a long, rational-expectations
tradition in macroeconomics, which rules out bounded recall at the individual level but allows
information to be heterogeneous across agents. That said, we welcome a behavioral reinterpre-
tation of Assumption 4 (and of Proposition 2 below), in which agents are infinitely-lived but for-
get the past with probability .18 Under either interpretation,  parameterizes the rate at which
memory decays, or the degree of the informational friction.
       In the limit as   0, the informational friction becomes vanishingly small. One may have
expected the equilibria of the full-information benchmark to be only marginally affected by such
a perturbation. But this is not the case: there is a discontinuity at  = 0, reminiscent of that shown
in the global games literature (Morris and Shin, 1998, 2003).

Proposition 2 (Determinacy without the Taylor principle). Suppose that memory is imperfect in
the sense of Assumption 4, for any  > 0. Regardless of , or , the equilibrium is unique and is
                                               F         F
given by the MSV solution, that is, by c t = c t where c t remains the same as in (9).

       The full result is proved in the Appendix. Here, we illustrate the main idea for the special case
in which there are no fundamental disturbances, so the task reduces to checking for the existence
of pure sunspot equilibria. That is, we specialize our equilibrium condition to

                                                           ¯ t [c t +1 ];
                                                     c t = E                                                           (15)

search for solutions of the form c t =           
                                                     a  ;
                                                 k =0 k t -k
                                                                  and verify that a k = 0 for all k .
       By Assumption 4, we have that, for all k  0,

                                                  ¯ t [ t -k ] = µk  t -k
                                                  E

where µk  (1 - )k measures the fraction of the population at any given date that know, or re-
member, a sunspot realized k periods earlier. Future sunspots, on the other hand, are known to
  17
     This is unlike Del Negro et al. (2015), Farhi and Werning (2019) and Angeletos and Huo (2021), where an OLG
structure is used to modify the Keynesian cross and, thereby, the MSV solution.
  18
     This suggests a possible link to the literature on bounded recall (e.g., Bordalo et al., 2020; da Silveira et al., 2020;
and Afrouzi et al., 2020).


                                                             12
nobody. It follows that, along any candidate solution, expectations satisfy
                                                                                         +
                        ¯ t [c t +1 ] = E
                        E               ¯ t a 0  t +1 +          a k  t +1-k = 0 +              a k +1 µk  t -k .
                                                          k =1                           k =0

and condition (15) rewrites as
                                           +                       +
                                                  a k  t -k =             a k +1 µk  t -k .
                                           k =0                    k =0

For this to be true for all sunspot realizations, it is necessary and sufficient that, for all k  0,

                                                       a k = µk a k +1 ,                                                    (16)

or equivalently
                                                   a0                              a0
                                       ak =                            =                           .                        (17)
                                               µ0 µ1 ...µk -1
                                              k
                                                                           k (1 - )
                                                                                        k (k -1)
                                                                                            2


Unless a 0 = 0, this explodes to infinity as k  , for any  and any   (0, 1). It follows that the
unique bounded solution has a k = 0 for all k , which corresponds to the applicable MSV solution.
      We expand on the intuition behind this argument momentarily. But first, it is useful to repeat
the above argument for the knife-edge case with  = 0, which corresponds the full-information
benchmark. In this case, µk = 1 for all k and condition (17) becomes

                                                          a k = -k a 0 .

When || < 1, this still explodes to infinity as k   unless a 0 = 0, which means that the unique
bounded solution is once again a k = 0 for all k . But when || > 1, the above remains bounded, and
indeed converges to zero as k  , for arbitrary a 0 . This recovers the previous section's sunspot
                                                                                        -k
equilibria: the "normalized" sunspot equilibrium c t =                             k          t -k is herein nested with a 0 = 1,
and all its rescaling is nested by letting a 0 = a , for arbitrary a = 0.
      Note how both of the above arguments, the one with  > 0 and the one with  = 0, use the
requirement that a k does to explode to infinity. But whereas this requirement alone suffices for
ruling out sunspot equilibria under our perturbation ( > 0), the standard case ( = 0) it must be
complemented by the Taylor principle. This verifies the point anticipated at the end of Section 2:

Corollary 1. Consider the assumption that there is a known steady state and there cannot exist
"unbounded" deviations from it. This is insufficient for pinning down a unique equilibrium in the
standard paradigm ( = 0), but becomes sufficient under our perturbation ( > 0).

      To put it differently, policymakers should worry about "anchoring expectations" in the sense
of the above assumption, but need not worry about communicating off-equilibrium threats of
the type embedded in the Taylor principle.19
 19
      By the same token, the extensive, state-contingent, escape clauses articulated in Atkeson et al. (2010) are not


                                                                  13
Intuition and additional remarks
                                                                               c t 
The following heuristic helps build additional intuition. Let                   0 t =0
                                                                                         stand for the Impulse Re-
                                                                  c t
sponse Function (IRF) of c t with respect to  0 . Since            0    = a t for all t , we can rewrite (16) as

                                                  c t       c t +1
                                                      = µt         .
                                                   0         0
This is the same condition as that characterizing the IRF of c t to  0 in a "twin" economy in which
memory is perfect but condition (4) is modified as follows:

                                                 c t = µt Et [c t +1 ].

Under this prism, it is as if the degree of strategic complementary between generations t and
t + 1 has been reduced from  to µt . Furthermore, because t large enough suffices for |µt | < 1
to hold regardless of , or , there is necessarily a finite period T after which c t cannot depend
on  0 . By induction then, c t cannot depend on  0 before T either.
    This interpretation of our result brings to mind Angeletos and Lian (2018) and Angeletos and
Huo (2021). These papers have emphasized how higher-order uncertainty helps attenuate GE
feedbacks, especially so when over longer horizons, or longer chains of reasoning. A similar logic
applies here, but there are two main differences. First, whereas these papers limit attention to
how this logic influences the model's MSV solution (e.g., its response to fundamental shocks or
to news about future monetary policy) under the Taylor principle, here we show how a similar
logic helps rule out the model's other, non-fundamental solutions even without that principle.
And second, whereas these papers allow the economy-wide information about past shocks only
to improve over time (due to learning), here we let it deteriorate, at least eventually.
    The see why such eventual deterioration is the key to our result, relax Assumption 4 in the
following way: suppose that the fraction of the population that is aware of a sunspot that occurred
k periods ago is given by an arbitrary, possibly non-monotonic, sequence {µk }k =0
                                                                                    (0, 1] . Such
a generalization allows us to capture the following three possibilities at once: not all agents are
attentive to the sunspot at the beginning (µ0 < 1); more and more agents learn about it in the
short run (µk is initially increasing in k ); and more and more agents forget it in the long run (µk is
eventually decreasing). The aforementioned papers and the broader literature on informational
frictions have focused on the first two possibilities. We instead leverage the third: our uniqueness
argument goes through as long as limk  µk = 0, regardless of what happens in the short run.
That is, the key assumption is that memory vanishes asymptotically.20
needed in their entirety; what is needed is only an escape clause for "unusually large" deviations.
  20
     What if µk = µ¯ for all k , which maps to the benchmark scenario of Angeletos and Lian (2018), or more generally
limk  µk = µ   ¯ for some µ  ¯  (0, 1)? In this case, the equilibrium is now unique if and only if |µ
                                                                                                    ¯ | < 1, which means



                                                          14
    Also note that the offered translation of our result in terms of strategic complementarity was
conditional on  0 . This means that µt  measures the strategic complementarity between periods
t and t + 1 in a very specific sense: as perceived from agents in period 0, when they contemplate
whether to react to  0 . In other words, this is about higher-order beliefs--or how current agents
think, or reason, about future agents.
    Let us explain. Because  0 is payoff irrelevant in every single period, period-0 agents have an
incentive to respond to it if and only if they are confident that period-1 agents will also respond
to it, which can be true only if they are also confident that period-1 will themselves be confident
that period-2 agents will do the same, and so on, ad infinitum. It is this kind of "infinite chain"
that supports sunspot equilibria when  = 0. And conversely, the friction we have introduced
here amounts to the typical period-0 agent reasoning as follows:

       "I can see  0 . And I understand that it would make sense to react to it if I were con-
       fident that all future agents will keep conditioning their behavior on it in perpetuity.
       But I worry that future agents will fail to do so, either because they will have forgotten
       it, or because they may themselves worry that agents further into the future will not
       react to it. It therefore makes sense not to react to  0 myself."

And the same logic rules out all sunspot and backward-looking equilibria.
    Three remarks help complete the picture. First, the reasoning articulated above reminds the
global games literature (Morris and Shin, 1998, 2003). Although in our context there are no dom-
inance regions of the kind assumed in that literature, the assumption that memory vanishes
asymptotically plays a similar role: it triggers a chain of contagion effects from "remote types"
(uninformed agents in the far future) to "nearby types" (informed agents in the immediate fu-
ture) and thereby to present behavior.
    Second, the aforementioned worries don't have to be "real" (objectively true). That is, we can
reinterpret Assumption 4 as follows: agents don't necessarily forget themselves but believe that
others will forget. Strictly speaking, this requires a departure from REE to PBE with heteroge-
neous and misspecified priors about one another's knowledge, along the lines of Angeletos and
Sastry (2021). But the essence is similar and highlights the role of higher-order beliefs.
    Finally, our result does not rest on the sunspot  t being uncorrelated over time. In particular,
Proposition 2 readily extends to an arbitrary ARMA process of the sunspot, except for one knife-
edge case: when  t follows an AR(1) process with autocorrelation exactly equal to -1 . In this
that the Taylor principle is relaxed but not completely removed. This reminds Gabaix (2020) and can indeed be
interpreted as a complementary foundation of that paper's approach, with µ ¯ here playing the same role as the degree
of cognitive discounting in that paper. That said, even if memory of sunspots does not vanish asymptotically, we can
induce uniqueness for every , or , via the perturbation considered in Section 6.


                                                         15
              F
case, c t = c t + a  t is an equilibrium for any a and is supported by knowledge of (x t ,  t ) alone. Of
course, such a situation is exceedingly unlikely: it requires an exogenous variable that, by pure
magic, eliminates the need of any memory. But could it be that an endogenous state variable,
such as the past outcome, c t -1 , replicates this magic when agents can observe this variable?
    We return to this question in Section 6. But we give a preliminary answer here:

Proposition 3 (Nearly perfect knowledge of past outcomes). Under Assumption 4, almost all
agents become arbitrarily well informed about arbitrarily long histories of c t as   0: for any map-
ping from h t to c t as in Definition 1, any K <  arbitrarily large but finite, and any , > 0 arbi-
trarily small but positive, there exists ^ > 0 such that, whenever   (0, ^ ), V ar E i [c t -k ] - c t -k 
                                                                                           t
for all k  K , for at least a fraction 1 -     of agents, and for every period t .

    In this sense, our uniqueness result is compatible with indirect but almost perfect knowledge
of past outcomes: it is as if agents have received arbitrarily precise signals about {c t -1 , ..., c t -K },
and by extension for {t -1 , ..., t -K }, too, for arbitrarily large K . In Section 6, we will show that
uniqueness is compatible even with perfect, direct observation of past outcomes, provided that
we consider a different perturbation; and we will finally speculate on which perturbations may or
may not work more generally. In the next section, we first comment on how the present approach
extends to a larger class of forward-looking, rational-expectations models.



5 A Generalization
Consider the following, multi-dimensional version of equation (4):

                                                          ¯ t [ y t +1 ],
                                             y t = Qx t + E                                              (18)

where y t is an   × 1 vector, Q is an        × n matrix, and  is an         ×   matrix. In this case, the MSV
solution requires inevitability of I - R (this is the analogue of Assumption 3) and is given by
                                               F
                                              yt = Q ( I - R )-1 x t .

In the full-information benchmark, this solution is the unique bounded equilibrium if and only
if all eigenvalues of  are within the unit circle (this is the analogue of the Taylor principle). But
once we replace full information with Assumption 4, this solution becomes the unique bounded
solution regardless the eigenvalues of .
    This hints at the broader applicability of our insights. And it underscores that the omission of
a forward looking term in our Phillips curve (2) was inessential on its own right. But there was a
more heroic simplification behind our IS curve (1), which we now address.


                                                         16
       If we take our OLG, incomplete-information version of the New Keynesian model "seriously,"
equation (1) must be replaced by the following:
                              +                                                      +
                                        k   ¯ t [i t +k - t +k +1 ] + 1 -                      k   ¯ t [c t +k ] +  t ,
            c t = -                         E                                                      E                        (19)
                              k =0                                                   k =0

where   (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor and  = 1 -   (0, 1] is the survival probability.
This equation is basically the aggregate consumption function, combined with market clearing:
the first term captures the effect of the real interest rate path, the second term captures perma-
nent income, and 1 -  measures the marginal propensity to consume. A detailed derivation
can be found in Angeletos and Lian (2018) and Angeletos and Huo (2021).21 For our purposes,
the key observation is that equation (19) lets c t depend on expectations of c t +k , t +k , and i t +k -1
for all k  1, whereas (1) had artificially restricted this dependence to k = 1.
       Suppose, next, that we replace our ad-hoc Phillips curve (2) with the standard, NKPC:

                                                  t = c t + Et [t +1 ] + t .                                                (20)

And finally, let the Taylor rule be
                                                    i t = z t + c c t +  t ,                                                (21)

for arbitrary, possibly zero or even negative, coefficients c ,   R. Solving (20) and (21) for t
and i t and replacing these solutions into (19), we infer that the model reduces to the following
single, forward-looking equation in aggregate spending:
                                                                   +
                                                             ¯t
                                                   c t = t + E            k c t +k                                          (22)
                                                                   k =0

for some random variable t and some fixed scalars k .22
       Compared to equation (4), equation (22) allows for more complex GE, or strategic, feedbacks
across time. There are three such feedbacks: between income and spending; between spending
and inflation; and between inflation/spending and interest rates. The first feedback is param-
eterized by the MPC, or ; the second by  and ; and the third by  and c . This explains
why the k coefficients are convolutions of all these parameters and suggests the following re-
interpretation: for appropriate such coefficients, equation (22) can nest any linear but otherwise
arbitrary "intertemporal Keynesian cross" (Auclert et al., 2018). Similarly, equation (22) can nest
a more flexible Taylor rule that ties interest rates not only to current inflation and output but also
  21
     That derivation requires perfect recall (equivalently, a law of iterated expectations) at the individual level. This is
consistent with Assumption 4, which explains why we can import equation (19) from these works to our setting.
  22                                                                                                             k ¯
     In particular, t   t - (z t + z news ) -  t +  1 -   news , where z news  +  E
                                              t                                       t               t       k =1   t [z t +k ]
                         k   ¯ t [t +k ]; and k  1 -  - c                   k                              1-k     k
and news
    t          +
               k =1
                             E                                                  +  -  + 1 -                 1-  , for all k .




                                                                  17
to the monetary authority's expectations of future inflation and future output.23
      To guarantee the existence of the MSV solution, we now require that I -                    +
                                                                                                      Rk
                                                                                                 k =0 k
                                                                                                            is invert-
ible; this is the analogue of Assumption 3. We can then verify that Proposition 2 goes through
despite the added complexity in how current outcomes depend on expectations of the future.

Proposition 4 (Generalized result). Maintain Assumption 4 but let the equilibrium condition for
c t take the richer form of equation (22), for arbitrary {k }k =0
                                                                  such that               
                                                                                              | |
                                                                                          k =0 k
                                                                                                    exists (is finite).
The equilibrium remains unique and is still given by the applicable MSV solution.

      The logic is the same as in our main analysis. There, || > 1 supported multiple equilibria
when  = 0; but as soon as  > 0, the multiplicity vanished, because  > 0 meant that the effec-
tive degree of strategic complementarity fell below 1 eventually, in the sense that µk || < 1 for
sufficiently high k . The same properties hold here modulo the replacement of || with                        
                                                                                                                 | |.
                                                                                                             k =0 k
      It is a safe guess that, similarly Proposition 2, the above result extends to a multi-variate ver-
sion of equation (22). In other words, our insights readily extend to a large class of linear, purely
forward-looking, rational expectations models, like that studied by Blanchard (1979) under the
full-information assumption. What is left for future work is the extension to models that add
payoff-relevant state variables (e.g., capital), as in Blanchard and Kahn (1980).



6 Observing Past Outcomes
We now pay closer attention to Assumption 4, which has been the catalyst for uniqueness in the
preceding analysis. Literally taken, this assumption precluded direct observation of past out-
comes, such as output or inflation. But as shown in Proposition 3, such a literal interpretation
could be misleading: in the limit as   , agents were arbitrarily well informed about arbitrar-
ily long histories of past outcomes, albeit in an indirect way.
      Under this prism, the uniqueness result of Propositions 2 and 4 seems compatible with noisy
observation of past outcomes. Still, the key assumption behind this result is hard to square with
a long tradition in macroeconomics that represents equilibria in recursive form, along which a
small set of state variables serve as sufficient statistics for the entire history of shocks. In this sec-
tion, we first illustrate how the recursive logic poses a challenge for us; we next explain why this
logic itself has its own limitations; and we finally show how a different perturbation can induce
basically the same result even when past outcomes are observed perfectly.
 23
      This detail matters for other approaches, such as E-stability (Honkapohja and Mitra, 2004), but not for ours.




                                                           18
Recursive equilibria: a challenge for us, and their own limitations

Go back to the full-information, representative-agent benchmark of Section 3, let || > 1, shut
down momentarily the fundamentals, and focus on the following, pure sunspot equilibrium:
                                                                   
                                                             
                                                     ct = ct             k  t -k .
                                                                  k =0

This can be represented in recursive form as

                                                       c t =  t + -1 c t -1 .                                                    (23)

It follows that perfect knowledge of yesterday's outcome can readily substitute for perfect knowl-
edge of the infinite history of past sunspots.
       This logic extends if agents observe only a noisy, public signal of c t -1 .24 But what about the
more general case, in which agents' information is contaminated with idiosyncratic noise, either
because of decentralized market interactions or because of rational inattention? This amounts
to introducing private information, which, if we extrapolate from the literature on global games,
is probably the key behind our earlier uniqueness result. But the presence of such information
opens a pandora box in dynamic settings: rational expectations equilibria generally cease to be
recursive on a small set of state variables, due to the infinite regress problem (Townsend, 1983).
       Under this prism, one can re-read Assumption 4 as the means for illustrating the potential dis-
continuity of recursive, non-fundamental equilibria to incomplete information, while bypassing
the infinite regress problem. Still, we find it instructive to show that the MSV solution can emerge
as the unique equilibrium even with perfect knowledge of c t -1 , which is what we do next.


Breaking the infinite chain, again

The recursive equilibrium described in (23) amounts to an "infinite chain" in the following sense:
current agents are conditioning their behavior on c t -1 , which is payoff-irrelevant from their per-
spective, only because they expect to be "rewarded" appropriately by future agents; but for this
to be the case, future agents must themselves condition their behavior on c t , which is payoff-
irrelevant for them, on the basis of a similar expectation about the behavior of agents further into
the future; and so on, ad infinitum.
       This chain is based on "thin air" in the sense that there is no agent along this chain whose
behavior is ever anchored to fundamentals. This contrasts with the dynamic GE feedbacks that
  24
     In particular, suppose that all agents at t observe only the current sunspot  t and a public signal c      ~t ,t -1  c t -1 +m t ,
where m t is zero-mean measurement error, i.i.d. across time, and independent of the sunspots. Then, the strategy
c t = a  t + -1 c
                ~t ,t -1 , which is the same as that in (23) modulo the replacement of c t -1 with c
                                                                                                   ~t ,t -1 , continues to be an
equilibrium for any a and no matter the variance of the measurement error.



                                                                 19
operate behind the MSV solution, which, too, work via expectations of future behavior but are
ultimately triggered by intrinsic forces (or PE effects).25 What is more, once behavior is anchored
to fundamentals and fundamentals themselves are not common knowledge, thin air may loose
its hold on beliefs: the aforementioned infinite chain may collapse.
      To illustrate what this means, bring back the fundamental shocks and consider any of the
                         B         
equilibria of the form c t + ac t , which, recall, were obtained by "solving the model backwards."
These are replicated by the following recursive strategy:

                                          c t = -1 (c t -1 - t -1 ) + a  t .                                   (24)

Contrary to that in (23), this strategy requires that the agents at t know not only c t -1 but also t -1 .
Why is such knowledge necessary? Because this what it takes for agents at t to know how to undo
the direct, intrinsic effect of t -1 on the behavior of the agents at t - 1 and, thereby, to "reward"
them to play the above strategy.
      This suggests that the chain can break if the agents at t do not know what exactly it takes to
reward the agents at t - 1. To make this point crisply, we proceed as follows.
      First, we introduce a new fundamental disturbance, denoted by t , which can be arbitrar-
ily small but is not observed by future agents. This allows us to maintain knowledge of t -1 (or
x t -1 ) itself, for symmetry with the earlier analysis, and at the same time parameterize the afore-
mentioned uncertainty by the support of t . In particular, we let t be drawn independently over
time, as well as independently of any other shock in the economy, from a uniform distribution
with support [-, +], where  is positive but arbitrarily small.
      Second, we abstract from informational heterogeneity and think of the economy as a se-
quence of representative agents, or a sequence of players, one for each period. This abstracts
from the question of how behavior is coordinated within a period and, instead, zeros in on the
aforementioned infinite chain between current and future behavior.
      Accordingly, we write the equilibrium condition at t , or equivalently the best response of the
period-t representative agent, as

                                           c t = t + t + E[c t +1 | I t ].                                     (25)

where E [·| I t ] is the rational expectation conditional on I t , the information set of the period-t
representative agent.
      And finally, we require that I t contains both the concurrent fundamentals (which explains
why these are outside the expectation operator in the equation above) and the past outcome c t -1
 25
    Think, for example, the response of the economy at t to news about z t +1 , monetary policy a period later. This
has a GE effect today via the expectations of future income and future inflation, which are themselves driven by the
direct, PE effect of tomorrow's interest rates on spending.


                                                         20
(in order to accommodate how perfect knowledge of the past outcome). But we also let I t not to
nest I t -1 , and in particular not to contain t -1 , even though it may contain a long history of the
"main" fundamental shocks and the sunspots. Formally:

Assumption 5. For each t , there is a representative agent whose information is given by

                           I t = {t }  {x t ..., x t -K  }  { t ...,  t -K  }  {c t -1 , · · · , c t -K c }

for finite but possibly arbitrarily large K  , K c , and K  .

      When  = 0 (the t shock is absent), Assumption 5 allows replication of all sunspot and backward-
looking equilibria with extremely short memory, i.e., with K  = 0 and K  = K c = 1. This is precisely
the recursive representation of these equilibria in the standard paradigm. But there is again a
discontinuity: once  > 0, all the non-fundamental equilibria unravel, no matter how long the
memory of outcomes and all other shocks may be.

Proposition 5. Suppose that Assumption 5 holds and  > 0. Regardless of , there is unique equi-
                                F               F
librium and is given by c t = c t + t , where c t is the same MSV solution as before.

      To further illustrate the logic behind this result, abstract from the t shock (but of course keep
the t shock) and let I t = {t ,  t , c t -1 }. In this case, "solving the model backwards," which literally
means having the agents at t + 1 create indifference for the agents t , requires that

                                               E [c t +1 | I t ] = -1 (-t + c t ).

Since the only "news" contained in I t +1 relative to I t are  t +1 and t +1 , the above is true if and
only if c t +1 satisfies
                                        c t +1 = a  t +1 + d t +1 + -1 (-t + c t )

for some a , d  R. As noted before, the agents at t + 1 may extract information about t from
their knowledge of c t . But since t is not directly known and c t +1 has to be measurable in I t +1 =
{t +1 ,  t +1 , c t }, the above condition can hold only if c t itself is measurable in t and not in any
other shock, such as the sunspots realized at t or earlier. In short, because the agents at t + 1
does not know a (small) component of the "preferences" of the agents at t , it is impossible to
support the aforementioned chain of indifference. The proof in the Appendix shows verifies that
an extension of this logic rules out not all equilibria but the MSV solution.26
 26                  F                                                                  F
    Noe that c t = c t + t is MSV solution of the perturbed model. This differs from c t  , the original MSV solution,
because the relevant fundamentals now include t . But as   0, the new solution converges to the old one. That is,
the original MSV solution is robust to the considered perturbation, while all other solutions are not. And this is the
same message as that delivered in our main analysis.




                                                                 21
Remarks

The argument given above goes through even if the t shock occurs only every, say, 10 periods
rather than every single period, because once there is a chance that the chain will break at some
future date the whole thing unravels. Also, the argument goes through even that the agents at
t + 1 know the current t perfectly, provided that the current agents are (incorrectly) worried that
this may not be the case--which once again highlights the role of higher-order beliefs.
      Earlier work by Bhaskar (1998) and Bhaskar, Mailath, and Morris (2012) has shown that only
Markov Perfect Equilibria (which in our context translate to the unique MSV solution) survive
in a class of games when a purification in payoffs is combined with finite social memory. Even
though our environment is different, Proposition 5 is a close cousin of these earlier results, not
only because these papers adopt similar informational assumptions but also because they let a
single, representative player act in each per period, as we did above.27
      An open question is how Proposition 5 and, by extension, the above literature connect to our
main result in Proposition 2 or 4. There, we built a bridge to the literature on global games. Under
that prism, the essence of Assumption 4 was that it removed common knowledge of the payoff-
irrelevant histories, thus also breaking their potency as coordination devices. The global games
literature suggests that, more generally, determinacy hinges on whether information is private
versus public. The results of Mailath and Morris (2002) and Peski (2012) seem consistent with
this logic, as the former relies on "almost public monitoring" to support multiple, non-Markovian
equilibria and the latter goes in the opposite direction. But the exact connections are elusive.



7 Discussion
In this section, we first discuss the applied lessons of our paper. We next comment on how both
the indeterminacy issue and our approach to it extend from REE to a larger class of solution
concepts, as well as how Level-K Thinking fits in this picture. We finally circle back to the role of
common knowledge and the precise interpretation and robustness of our results.


Interest rate pegs, feedback rules and Ramsey optimum

Suppose that the monetary authority does not even follow a feedback rule, or  = 0. Ask then
the following, classic question: is there a unique equilibrium mapping from interest rate paths to
inflation and output paths? The standard answer is "no." Ours is "yes."
 27
    This assumption is not innocuous; see Section 5.2 of Bhaskar, Mailath, and Morris (2012). But the results in Peski
(2012) suggest that it can be relaxed.



                                                         22
      This is the heart of our contribution, and can be translated in terms of optimal policy is
                o o o
follows. Let {i t , t , c t } denote the interest rate, inflation, and output along the best possible
bounded equilibrium, as functions of the underlying shocks. And ask the following question:
what does it take for this to be implemented as the unique bounded equilibrium?
      The textbook answer goes as follows. If the monetary authority observes the underlying shocks,
then the Ramsey optimum can be implemented with the following rule:
                                                     o
                                               it = it + (t - o
                                                              t ),

where  is any number that satisfies the Taylor principle.28 Note then that the feedback from t
to i t serves exclusively the function of equilibrium selection: it does not affect the properties of
the optimum, it merely makes sure that no other equilibrium is possible.
      But what if the monetary authority does not observe the underlying shocks? Feedback rules
may then be useful for the purpose of replicating the optimal contingency of interest rates on
shocks, or for optimal stabilization. And at least in principle, this function could be at odds with
that of equilibrium selection. See Galí (2008, p.101) for an illustration with cost-push shocks, and
Loisel (2021) for a general formulation.29
      Clearly, our results help ease this conflict: because feedback rules are no more needed for
equilibrium selection, they are "free" to be used for stabilization.


On the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level

So far we have abstracted from fiscal policy, because it did not enter equations (1)-(3). Continue
to assume that this is the case, but take into account the government's intertemporal budget
constraint. Under the simplifying assumption that the government issues only one-period, non-
contingent, nominal bonds, this constraint can be written (in levels) as follows:
                                                   B t -1
                                                          = PV S t ,                                              (26)
                                                    Pt
where B t -1 denotes the outstanding nominal debt, P t denotes the nominal price level, and PV S t
denotes the present discounted value of primary surpluses. Does the incorporation of this equa-
tion make a difference for the determination of inflation and output?
      While the conventional approach says no by selecting the MSV solution, the FTPL argues the
opposite by selecting a different solution. To illustrate, consider a shock to tax revenue that does
not enter equations (1)-(3). This shock counts as a sunspot vis-a-vis the preceding analysis and
                                        o
 28
     This is nested in (3) with z t = i t - o
                                            t , which is indeed feasible as long as the monetary authority observes the
shocks that drive the Ramsey optimum.
  29
     We suspect that a similar conflict may emerge under the "sophisticated" implementation of Atkeson et al. (2010),
or that of Bassetto (2005), once the policymaker faces sufficient uncertainty about the underlying shocks.


                                                          23
does not affect P t under the MSV solution. But there is a sunspot equilibrium that features an
increase in P t and a fall of the real debt burden, whenever the aforementioned shock is high. This
sunspot equilibrium provides the fiscal authority with valuable insurance. Suppose then that
the fiscal authority threatens to "blow up" its budget--i.e., violate (26)--unless this equilibrium
is selected. In the face of such a "non-Ricardian" fiscal policy, the standard paradigm predicts
that an equilibrium cannot exist unless the monetary authority becomes "passive" (abandons
the Taylor principle) and allows this equilibrium to obtain. This is the crux of the FTPL.
   This discussion puts the Taylor principle and the FTPL at equal footing: they are different but
seemingly equally logical assumptions about off-equilibrium policy threats. And because such
assumptions are inherently untestable, one can argue that the debate reduces to a "religious"
matter (Kocherlakota and Phelan, 1999).
   Cochrane (2005) disagrees with the interpretation of the non-Ricardian assumption given
above. He argues that (26) must be read as an equilibrium condition, akin to the pricing of a
company's stock; and that such conditions are only defined on equilibrium, so the blow-up logic
does not apply to the FTPL even though it applies to the Taylor principle. This translates the
debate in another form: that about the exact meaning of (26).
   Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe (2010), on the other hand, consider a class of "sophisticated" mon-
etary policies that allow the monetary authority to select its preferred equilibrium without a re-
liance on either the Taylor principle or any other blow-up threat. This represents an improvement
over the conventional approach, but does not really address the debate with the FTPL: Bassetto
(2002, 2005) effectively shows that the fiscal authority could also select a possibly very different
equilibrium by engaging in similarly sophisticated strategies.
   Our paper helps avoid these conundrums. Under our perturbations, the fundamental/MSV
solution emerges as the only possible equilibrium regardless of whether monetary policy is "ac-
tive" or "passive." By the same token, there is no space for equilibrium selection by means of a
"non-Ricardian" fiscal policy; no meaningful connection between the FTPL and Ricardian equiv-
alence (Barro, 1974); and no reason to debate whether (26) is a real constraint or merely an equi-
librium condition.
   But of course there is room for fiscal considerations--such as seigniorage or the real debt
burden--to enter the monetary authority's choice of {z t } and thereby the MSV solution. In other
words, this solution itself is logically consistent with the "unpleasant arithmetic" of Sargent and
Wallace (1981), the evidence in Sargent (1982), and the Ramsey literature on how monetary policy
can substitute for fiscal policy and/or ease tax distortions (e.g.,Chari et al., 1994; Benigno and
Woodford, 2003; Correia et al., 2008).



                                                24
Discounted Euler equations

Suppose we replace our IS equation (1) with the following variant:

                                                                  ¯ t [c t +1 ] +
                                                ¯ t [t +1 ] + m c E
                            c t = -m i i t + m  E                                   t,         (27)

for some positive scalars m i , m  , m c . When m c < 1, this nests the "discounted" Euler equations
generated by liquidity constraints in McKay et al. (2017) and by cognitive discounting in Gabaix
(2020). The opposite case, m c > 1, is consistent with the broader HANK literature (Werning, 2015;
Bilbiie, 2020), as well as with over-extrapolation or "cognitive hyperopia". Finally, m i = m  could
capture differential attention to (or salience of) nominal interest rates and inflation.
   With these modifications, the entire analysis goes through modulo the following adjustment
in the definition of  :
                                                   m   + m c
                                              =
                                                   1 + m i 
The Taylor principle is still the same in the  space, but of course changes in the  space: we now
have that || < 1 if and only if   (-, )  (, +), where
                                m 1 + mc                               m mc - 1
                          -        -                   and                +
                                mi   m i                               mi   m i
Depending on the m s, these thresholds can be either smaller or larger than the ones in the main
analysis. In this sense, the model's region of indeterminacy may either shrink or expand by the
above modifications. For instance, Gabaix (2020) assumes m i = m  and m c < 1, obtains  < 1,
and uses this to argue that cognitive discounting relaxes the Taylor principle and, thereby, eases
the potential conflict between the stabilization and equilibrium selection functions of monetary
policy. From this perspective, that paper and ours are complements. But none of these enrich-
ments changes the fact that indeterminacy remains for sufficiently "passive" monetary policy,
and this is where our approach offers a potential way out.


Alternative Solution Concepts

Throughout, we have preserved Rational Expectations Equilibrium (REE), relaxing only the as-
sumption of perfect information about the past. REE is defined by the requirement that the
agents' subjective model of the economy exactly coincides with the true model generated by
their behavior. One can capture bounded rationality by allowing a discrepancy between the for-
mer and the latter. But as long as one allows for a two-way feedback between them, the kind of
indeterminacy we have studied here remains possible, and so does our resolution to it.
   This circles back our earlier discussion of Gabaix (2020): the solution concept in that paper
allows the objective model to feed into the subjective model, albeit with a distortion relative to

                                                      25
REE. The same is true for Diagnostic Expectations (Bordalo et al., 2018); for Perfect Bayesian Equi-
librium with mis-specified priors (Angeletos and Sastry, 2021); and for Woodford (2019)'s model
of "finite planning horizons," at least once learning is allowed (Xie, 2019). All these concepts are
close cousins of REE in the sense that they preserve the two-way feedback between beliefs and
outcomes, thus also preserving the indeterminacy problem we have addressed in this paper.
       Contrast this class of concepts with Level-K Thinking (García-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019;
Farhi and Werning, 2019). The latter pins down a unique solution by shutting down the feedback
from objective truth to subjective beliefs. But this begs the question of how agents adjust their
behavior over time, in the light of repeated, systematic discrepancies between what they expect
to happen and what actually happens. Accordingly, we believe that Level-K Thinking is more
appropriate for unprecedented experiences (e.g., the recent ZLB experience) than for the kind of
stationary environments we are concerned with in this paper.
       Furthermore, one may argue that Level-K Thinking does not "really" resolve the indetermi-
nacy problem and, instead, only translates it to a different dimension: whenever || > 1, the level-
k outcome becomes infinitely sensitive to the arbitrary level-0 outcome as k  . In this sense,
one free variable (the sunspot) is replaced by another free variable (the level-0 outcome).30 By
contrast, our approach leaves neither kind of freedom in specifying beliefs.


Determinacy and common knowledge

Our results do not mean that sunspot and backward-looking equilibria are fragile to all kinds of
"noise." We gave a counter-example with noisy but public observation of c t -1 in the previous
section. Furthermore, the results of Weinstein and Yildiz (2007) underscore that, although mul-
tiple equilibria may be "degenerate" in an appropriate topology, this statement by itself can be
vacuous: with enough freedom in choosing priors and information structures, one can recast
equilibrium indeterminacy as strategic uncertainty along a unique equilibrium.
       Under this prism, a key task for theory is to understand how a model's determinacy and its
predictions more generally depend on common knowledge. The global games literature has ac-
complished this task quite comprehensively for static coordination games, offering, inter alia, a
  30
    To clarify this point, consider what Level-K Thinking means in our setting. First, level-0 behavior is exogenously
                                        0
specified, by a random process {c t       }. Level-1 behavior is then defined as the best response to the belief that others play
                                                1             0
according to level-0 behavior, that is, c t        t + Et [c t +1 ],where Et is the full-information expectation operator. This
amounts to using the "wrong" beliefs about what other players do but the "correct" beliefs about the random vari-
                  0                                                                                K    K    k             K 0
ables t and c t    +1 . Iterating K times, for any finite K , gives the level-K outcome as c t  k =0  Et [t +k ] +  Et [c t +K ].
                                                                           K
The solution concept says that actual behavior is given by c t = c t for all periods and states of nature, where both K
        0                                                                  K
and {c t  } are free variables for the modeler to choose. Clearly, {c t      } is uniquely determined for any given K and any
           0                    0
given {c t }. But because {c t } is a free variable, the original indeterminacy issue is effectively transformed to the mod-
                                                   0
eler's (or the reader's) uncertainty about {c t      }. Furthermore, the bite of this uncertainty is most severe precisely when
                                                                                    K         0
the indeterminacy issue is present: whenever || > 1, the sensitivity of {c t          } to {c t } explodes to infinity as K  .


                                                              26
sharp understanding of how determinacy in such games depends on assumptions about private
versus public information. An analogue for dynamic games, or dynamic macroeconomic mod-
els, is missing. But our results have illustrated the ramifications of this research agenda for the
specific context of interest.
   To sum up, we invite the following reading of our results: not as an unequivocal resolution of
the New Keynesian model's indeterminacy issue, but rather as a sharp illustration of how fragile
its sunspot and backward-looking solutions can be to appropriate relaxations of common knowl-
edge and, therefore, as a rationale for paying less attention to, if not entirely dispensing with,
these solutions.



8 Conclusion
In this paper we revisited the local indeterminacy issue of the New Keynesian model. We high-
lighted how all sunspot and backward-looking equilibria hinge on an infinite chain between cur-
rent and future behavior. And we showed how "easy" it can be to break this chain by relaxing the
model's assumptions about memory and intertemporal coordination.
   To keep the analysis tractable, we followed two stark but complementary approaches: our first
result (Proposition 2) allowed rich information heterogeneity within each period at the expense
of abstracting from endogenous learning; our second result (Proposition 5) considered the op-
posite extreme. We discussed the limits of these approaches; we suggested links to the literatures
on global games and the fragility of non-Markovian equilibria; and we speculated that, in gen-
eral, determinacy is likely to depend on the subtler question of how much common knowledge is
afforded both within and across time.
   Notwithstanding the last point, our results lend support to the practice of focusing on its fun-
damental/MSV solution regardless of whether monetary policy is "active" or "passive." To put
it differently, our results provided a rationale for why equilibrium can be determinate even with
interest rate pegs--or why monetary policy may be able to regulate aggregate demand without a
strict reliance on off-equilibrium threats of the kind embedded in the Taylor principle.
   At the same time, our findings shined a new spotlight on the familiar boundedness assump-
tion. This assumption is customarily justified by an implicit policy commitment to kill a self-
fulling hyperinflation or any other large deviation from a given steady state. But whereas in the
standard paradigm such a commitment is insufficient for pinning down a unique equilibrium
in the neighborhood of any given steady state, it becomes sufficient in our context. Under this
prism, the notion of "anchoring expectations" takes a new meaning: there is no need to engage
in the kind of off-equilibrium threats that are needed for equilibrium selection in the standard

                                                27
paradigm; it suffices to anchor expectations in the sense of establishing common knowledge of
a steady state and of the aforementioned commitment. How this is accomplished in practice is
beyond the scope of our paper. But it is an integral part of our contribution to shift attention from
the Taylor principle, or the debate with the FTPL, to exactly this question.
   Let us close with a comment on the strategic interaction between the monetary and the fis-
cal authority. Specifying a proper game between the two authorities requires a unique mapping
from those player's actions--interest rates and government deficits, respectively--to their pay-
offs. Such a mapping is missing in the standard paradigm, because the same paths for interest
rates and government deficits can be associated with multiple equilibria within the private sector.
By providing such a mapping, our paper opens a new way for studying this interaction.




                                                 28
Appendix: Proofs
As discussed after Definition 1, our proofs use a weaker boundedness criterion than the require-
ment of a finite V ar (c t ). The next lemma verifies that that the latter implies the former. The rest
of the Appendix provides the proofs for all the results.

Lemma 1. Consider any candidate equilibrium, defined as in Definition 1. There exist a finite
scalar M > 0 such that |a k |  M and k            1     M for all k, where ·                 1   is the L 1 -norm.

      Substituting (6) into (7), we have that any candidate equilibrium can be rewritten as
                                                                      
                                         ct =          a k  t -k +          k x
                                                                              t -k ,                                   (28)
                                                k =0                 k =0

where, for all k  0,
                                                            k
                                                  k               k -l R l .                                           (29)
                                                           l =0

Since  t and x
             t are independent of each other as well as independent over time, we have
                                                          
                                                                   2
                                        V ar (c t ) =             ak + k  k .
                                                         k =0

This can be finite only if limk + |a k | = 0 and limk + k                             1    = 0.31 From (29), k = k - k -1 R
for all k  1. It follows that limk + k            1   = 0 as well. We conclude that there exist a scalar M > 0,
large enough but finite, such that |a k |  M and k                    1    M for all k .


Proof of Proposition 1

Suppose that memory is perfect ( = 0). The equilibrium condition (8) becomes

                                                c t = t + Et [c t +1 ],                                                (30)

where Et [·]  E[·|h t ] is the full-information rational expectation operator.
                                                     F
      Part (i) follows directly from the fact that c t  q ( I - R )-1 x t satisfies (30).
                                                                                F
                                                                   ^t = c t - c t
      Consider part (ii). Let {c t } be any equilibrium and define c              . From (30),

                                                      ^t = Et [c
                                                      c        ^t +1 ].                                                (31)

From Definition 1,
                                                                      
                                        ^t =
                                        c              ^k  t -k +
                                                       a                    ^ k x t -k ,
                                                k =0                 k =0

 31
    To prove the latter statement, note that, because  is positive definite, there exists an invertible L such that
 = L L by Cholesky decomposition. The finiteness of V ar (c t ) then implies limk + L k 1 = 0, which implies
limk + k 1 = 0.



                                                             29
            ^ and 
      ^k |  M
with |a           ^k         1
                                                               ^ > 0. From Assumptions 1­2, we have
                                 ^ for all k , for some finite M
                                 M
                                                   +                          
                                  E t [c
                                       ^t +1 ] =          ^k +1  t -k +
                                                          a                        ^ k +1 x t -k + ^0R xt .
                                                   k =0                     k =0

The equilibrium condition (31) can thus be rewritten as
                                                               +                              
                         ^k  t -k +
                         a                   ^ k x t -k =              ^k +1  t -k +
                                                                       a                          ^ k +1 x t -k + 
                                                                                                                  ^ 0 Rx t .
                  k =0                k =0                     k =0                        k =0

For this to be true for all t and all states of nature, the following restrictions on coefficients are
necessary and sufficient:

               ^k =  a
               a     ^k +1 k  0,                    ^ 0 = ^ 1 + ^0R                    and            ^ k = 
                                                                                                            ^ k +1 k  1.

When the Taylor principle is satisfied (|| < 1), a
                                                 ^k and                     ^0 = 0 and 
                                                        ^ k explodes unless a          ^ 1 = 0. Since
I - R is invertible from Assumption 3, ^ 0 = 0 too. We know that the only bounded solution of
                               F
        ^t = 0. As a result, c t
(31) is c                        is the unique equilibrium.
                                    B                                                      
    Finally, consider part (iii). c t -                    k =1
                                                           
                                                                -k t -k       and c t              
                                                                                                   k =0
                                                                                                        -k  t -k are bounded (the in-
                                                                                                             B
finite sums converge) when the Taylor principle is violated                                      (|| > 1). c t  satisfies (30). So does
                F      B       
c t = (1 - b )c t + bc t + ac t for arbitrary b, a  R.


Proof of Proposition 2

Since the sunspots { t -k }k =0
                                are orthogonal to the fundamental states {x t -k }k =0
                                                                                       , the argument in
the main text proves that a k = 0 for all k . We can thus focus on solutions of the following form:
                                                                   
                                                            ct =          k x t -k .                                              (32)
                                                                   k =0

And the remaining task is to show that 0 = q ( I - R )-1 and k = 0 for all k  1, which is to say
that only the MSV solution survives.
    To start with, note that, since x t is a stationary Gaussian vector given by (6), the following
projections apply for all k  s  0 :

                                                     E x t -k | I ts = Wk ,s x t -s ,

where I ts  {x t , ..., x t -s } is the period-t information set of an agent born s periods before and
                                                                       -1                           k -s             -1
                          Wk ,s = E x t -k x t -s E x t x t                 = E xt xt         R            E xt xt

is an n × n matrix capturing the relevant projection coefficients.
    Next, note that
                                                                              k -s                     -1
                                   Wk , s    1    E xt xt          1      R            1   E xt xt            1,                  (33)



                                                                       30
where ·       1   is the 1-norm. Since all the eigenvalues of R are within the unit circle, we know the
spectral radius  (R ) =  R < 1. From Gelfand's formula, we know that there exists ¯  (0, 1) and
M 1 > 0 such that
                                                          k -s               ¯ k -s ,
                                                    R                1    M1 

for all k  s  0. Together with the fact that E x t x t is invertible (because  is positive definite
and  (R ) < 1), we know that there exists M 2 > 0 such that

                                                    Wk , s       1    M2 ¯ k -s .                                                   (34)

Now, from Assumption 4, we know
                                                          k -1                                           k
                       ¯ t [x t -k ] = (1 - )k x t -k +
                       E                                          (1 - )s E x t -k | I ts                     Vk , s x t - s ,      (35)
                                                          s =0                                         s =0

where, for all k  s  0,

                                  Vk ,k = (1 - )k I n ×n and Vk ,s =  (1 - )s Wk ,s .

Together with (34), we know that there exits M 3 > 0 and  = max 1 - , ¯  (0, 1) such that for all
k  s  0,
                                                        Vk , s   1    M 3 k .                                                       (36)

     Now consider an equilibrium in the form of (32). From equilibrium condition (8), we know
                         +                              +
                                               ¯t
                                k x t -k = t + E               k x t +1-k
                         k =0                           k =0
                                                                                       +
                                                           ¯t
                                       = q + 0 R + 1 x t + E                                  k +1 x t -k
                                                                                       k =1
                                                                                +                 k
                                       = q + 0 R + 1 x t +                             k +1            Vk , s x t - s ,
                                                                                k =1            s =0

where we use the fact that all agents at t know the values of the fundamental state x t .
     For this to be true for all states of nature, we can compare coefficients on each x t -k , we have

                                                0 = q + 0 R + 1
                                                        +
                                                k =            l +1Vl ,k k  1.                                                      (37)
                                                        l =k

From Definition 1, we know that there is a scalar M > 0 such that k                                           1    M for all k  0, where
 ·   1   is the 1-norm. From (36) and (37), we know that, for all k  1,
                                                   +                                    k
                                        k   1              Vl ,k         1M    M 3        M.                                        (38)
                                                   l =k                                1-



                                                                     31
                                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                                   k
                                                 ^ finite but large enough M 3  < 1. So we
Because limk  k = 0, there necessarily exists an k                            1-
                      ^
know that, for all k  k ,
                                                                           ^
                                                                  k
                                                   k      1  M 3    M.
                                                                 1-
    Now, we can use the above formula and (37) to provide a tighter bound of k                                1:
                                                                                                                              ^,
                                                                                                                   for all k  k
                                                                          ^      2
                                                             k
                                                k    1  M 3                           M.
                                                            1-
                                      ^ and l  0,
We can keep iterating. For for all k  k
                                                                          ^       l
                                                             k
                                                k    1  M 3                           M.
                                                            1-
            k  ^
Since M 3 1-
                                                 ^ . Using (37) and doing backward induction,
              < 1, we then have k = 0 for all k  k
we then know k = 0 for all k  1 and

                                                      0 = q + 0 R ,

which means 0 = q ( I - R )-1 . Together, this means that the equilibrium is unique and is given
           F           F
by c t = c t , where c t is defined in (9).


Proof of Proposition 3

Consider a candidate equilibrium c t in Definition 1. We first notice that, for the period-t agent
born s periods ago, her information set I ts in Assumption 4 can be written equivalently as

                                      I ts =  t -s , ...,  t , x t -s , x                 x
                                                                        t -s +1 , · · · , t ,

where x
      t is the innovation in x t in Assumption 1. From (28) in the proof of Lemma 1, we know
that c t can be written as
                                                                        
                                            ct =          a k  t -k +          k x
                                                                                 t -k ,
                                                   k =0                 k =0

where k is given by (29). From the law of total variances, we have
                                                                                            
                           V ar E t c t | I ts - c t  V ar                    a k  t -k +          k x
                                                                                                     t -k .
                                                                  k =s +1                   k =s

Since  t and x
             t are independent of each other as well as independent over time, the finiteness of
V ar (c t ) implies that
                                                                              
                                   lim V ar                  a k  t -k +          k x
                                                                                    t -k = 0.
                                  s +
                                                   k =s +1                 k =s




                                                                32
                                                                      ^0 , such that
As a result, for any > 0 arbitrarily small but positive, there exists s

                                                     V ar E t c t | I ts - c t 

           ^0 and every t . Similarly, for each k  K , there exists s
for all s  s                                                        ^k , such that

                                                  V ar E t c t -k | I ts - c t -k 

           ^k and every t . Now, for any > 0 arbitrarily small but positive, we can find 
for all s  s                                                                               ^ >0
                 ^k
such that 1 -  ^ s   1 - for all k  {0, · · · , K } . Together, this means that whenever   (0, ^ ),
       i
V ar E t [c t -k ] - c t -k  for all k  K , for at least a fraction 1 -                             of agents, and for every period t .


Proof of Proposition 4

                                 F
We first find the MSV solution c t =  x t for some   Rn . From (4), we have

                                                                           +
                                                       = q +                      R k .
                                                                           k =0

Since I -    +
                  Rk
             k =0 k
                           is invertible, the unique solution is  = q ( I -                                         + k -1
                                                                                                                    k =0
                                                                                                                         R ) .    We henceforth
denote this solution as
                                                                       +
                                                     F
                                                    ct  q (I -                R k )-1 x t .                                                  (39)
                                                                       k =0

    Consider an equilibrium taking the form of (7). We use (4):
               +                                                      +             +                        
                      a l  t -l +                             ¯t
                                           l x t -l = q x t + E              k              a l  t +k -l +          l x t +k -l   .          (40)
               l =0                 l =0                              k =0          l =0                     l =0

We know                                                          
                                                                 µl  t -l
                                                                 
                                                                                  if l  0
                                                ¯ t [ t -l ] =
                                                E
                                                                 0
                                                                 
                                                                                  otherwise

where µl = (1 - )l is the measure of agents who remember a sunspot realized l periods earlier as
in the proof of Proposition 2. Comparing coefficient in front of  t -l and using the facts that each
sunspot is orthogonal to all fundamentals:
                                                              +
                                                   a l = µl          k a k +l l  0.                                                          (41)
                                                              k =0

                                                  ^ finite but large enough µ ^
Because liml  µl = 0, there necessarily exists an l                                                                           
                                                                                                                                  | | < 1.
                                                                             l                                                k =0 k
    Since we are focusing bounded equilibria as in Definition 1, there exists a scalar M > 0, arbi-
                                                                                                   ^,
trarily large but finite, such that |a l |  M for all l . From (41), we then know that, for all l  l
                                                                           +
                                                        |a l |  µl^M              | k | ,                                                    (42)
                                                                           k =0


                                                                      33
where we also use the fact that the sequence {µl }     l =0
                                                            is decreasing. Now, we can use (41) and (42)
to provide a tigehter bound of |a l |. That is, for all l  l ^,

                                                                                          2
                                                         |a l |  µl^               |k |       M.
                                                                            k =0

We can keep iterating. Since µl^                 
                                                     | | < 1, we then have a l                                       ^. Using (41) and doing
                                                                                                      = 0 for all l  l
                                                 k =0 k
backward induction, we then know a l = 0 for all l .
     Now, (40) can be simplified as
                                                         +            
                                              ¯t
                           l x t -l = q x t + E                 k           l x t +k -l .                                                       (43)
                    l =0                                 k =0        l =0
                                                  +           k                                    + +
                                   = q xt +              k          l R k -l x t + E
                                                                                   ¯t                           k k +l x t -l .
                                                  k =0       l =0                                   l =1 k =0

For this to be true for all states of nature, we can compare coefficients on each x t -l :
                                                                +            k
                                             0 = q +                  k            l R k -l                                                     (44)
                                                              k =0          l =0
                                                        + +
                                             l =                      k k +s Vs ,l l  1,                                                        (45)
                                                        s =l k =0

where Vs ,l is defined in (35).
     From Definition 1, we know that there is a scalar M > 0 such that l                                              1    M for all l  0, where
 ·   1   is the 1-norm. From (45), we know, for all l  1
                                          +               +                                   +                   l
                              l   1              |k |               Vs ,l    1     M                 | k | M 3      M,                          (46)
                                          k =0             s =l                               k =0               1-
                                                                                    ^ finite but
where M 3 and  are defined in (35) Because liml  l = 0, there necessarily exists an l
                                      l^
large enough such that + |k | M 3  < 1. So we know that, for all l  l
                                   k =0                  1-
                                                                      ^,
                                                                                                ^
                                                                  +    l
                                                   l 1       |k | M 3    M.
                                                        k =0          1-

     Now, we can use the above formula and (45) to provide a tighter bound of l                                                   1:
                                                                                                                                                  ^,
                                                                                                                                       for all l  l
                                                                                               ^      2
                                                                  +               l
                                                 l   1                 | k | M 3                          M.
                                                                  k =0           1-
                                                                   l    ^
We can keep iterating. Since                  +
                                                  | |
                                              k =0 k
                                                             M 3 1                                     ^
                                                                  - < 1, we then have l = 0 for all l  l . Using (45)
and doing backward induction, we then know l = 0 for all l  1 and, from (44),
                                                                                 +
                                                        0 = q + 0                       k R k ,
                                                                                 k =0




                                                                            34
                                                        -1
which means 0 = q I -                           +
                                                     Rk
                                                k =0 k
                                                           . Together, this means that the equilibrium is unique and
                    F           F
is given by c t = c t , where c t is defined in (39). This proves the Proposition.


Proof of Proposition 5

Given Assumption 5, an possible equilibrium takes the form of
                                                 K                    K                     K
                                         ct =           a k  t -k +          k c t -k +           k x t -k + t .
                                                 k =0                 k =1                 k =0

From (25), we have that
K                    K                   K                                                  K  -1                    K -1                   K  -1
       a k  t -k +          k c t -k +          k x t -k + t = t + t + E[                           a k +1  t -k +          k +1 c t -k +           k +1 x t -k | I t ]
k =0                 k =1                k =0                                               k =0                     k =0                   k =0
                                                                                              K  -1                    K -1                    K  -1
                                                                 = q x t + t +                         a k +1  t -k +          k +1 c t -k +           k +1 x t -k + 0 R x t
                                                                                                k =0                    k =1                   k =0
                                                                                   K                     K                  K
                                                                      + 1                 a k  t -k +          k c t -k +          k x t -k + t
                                                                                   k =0                 k =1                k =0

where we use Assumptions 1­2 and the fact that t is drawn independently over time. For this to
be true for all states of nature, we can compare coefficients:

                              a k = a k +1 + 1 a k k  0, · · · , K  - 1                             and a K  = 1 a K                                   (47)

                              k = k +1 + 1 k k  1, · · · , K  - 1                                   and K  = 1 K                                       (48)

                               k = k +1 + 1 k k  {1, · · · , K  - 1} and K  = 1 K                                                                      (49)

                                                  0 = q + 1 + 1 0 + 0 R and  = 1 + 1 .                                                                 (50)

First, from the second equation in (50), we know 1 = 1. Then, from the second parts of (47)­
(49), we know a K  = 0, K  = 0, and K = 0. From backward induction on (47)­(50), we know that
                                                             

all a ,b,  are zero except for the following:

                                                                  0 = q + 0 R ,

which means 0 = q ( I - R )-1 . We also know that  = 1. We conclude that the unique solution is
                                                                            F
                                                                      ct = ct + t ,
        F
where c t is given by (9).




                                                                              35
References
A BREU , D. AND M. K. B RUNNERMEIER (2003): "Bubbles and crashes," Econometrica, 71, 173­204.

A FROUZI , H., S. Y. K WON , A. L ANDIER , Y. M A , AND D. T HESMAR (2020): "Overreaction and working memory," Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.

A NGELETOS , G.-M. AND Z. H UO (2021): "Myopia and Anchoring," American Economic Review, 111, 1166­1200.

A NGELETOS , G.-M. AND C. L IAN (2018): "Forward guidance without common knowledge," American Economic Re-
  view, 108, 2477­2512.

A NGELETOS , G.-M. AND K. A. S ASTRY (2021): "Managing Expectations: Instruments vs. Targets," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics.

ATKESON , A., V. V. C HARI , AND P. J. K EHOE (2010): "Sophisticated monetary policies," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 125, 47­89.

AUCLERT, A., M. R OGNLIE , AND L. S TRAUB (2018): "The intertemporal keynesian cross," .

B ARRO, R. J. (1974): "Are government bonds net wealth?" Journal of political economy, 82, 1095­1117.

B ASSETTO, M. (2002): "A game­theoretic view of the fiscal theory of the price level," Econometrica, 70, 2167­2195.

------ (2005): "Equilibrium and government commitment," Journal of Economic Theory, 124, 79­105.

B ENHABIB , J., S. S CHMITT-G ROHÉ , AND M. U RIBE (2002): "Avoiding liquidity traps," Journal of Political Economy,
  110, 535­563.

B ENIGNO, P. AND M. W OODFORD (2003): "Optimal monetary and fiscal policy: A linear-quadratic approach," NBER
  macroeconomics annual, 18, 271­333.

B HASKAR , V. (1998): "Informational Constraints and the Overlapping Generations Model: Folk and Anti-Folk Theo-
  rems," The Review of Economic Studies, 65, 135­149.

B HASKAR , V., G. J. M AILATH , AND S. M ORRIS (2012): "A Foundation for Markov Equilibria in Sequential Games with
  Finite Social Memory," The Review of Economic Studies, 80, 925­948.

B ILBIIE , F. O. (2020): "Monetary policy and heterogeneity: An analytical framework," .

B LANCHARD, O. J. (1979): "Backward and forward solutions for economies with rational expectations," American
  Economic Review, 69, 114­118.

B LANCHARD, O. J. AND C. M. K AHN (1980): "The solution of linear difference models under rational expectations,"
  Econometrica, 1305­1311.

B ORDALO, P., N. G ENNAIOLI , AND A. S HLEIFER (2018): "Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles," Journal of Fi-
  nance.



                                                         36
------ (2020): "Memory, Attention, and Choice," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 1399­1442.

B UITER , W. H. (2002): "The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: A Critique," The Economic Journal, 112, 459­480.

C ANZONERI , M. B., R. E. C UMBY, AND B. T. D IBA (2001): "Is the Price Level Determined by the Needs of Fiscal
     Solvency?" American Economic Review, 91, 1221­1238.

------ (2010): "The interaction between monetary and fiscal policy," Handbook of monetary economics, 3, 935­999.

C HARI , V. V., L. J. C HRISTIANO, AND P. J. K EHOE (1994): "Optimal fiscal policy in a business cycle model," Journal of
     polítical Economy, 102, 617­652.

C HRISTIANO, L. (2018): "Comment," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32, 227­245.

C HRISTIANO, L., M. E ICHENBAUM , AND B. J OHANNSEN (2018): "Does the New Keynesian Model Have a Uniqueness
     Problem?" .

C OCHRANE , J. H. (2005): "Money as stock," Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 501­528.

------ (2011): "Determinacy and identification with Taylor rules," Journal of Political economy, 119, 565­615.

------ (2017): "The new-Keynesian liquidity trap," Journal of Monetary Economics, 92, 47­63.

------ (2018): "Michelson-Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The radical implications of stable quiet inflation at the zero
     bound," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32, 113­226.

C ORREIA , I., J. P. N ICOLINI , AND P. T ELES (2008): "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy: Equivalence Results," Journal
     of Political Economy, 116, 141­170.

DA   S ILVEIRA , R. A., Y. S UNG , AND M. W OODFORD (2020): "Optimally imprecise memory and biased forecasts," Na-
     tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

D EL N EGRO, M., M. G IANNONI , AND C. PATTERSON (2015): "The Forward Guidance Puzzle," FRB of New York mimeo.

E VANS , G. W. AND B. M C G OUGH (2018): "Equilibrium selection, observability and backward-stable solutions," Jour-
     nal of Monetary Economics, 98, 1­10.

FARHI , E. AND I. W ERNING (2019): "Monetary policy, bounded rationality, and incomplete markets," American Eco-
     nomic Review, 109, 3887­3928.

G ABAIX , X. (2020): "A behavioral New Keynesian model," American Economic Review, 110, 2271­2327.

G ALÍ , J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework,
     Princeton University Press.

G ARCÍA -S CHMIDT, M. AND M. W OODFORD (2019): "Are low interest rates deflationary? A paradox of perfect-foresight
     analysis," American Economic Review, 109, 86­120.




                                                          37
H ONKAPOHJA , S. AND K. M ITRA (2004): "Are non-fundamental equilibria learnable in models of monetary policy?"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 1743­1770.

K ING , R. G. (2000): "The new IS-LM model: language, logic, and limits," FRB Richmond Economic Quarterly, 86,
  45­104.

KOCHERLAKOTA , N. AND C. P HELAN (1999): "Explaining the fiscal theory of the price level," Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23, 14­23.

L EEPER , E. M. (1991): "Equilibria under "active" and "passive" monetary and fiscal policies," Journal of monetary
  Economics, 27, 129­147.

L OISEL , O. (2021): "The implementation of stabilization policy," Theoretical Economics, 677­716.

M A CKOWIAK
    ´       , B. AND M. W IEDERHOLT (2009): "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 99, 769­803.

M AILATH , G. J. AND S. M ORRIS (2002): "Repeated games with almost-public monitoring," Journal of Economic the-
  ory, 102, 189­228.

M ANKIW, G. AND R. R EIS (2002): "Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: a Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian
  Phillips Curve," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1295­1328.

M C C ALLUM , B. T. (1983): "On non-uniqueness in rational expectations models: An attempt at perspective," Journal
  of monetary Economics, 11, 139­168.

------ (2001): "Indeterminacy, bubbles, and the fiscal theory of price level determination," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 47, 19­30.

------ (2007): "E-stability vis-a-vis determinacy results for a broad class of linear rational expectations models,"
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31, 1376­1391.

------ (2009): "Inflation determination with Taylor rules: Is new-Keynesian analysis critically flawed?" Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 56, 1101­1108.

M C C ALLUM , B. T. AND E. N ELSON (2005): "Monetary and fiscal theories of the price level: the irreconcilable differ-
  ences," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21, 565­583.

M C K AY, A., E. N AKAMURA , AND J. S TEINSSON (2017): "The discounted euler equation: A note," Economica, 84, 820­
  831.

M ORRIS , S. AND H. S. S HIN (1998): "Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-fulfilling Currency Attacks," American
  Economic Review, 587­597.

------ (2003): "Global Games: Theory and Applications," in Advances in Economics and Econometrics (Proceedings
  of the Eighth World Congress of the Econometric Society), Cambridge University Press.

------ (2006): "Inertia of Forward-looking Expectations," The American Economic Review, 152­157.


                                                          38
N IEPELT, D. (2004): "The Fiscal Myth of the Price Level," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 277­300.

N IMARK , K. (2008): "Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge," Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 365­
  382.

O BSTFELD, M. AND K. R OGOFF (1983): "Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?"
  Journal of Political Economy, 91, 675­87.

------ (2021): "Revisiting Speculative Hyperinflations in Monetary Models," Review of Economic Dynamics, 40, 1­11.

P ESKI
       , M. (2012): "An anti-folk theorem for finite past equilibria in repeated games with private monitoring," Theo-
  retical Economics, 7, 25­55.

RUBINSTEIN , A. (1989): "The Electronic Mail Game: Strategic Behavior Under "Almost Common Knowledge"," The
  American Economic Review, 79, 385­391.

S ARGENT, T. (1982): "The Ends of Four Big Inflations," in Inflation: Causes and Effects, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 41­98.

S ARGENT, T. AND N. WALLACE (1981): "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapo-
  lis Quarterly Review.

S ARGENT, T. J. AND N. WALLACE (1975): ""Rational" Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Opti-
  mal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 83, 241­254.

S IMS , C. A. (1994): "A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the interaction of monetary
  and fiscal policy," Economic theory, 4, 381­399.

TAYLOR , J. B. (1993): "Discretion versus policy rules in practice," in Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public
  policy, Elsevier, vol. 39, 195­214.

T OWNSEND, R. M. (1983): "Forecasting the forecasts of others," Journal of Political Economy, 91, 546­588.

W EINSTEIN , J. AND M. Y ILDIZ (2007): "A Structure Theorem for Rationalizability with Application to Robust Predic-
  tions of Refinements," Econometrica, 75, 365­400.

W ERNING , I. (2015): "Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand," NBER Working Paper No. 21448.

W OODFORD, M. (1995): "Price-level determinacy without control of a monetary aggregate," in Carnegie-Rochester
  conference series on public policy, Elsevier, vol. 43, 1­46.

------ (2003): "Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy," Knowledge, Information, and
  Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps.

------ (2019): "Monetary policy analysis when planning horizons are finite," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 33,
  1­50.

X IE , Y. (2019): "Fiscal and Monetary Policy Interaction under Limited Foresight," mimeo.


                                                            39
