                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MISINFORMATION: STRATEGIC SHARING, HOMOPHILY,
                      AND ENDOGENOUS ECHO CHAMBERS

                                     Daron Acemoglu
                                     Asuman Ozdaglar
                                      James Siderius

                                     Working Paper 28884
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28884


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We are grateful to Hunt Allcott, Matthew Gentzkow, Ro'ee Levy, Davy Perlman, Alexander
Wolitzky, MIT theory lunch participants, and MIT LIDS tea talk participants for comments. We
also gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NSF, the Sloan Foundation, and MIT
Quest. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Е 2021 by Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and James Siderius. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Е notice, is given to the source.
Misinformation: Strategic Sharing, Homophily, and Endogenous Echo Chambers
Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and James Siderius
NBER Working Paper No. 28884
June 2021
JEL No. D83,D85,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

We present a model of online content sharing where agents sequentially observe an article and
must decide whether to share it with others. The article may contain misinformation, but at a cost,
agents can fact-check it to determine whether its content is entirely accurate. While agents derive
value from future shares, they simultaneously fear getting caught sharing misinformation. With
little homophily in the "sharing network", misinformation is often quickly identified and brought
to an end. However, when homophily is strong, so that agents anticipate that only those with
similar beliefs will view the article, misinformation spreads more rapidly because of echo
chambers. We show that a social media platform that wishes to maximize content engagement
will propagate extreme articles amongst the most extremist users, while not showing these
articles to ideologically opposed users. This creates an endogenous echo chamber--filter bubble
--that makes misinformation spread virally. We use this framework to understand how regulation
can encourage more fact-checking by online users and mitigate the consequences of filter
bubbles.

Daron Acemoglu                                   James Siderius
Department of Economics, E52-446                 Department of Electrical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            and Computer Science
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139                              77 Massachusetts Ave.
and NBER                                         Cambridge, MA 02139
daron@mit.edu                                    USA
                                                 siderius@mit.edu
Asuman Ozdaglar
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, E40-130
Cambridge, MA 02139
asuman@mit.edu
1        Introduction

Social media has become an increasingly important source of information for many Americans.
Leading up to the 2016 US presidential election, around 14% of Americans indicated social media
as their primary source of news (Allcott and Gentzkow (2017)), and over 70% of Americans reported
receiving at least some of their news from social media (Levy (2020)). Many of these news stories made
wildly false claims, for example, arguing that there were no mass shootings under Donald Trump1 or
Hillary Clinton approved ISIS weapon sales.2 These false stories spread virally on social media sites,
with "falsehood diffusing significantly farther, faster, deeper, and more broadly than the truth in all
categories of information," according to Vosoughi et al. (2018).
        Two main forces, echo chambers and political polarization, may have exacerbated the spread
of misinformation. Facebook, where the vast majority of news consumption on social media takes
place, employs algorithms that create "filter bubbles," which limit the exposure of users to counter-
attitudinal news outlets and instead promote "politically congenial" content (Lazer et al. (2018), Levy
(2020)). These dynamics have been shown to reinforce political viewpoints and exacerbate cascades
of misinformation (see, for instance, Tе
                                       ornberg (2018) and Vicario et al. (2016)). At the same time,
from 1996 to 2016, political polarization has increased significantly according to a variety of measures.3
This polarization may have fueled more selective exposure to news consumption, as well as growing
exposure to misinformation, particularly for individuals with more extreme views (Guess et al. (2018)).
Engaging in selective exposure is further facilitated when information can be easily consumed and
shared on social media sites like Facebook by scrolling through a news feed with nearly limitless
content (Bakshy et al. (2015)).
        In this paper, we develop a parsimonious model of online behavior in the presence of
misinformation, homophily, and political polarization. As a first step in this endeavor, we abstract
from the various behavioral biases of individuals when they engage with online information (see,
for instance, Buchanan (2020) and Pennycook and Rand (2018)), and focus on the behavior of fully
Bayesian agents, which we show generates rich strategic interactions and dynamics.
        Agents in our model choose to interact with an article by either ignoring it, inspecting it for
misinformation, or simply sharing it (the importance of the inspection mechanism in practice is
demonstrated in Guriev et al. (2020)). Each agent has a different ideological leaning, captured by his
or her (henceforth, simply her) priors, and every article has a particular political viewpoint, which
may agree or disagree with an agent's prior beliefs. The article may also contain misinformation.
We suppose that agents are situated in a "sharing network"--reflecting their social network as well
as the algorithms used by the platform--which determines who they share articles with. We first take
this network as given and then endogenize it. Agents derive value from getting additional shares or
    1
     https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/mass-shootings-under-trump/
    2
     https://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/30/read-all-about-it-the-biggest-fake-news-stories-of-2016.html
   3
     While there has been some debate about whether polarization has been isolated mainly to politicians (see Fiorina et al.
(2008) and Prior (2013)), there is considerable evidence that polarization has also risen among the general public (see Pew
Research Center (2014) and Abramowitz (2010)).


                                                             1
"retweets" on the stories they share, but are afraid to get called out for spreading misinformation. This
creates an incentive to share stories that (i) are unlikely to contain misinformation, and/or (ii) are likely
to be shared, and not scrutinized, by others in one's social circle. We also assume that articles at first
spread slowly (are shared with a few people), and after a while, they become viral and are shared with
a larger subset of those in the agent's relevant social circle.
   We characterize the (sequential) equilibria of the aforementioned game. Before the article has
gone viral, and is being shared slowly, agents who disagree with it (i.e., those who fall below a certain
ideological belief cutoff ) simply ignore it, while those who agree with it always share it. This is
consistent with the selective exposure effect identified in Guess et al. (2018). Once an article enters
the viral phase, agents who disagree with the article inspect it to see if it contains misinformation,
whereas agents who agree with it share without inspection.
   Our game features neither strategic substitutes nor strategic complements. When other agents
share more, an agent might worry that nobody is inspecting and becomes more likely to inspect more
and thus share less, which pushes towards strategic substitutes. On the other hand, when others are
expected to inspect more in the future, the agent may reason that she is unlikely to be found out to
have propagated misinformation and may share more, thus pushing towards strategic complements.
Despite these rich strategic interactions, we prove that an equilibrium always exists. We also provide
conditions under which the most viral--the "all-share"--equilibrium, one where all agents in the
population share the article, exists and is unique.
   We present two sets of main results. The first is a series of comparative static results showing
when misinformation is more likely to spread virally. Most importantly, we show that when there
is little homophily in the sharing network, and agents are likely to be exposed to cross-cutting
content (including counter-attitudinal articles), extreme messages with misinformation are unlikely
to survive for very long. Perhaps paradoxically, we find that in this baseline environment with limited
homophily, political polarization and/or a small increase in homophily actually help reduce the extent
of misinformation. Both of these effects occur because agents will encounter strongly counter-
attitudinal news, which they will investigate and expose if they find it to contain misinformation. A
small increase in homophily (or more political polarization) encourages further inspection from agents
who disagree with the article, because they have become more likely to share it with others, who like
themselves, disagree with it. Their behavior in turn further disciplines agents who agree with the story
to be cautious about sharing without inspection.
   However, these conclusions are reversed when the network has strong homophily. In this case,
agents who agree and disagree with the article interact rarely. Consequently, an increase in homophily
creates an echo chamber where agents become less concerned about others inspecting their article
and are more likely to spread misinformation. Notably, this viral behavior is exacerbated when the
article has an extreme message or polarization is strong. Because the article is unlikely to fall in the
hands of any individual who opposes it, extremism fuels misinformation amongst those who agree
with it.


                                                      2
   Our second set of main results identify conditions under which platforms will design algorithms
for content sharing in a way that both creates ideological homophily in the sharing network
and propagates misinformation. In particular, we assume that the platform wishes to maximize
engagement but is indifferent to whether this engagement is with misinformation or truthful content.
We demonstrate that when all sources of news are reasonably moderate, the platform prefers to
inspect the veracity of the articles itself and then tags them as "verified". It also does not create filter
bubbles. This strategy is beneficial for the platform because tagged accurate information triggers a
share cascade that will not be interrupted by an exposure of misinformation. In contrast, if extremist
content is available, the platform's incentives are diametrically different: it prefers not to inspect the
veracity of such extreme content, designs its algorithm to create strong filter bubbles, and propagates
the extremist content. This preference is rooted in the fact that like-minded agents will share extremist
content among themselves when they understand they are in an echo chamber, which leads to high
engagement. We also establish that the platform's incentive to create filter bubbles and share extremist
messages becomes even stronger when there is severe polarization. Overall, these results imply that
a particularly pernicious form of misinformation--contained in the most extremist messages and
exacerbated with user polarization--will spread virally.
   Lastly, we briefly consider the problem of regulation of social media--say by a planner who wants
to limit misinformation on the platform. We consider three different policies: news quality revelation,
censorship, and network regulation (e.g., an ideological segregation standard for the network induced
by platform algorithms). First, we show that a policy that reveals an article's provenance (and the
source's quality) can decrease misinformation by allowing users to separate their scrutiny based on
the likelihood of misinformation.. However, we also find that such policies can sometimes backfire
and actually increase the spread of misinformation, because they discourage agents from inspecting
articles that are not tagged as originating from unreliable sources. Second, we show a limited form of
censorship may be effective in reducing misinformation, and even the threat of such censorship may
motivate platforms not to create filter bubbles and propagate extremist messages. Lastly, we consider
regulation that targets the sharing network and filter bubbles directly, by setting a requirement that
reduces the amount of acceptable homophily present in the network.

Related Literature. Our paper builds on a large body of work on misinformation and fake news, both
empirical and theoretical. In addition to the literature mentioned previously, several other papers on
misinformation are related to our findings.
   Much previous work has focused on the susceptibility of boundedly-rational agents to engage with
misinformation. In Acemoglu et al. (2010) and Acemoglu et al. (2013), the existence of persuasive
agents can impede information aggregation and enable misinformed beliefs to survive, and sometimes
even become dominant, in the population. In Mostagir et al. (2019) and Mostagir and Siderius (2021),
a strategic principal who wants to persuade agents of an incorrect belief can often distort the learning
process by leveraging social connections and echo chambers to propagate misinformation. Similarly,


                                                     3
models of misinformation "contagion"--without Bayesian agents or strategic decisions--have been
studied in Budak et al. (2011), Nguyen et al. (2012), and Tе
                                                           ornberg (2018). Our contribution is different
because, in our model, the spread of misinformation is rooted in this strategic interactions of Bayesian
agents and profit-maximizing platforms.
    There is a growing literature on information design by platforms, most often building on the
concept of Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) and Kamenica (2019)). Candogan
and Drakopoulos (2017) study how a platform with private knowledge of content's accuracy should
optimally signal to rational users whether to engage with it, while Chen and Papanastasiou (2019) and
Keppo et al. (2019) consider more manipulative actions by platforms, including strategic seeding of
information or "cheap talk" signals about quality. Also related are works on reputation and media
bias. Motivated by the 2016 presidential election, Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) study the incentives of
certain outlets to present misleading news, while Gentzkow and Shapiro (2006), Hsu et al. (2020) and
Allon et al. (2019) explore other strategic reasons for media bias. Among other things, our paper differs
from these works because our focus is on social media interactions among users with heterogeneous
prior beliefs in potentially homophilic networks. As a result, none of these papers generate viral spread
of misinformation driven by user sharing behavior or endogenous echo chambers.
    The most closely related work to ours is the important paper by Papanastasiou (2018), who studies
a model where agents hold heterogenous ideological beliefs and digest and potentially inspect a news
article sequentially. Our work is different in three important dimensions. First, consistent with much
of the empirical literature on social networks, our model incorporates the strategic complementarity
of online sharing behavior.4 This strategic complementarity is at the root of all of our main results,
and arises in our model because agents care about whether others will inspect and find them to be
propagating misinformation. In contrast, Papanastasiou (2018) there is no peer feedback on sharing
decisions and hence the game he studies is one of strategic substitutes (making his analysis more
straightforward as a result). Second, and relatedly, echo chambers play no role in Papanastasiou
(2018) (and in fact, an agent is completely indifferent to any share cascades that might result from
her initial sharing decision). Our reading is that the vast majority of empirical work in this area finds
socializing and status seeking are among the top reasons individuals share news on social media (see
Lee et al. (2011)), and as a result, viral misinformation is typically associated with social reinforcement
among peers in one's network (see, for example, Tе
                                                 ornberg (2018), Centola (2010), and Centola and
Macy (2007)). Third, the platform analysis in Papanastasiou (2018) assumes that the platform wants to
reduce the spread of misinformation, so the results focus on when self-policing is more effective than
platform inspections. As a result, our results on how engagement-maximizing platforms will propagate
misinformation by creating filter bubbles are, to the best of our knowledge, completely new.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We introduce our basic model, with exogenous
   4
     For example, Eckles et al. (2016) find evidence that feedback or "encouragement" from peers about Facebook posts
contributes significantly to future behavior and posting. In our model, as opposed to an inherent dislike for spreading
misinformation, agents simply fear peer "shaming" from being identified as someone who spreads misinformation. See
also Taylor and Eckles (2018) and Aral and Dhillon (2018).



                                                          4
sharing network, in the next section. Section 3 characterizes the (sequential) equilibria of this model
and provides some basic comparative static results. Section 4 studies the effects of homophily by
focusing on a special class of sharing networks that correspond to a set of the "islands" of like-minded
individuals who are less closely linked to those in other islands. Section 5 endogenizes the sharing
network as a result of the algorithmic choices of a platform that aims to maximize engagement. Section
6 discusses a range of regulations aimed at containing misinformation. Section 7 concludes, while all
proofs are provided in the Appendix.


2      Model

There is an underlying state of the world   {L, R}, for example, corresponding to whether the left-
wing or the right-wing candidate is more qualified for political office. Agents have heterogeneous
prior (ideological) beliefs about , and agent i's prior that  = R is denoted by bi and has distribution
Hi (и). For concreteness, throughout the paper we will take the state to be  = L.
      We assume there are N agents in the population, who share a news article according to a sharing
network defined by matrix P of link probabilities:
                                                                       
                                               0     p12   и и и p1N
                                                                       
                                       p
                                       21    0 и и и p2N               
                                     P
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                       иии иии иии иии                 
                                                                       
                                       pN 1 pN 2 и и и 0

where pij is the probability that agent i has a link to agent j . We denote by Ni as the set of agents
attached to agent i with an outgoing link (i.e., agent i's "neighborhood"). The sharing network reflects
both an individual's social circle and the algorithms the platform uses for sharing articles. We take it as
given throughout this and the next two sections, and endogenize it in Section 5.
      We next describe how news articles are generated and how they spread through the population. We
then present the payoffs of the agents. Finally, we introduce the solution concept we use to analyze the
equilibria of this game.


2.1     Misinformation and News Generation

Each news story has a three-dimensional type (s, , m). The type s  R indicates the provenance (or
source) of the news. The type  is the article's veracity, which can either be T , to indicate the article
is truthful, or M, to indicate the article contains misinformation. The type m  R is the message,
which corresponds to the article's viewpoint. Without loss of generality, we assume that lower-valued
messages advocate for left-wing ideas, whereas higher messages advocate for right-wing ideas, as seen
in Figure 1. The message m = 0 is a moderate message that splits the message space into left and




                                                     5
right-wing news.5




                                    Figure 1. Interpretation of Article's Message.



Misinformation vs Fake News. Our focus in this paper is on articles that contain misinformation,
interpreted as items that include misleading information or arguments, with the explicit or predictable
purpose of influencing (a subset of) the public. Articles containing "fake news" (demonstrably false
information) make up a small subset of those containing misinformation. For example, a news item
that favorably describes a report denying climate change, without putting this in the context of the
criticisms that this report has received from scores of experts or hundreds of other reports reaching
the opposite conclusion, would be one containing misinformation according to this definition. Recent
work finds that this type of misinformation is much more common than explicit fake news (e.g., Allen
et al. (2020), Guess et al. (2019), Grinberg et al. (2019)). For example, Allen et al. (2020) report that less
than 0.2% of political content on social media is overtly false.

Generation Process.          Each article's (three-dimensional) type (s, , m) is drawn according to the
following i.i.d process:

  (i) The provenance of the news s is drawn from a Lebesgue-integrable density function g (и).

 (ii) The veracity of the article is  = T with probability qs and  = M with probability 1 - qs .6

       (a) If the news story is truthful (i.e.,  = T ), then the message is generated according to a smooth
            distribution F (и|) which depends on the underlying state  and has density f (и|) bounded
            above and bounded below away from 0. We assume truthful messages are informative about
            the state, so the likelihood ratio f (m| = R)/f (m| = L) is (strictly) increasing in m. This
            implies, for example, that strong right-wing messages are a stronger indication of  = R
            than weak right-wing messages or left-wing messages. We refer to this property of f as the
            monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP).

       (b) If the news story contains misinformation (i.e.,  = M), we assume that it is anti-correlated
            with the state, meaning that the message is distributed according to f (m| = г), where г
   5
      This is without loss of generality: for general m , one can simply make the change of variables m ~ = m - m to realign
                               
the moderate message to m    ~ = 0.
    6
      Note that while agents hold different prior beliefs about the state , they hold the same (prior) belief about the veracity
of the news, given by the (objective) probability of truthfulness, qs .



                                                               6
            is the opposite of state  (i.e, г = R when  = L and vice-versa). This assumption is adopted
            for convenience. In general, our definition implies that misinformation is potentially, but not
            entirely, misleading, and this can be modeled as a different correlation structure between
            the underlying state and messages under misinformation than the truth. We show in
            Appendix B.6 that our results generalize to this case, though the relevant thresholds are more
            complicated, and thus we opt for the pure anti-correlation formulation here for expositional
            simplicity.

      In the baseline model, we assume that (s,  ) is not known to the agents--in particular, the platform
does not provide any information about the veracity of the news article. Therefore, the ex-ante
                                              
probability an article is truthful is q       - qs g (s) ds   and the agent's belief  i about  is updated
according to Bayes' rule, conditional on her prior belief bi .


2.2     Lifetime of an Article

Time is discrete t = 1, 2, . . .. Without loss of generality, we assume there is just a single article in
circulation. At t = 1, this article is given to some seed agent i chosen uniformly at random. When
receiving the article, an agent plays one of three actions: share the article, inspect the article, or kill
the article. We denote the action of agent i as ai and the share, inspect, and kill actions as S , I , and
K, respectively. Agents see the message m of the article before taking their action ai . The share action
means the agent chooses to pass on the article to others without fact-checking it first. The inspect
action means the agent fact-checks the article, which perfectly reveals whether the article is truthful or
contains misinformation, and then shares it with others if it is truthful. The kill action means the agent
just ignores the article.
      Every article goes through three phases in its "lifetime" which we call the initial phase, the viral
phase, and the obsolescent phase. Formally, the article, given to seed agent i at t = 0, always starts
in the initial phase. The article then transitions to the viral phase at random, which is determined
by a Poisson clock. Once in the viral phase, a new Poisson clock starts, which determines when the
article then transitions to the obsolescent phase. The details of what occurs during each of the phases
is provided next.

Initial Phase. When agent i shares the article in the initial phase, the article is passed on to exactly one
neighbor of agent i, determined uniformly at random from the agents in i's neighborhood. If agent i
kills the article, the article dies and skips immediately to the obsolescent phase. Conditional on the
article not being killed up until some point in time, there is a random chance the article goes "viral"
and begins attracting more attention, determined by a Poisson clock with parameter 1 . Once this
clock ticks (and given all agents have shared until now), the article transitions to the viral phase.

Viral Phase. In the viral phase, when agent i shares the article, it is passed to  > 1 neighbors of agent i
instead of just 1 (again, chosen uniformly at random from agent i's neighborhood). While the article is

                                                     7
viral, there is a random chance it becomes "yesterday's news" and agents lose interest and stop sharing.
This also occurs randomly: a new Poisson clock starts as soon as the viral phase begins, with parameter
2 . When this clock ticks, the article immediately transitions into the obsolescent phase.

Obsolescent Phase. After the article becomes obsolete, we assume the article is inspected by an
outside source. For instance, after the article has been around for awhile, a third-party fact checking
organization, such as Politifact, inspects.7 Thus, once the article is no longer being shared on social
media, society discovers the ground truth about whether the article did in fact contain misinformation.




                                         Figure 2. The lifetime of an article.


       A pictorial version of the process is shown in Figure 2. Intuitively, this three-phase structure is
motivated by the typical dynamics of articles over social media, for example as documented in the work
of Vosoughi et al. (2018). The average lifetime of an article for both real (green) and fake (red) stories is
shown in Figure 3, courtesy of Vosoughi et al. (2018). For articles containing misinformation, while it
took nearly 1k minutes to attract 1k unique users, 40k users were obtained in about 10k minutes, but
only in rare circumstances were more users obtained after that.8 The viral phase is also reminiscent of
the "hot" designation that content receives after being shared consistently.9


2.3      Strategic Sharing and Exposure to Misinformation

After observing the message m of the article, any agent i who receives the article at some period t  1
chooses its action ai  {S , I , K}. If she chooses to share (ai = S ), then no fact-check is done and the
   7
      This final inspection can occur for a number of reasons, which need not be related to another news source investigating
the story. For instance, the virality of the Pizzagate conspiracy came to a halt when someone invaded the pizza parlor and
revealed the story to have misinformation.
    8
      According to https://buzzsumo.com/blog/the-most-shared-facebook-content-posts-videos/, the most shared
content on Facebook in 2017 received over 22 million shares. Facebook had over 2 billion active users in 2017 though (https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/), so only a very small
fraction of users interact with even the most viral posts.
    9
      For example, sites like Reddit algorithmically identify such "hot" content and place it at the top of related sub-
reddits (https://medium.com/hacking-and-gonzo/how-reddit-ranking-algorithms-work-ef111e33d0d9) and Facebook
is reported to use various strategies to attract users to this type of content (https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/03/
11/1020600/facebook-responsible-ai-misinformation/).


                                                             8
article progresses as described in Section 2.2 (i.e., passes to one agent in Ni in the initial phase and
passes to  agents in Ni in the viral phase). If she chooses to inspect (ai = I ), then the agent first
fact-checks the article, which requires effort, and pays a cost K ; if the article is truthful, she shares it,10
and if it contains misinformation, the article is revealed as containing misinformation and payoffs are
realized. We describe these next.
    Each agent discounts the downstream consequences (i.e., friends of friends' decisions and so on)
at the rate   0. When  > 0, payoffs include the implications of subsequent interactions on social
media (e.g., retweeting a retweet). But nothing in our analysis precludes the possibility that  is close
to or equal to zero.




                               Figure 3. Average unique users as a function of time.


    We refer to the downstream network of agents receiving the article, rooted at agent i, following
i's original share as i's sharing subtree. Let ti be the time at which agent i receives the article,  1
the (random) time at which the first clock ticks and the article transitions to the viral phase, and  2
the (random) time at which the second clock ticks after the first clock, and the article transitions to
the obsolescent phase. All sharing ceases in agent i's sharing subtree after either: (i) the article is
inspected and found to contain misinformation by some agent in i's sharing subtree, or (ii) the article
is inspected by the outside source (regardless of its veracity). We denote by Ti this (random) time for
agent i. Naturally, an agent's payoff depends on which of the three actions (S , I , or K) she takes:

Kill (ai = K). When an agent kills the article, she simply ignores it, and it is not shared with others.11
The payoff from killing the article is normalized at 0.

Share (ai = S ). The payoff from sharing the article is proportional to the (discounted) number of
                                                                                                         -1
agents who share that article in the future. The utility from sharing is Si   и                     =1      Si, , where Si,
is the number of (indirect) shares (in her sharing subtree) resulting from agent i's share  periods later,
 captures the marginal social utility from an additional share, and  is the discount factor. Formally,
  10
     Therefore, the agent will always share an article she knows to be truthful with probability 1. This is an implication of the
payoffs we present next, but it is convenient incorporate it into the description of the environment.
  11
     If we removed the kill/ignore option and forced agents to either share or inspect the news article, this would simplify the
analysis but would also lead to a highly counterfactual prediction that is not present in our model: truthful articles would
spread farther than articles containing misinformation, whereas the evidence seems to be the opposite; e.g., Vosoughi et al.
(2018).




                                                               9
the value of the shares at time  is:
                                
                                0, if ti +   T 
                                
                                               i
                                
                          Si, = 1, if ti +  < min{ 1 , Ti }
                                
                                Si, -1 , if  1  ti +  < min{ 1 +  2 , T  }
                                
                                                                       i


In other words, there are three cases: (i) once sharing comes to an end, there are no more payoffs, (ii)
in the initial phase, conditional on the article's survival, each period leads to one additional share, and
(iii) in the viral phase, conditional on the article's survival, the sharing agent receives  times the shares
she received in the previous period (due to the branching of the share process).12
      There is also a possible punishment from sharing misinformation. In particular, an agent i who
                                                                                     
chose S , in addition to her sharing payoff, faces a punishment C Ti -ti -1 when the article is inspected
at time Ti > ti by an agent in her sharing subtree (with no sharing payoff or punishment if ti = Ti ),
and found out to contain misinformation. In Appendix B.8, we derive this cost from a reputational
mechanism, but it is more convenient to impose it as an assumption here. This type of reputational
cost has been documented in Altay et al. (2020), who find in a Facebook field study that users who had
passed on misinformation in the past experienced bad reputation in their future shares.

Inspect (ai = I ). If an agent inspects, she automatically pays an inspection cost K > 0, regardless
of the outcome of the inspection (see Section 5.2 for heterogeneous inspection costs).                                    If the
article contains misinformation, the punishments described in the sharing section are realized, and
the article dies. If the article is viral, the agent receives a positive payoff  > 0 from exposing
misinformation in an article, but there is no such payoff in the initial phase.13
      If the article is truthful, the agent shares it and receives the same payoff as the agent who elects
ai = S (of course, after paying the cost K ). Consequently, the payoff from inspecting is given by:
                   
                   -K,
                   
                                                    if  = M and I is played in the initial phase
                   
                    - K,                            if  = M and I is played in the viral phase
                   
                       -1 Si, - K,
                   
                                                    if  = T and I is played (regardless of phase)
                   
                       =1


2.4     Payoff Assumptions

In this section, we introduce additional assumptions about payoff parameters. We define two objects,
vinitial and vviral , that will play an important role in our analysis. More specifically, these are the
   12
      In practice, agents may receive utility (or higher utility) from others liking their posts and shares rather than the number
of further shares, but the implications of this modification would be similar in our setting and would only further encourage
sharing in the presence of homophily (see Section 4).
   13
      The feature that there are weaker incentives to expose misinformation in the initial phase is also supported by the data.
For example, moderators on Reddit typically concentrate the majority of their time on "hot" articles and not content that
does not get shared often. There are also "community awards" that Reddit moderators can use to entice Reddit users to
engage in responsible behavior (e.g., fact-checking) of top posts.


                                                               10
expected payoffs from a share cascade in the initial phase and viral phase, respectively, when it is
common knowledge that the focal article is truthful (and all agents share):

 (i) Expected initial phase share cascade, vinitial : Recall that for agents in the initial phase, the article
     gets shared with exactly one other agent, until the first Poisson clock ticks, and then the article
     enters the viral phase. The probability the clock does not tick after each share is e-1 . If the clock
     ticks at random time  1 , the share cascade expected in the initial phase (before the clock ticks and
     transitions to the viral phase) is given by:

                                          
                                                                                      (1 - e-1 )
                                                   1 -1  1 (1 - e-1 )e-1 ( 1 -1) =                               (1)
                                                                                     (1 - e-1 )2
                                          1 =1


     Next, we consider the share cascades that occur after the article enters the viral phase (which it is
     guaranteed to under the assumption all agents share). This corresponds to the expected number
     of nodes in a branching process with parameter  , discounted after each level by e-2 , where
     e-2 captures the likelihood of the viral phase continuing after each period. Thus, the expected
     (initial) share cascade from the viral phase is:

                                                         2
                                        1 + 2 -1                  e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 )
                         1 =1  2 =1                       =1


                                                           (1 - e-1 )(1 - e-2 )
                                                 =                                                               (2)
                                                     (1 - e-2 )(1 - e-1 )(1 - e-2 )
     with vinitial being the sum of both of the above expressions.

 (ii) Expected viral phase share cascade, vviral : Similar to the above analysis, the expected share
     cascade is the expected number of nodes in a branching process with parameter  discounted
     according to e-2 after each level. In particular, the expected viral phase share cascade is given
     by:

                                                     2
                                                                                                (1 - e-2 )
                vviral =               2 -1                    e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 ) =
                                                                                          (1 - e-2 )(1 - e-2 )
                              2 =1                 =1


   Because the sharing payoff is relatively small in the initial phase, given that agents are only sharing
with one neighbor, we assume vinitial < K . This ensures that while the article is gaining traction, agents
will either choose to share or simply ignore (kill) the content, but will not invest resources to verify the
article. In other words, agents decide between the two most extreme actions; those that agree with
the article share it and those who do not simply ignore it, and no agents investigate the veracity of the
article. Our assumption is consistent with Bakshy et al. (2015), who show that many users on Facebook
either engage with content substantially or not at all--in the terminology of the current paper, they
either share or kill the article.


                                                                   11
       On the other hand, in the viral phase, sharing is much more lucrative because of the anticipation
of large share cascades, which will be the case when vviral > K . These two inequalities can hold
simultaneously only when there is a substantial gap between vinitial and vviral . Figure 4 depicts a
sample simulation of vinitial and vviral , with the line at K separating the two, as we have assumed.




Figure 4. Blue = vinitial ; Orange = vviral ; Yellow = Minimal K separation; Purple = Maximal K separation.


       Agents additionally derive utility from debunking well-known--in our context viral--articles that
contain misinformation. However, if  < K , even an agent who knows the article to contain
misinformation for a fact would not inspect it. For this reason, we also impose  > K . In summary, we
impose:

Assumption 1. Parameter values satisfy vinitial < K < min{vviral ,  }.

       Assumption 1 guarantees that agents in the initial phase decide between sharing and killing, and
in the viral phase between sharing and inspecting. Thus, the sharing process can end only in the initial
phase if an article is killed by an agent who strongly disagrees with it. This might constitute a type-I
error, because the article may or may not actually contain misinformation. It is also possible that an
agent shares an article with misinformation, which constitutes a type-II error. Because there will be no
killing without inspection in the viral phase, there can only be type-II errors at this stage.


2.5      Information Structure and Solution Concept

We assume that agents are not aware of calendar time, the prior sharing process, or any social network
connections beyond their own.14 However, because agents do know their own social connections (e.g.,
their "friends"), they will have some information about who shared the article with her.
       When receiving an article from another agent j , agent i has access to the share behavior of agent j ,
and thus can observe how many other agents also received the article from agent j . Such information
can be deduced easily on social media sites like Facebook by seeing how many "likes" or "shares" your
friend received on her post. This is depicted pictorially in Figure 5.
  14
    This assumption is consistent with the findings in Breza et al. (2018), who demonstrate that, in practice, agents rarely
know much about social interactions beyond their direct neighborhoods. It is also consistent with the fact that most users
do not seem to have a detailed understanding of how the newsfeed works (see Pew Research Center (2014)).


                                                            12
Figure 5. The dark agent observes only what is in white shading (nothing in the shadows). She sees the
agent who shared it with her, and how many agents she shared it with, but nothing else.


         For our solution concept, we concentrate on (pure-strategy) sequential equilibria of this game.
In particular, the information set I for agent i specifies the phase and the fact that the article is still
alive by the time agent i receives it. For each information set, agents hold a probability distribution
(belief assessment ) over calendar time and past actions of agents determined by Bayes' rule. Let
 = ( initial ,  viral ) be strategy profiles in the initial and viral phases, respectively. We say that strategy
profile  is sequentially rational if and only if at each information set I , the agent who moves at I
chooses the action (kill, inspect, or share) that maximizes her expected utility given belief assessment 
and given that all agents play according to  in the continuation game. Then a sequential equilibrium
is a pair (, ) such that there exists a sequence ( d , d ) where (i) limd ( d , d )  (, ), (ii)  d
                                                                                                 initial
is totally mixed between killing and sharing and  d
                                                  viral is totally mixed between inspecting and sharing,
(iii) d is derived from  d using Bayes' rule, and (iv) (, ) is sequentially rational. We often will discuss
the equilibrium strategy profile  without explicitly providing .


3         Equilibria in General Networks

In this section, we characterize the structure of equilibria for any stochastic network structure P. To
do so, we fix the message m of the article received by the seed agent at t = 1. By the MLRP, f (m| =
R) = f (m| = L) for a unique m, which we set to 0, which is without loss of generality (see footnote 5),
dividing the message space of the article into left-wing and right-wing news. We thus refer to the article
as left-wing when m < 0 and right-wing when m > 0.


3.1         Cutoff Form

                                                                               ~,15 she updates her ex-
When an agent i believes the article is truthful with some ex-ante probability q
post belief,  i , of the article's truthfulness depending on the message m according to Bayes' rule:

                                        (f (m| = R)bi + f (m| = L)(1 - bi ))~ q
             i =
                   (f (m| = R)bi + f (m| = L)(1 - bi ))~
                                                       q + (f (m| = L)bi + f (m| = R)(1 - bi ))(1 - q
                                                                                                    ~)
    15
                     ~  q because agents anticipate that the article may have been inspected in the past.
         In general, q



                                                                 13
Note that  i is increasing in bi when the message is right-wing (m > 0) but decreasing in bi when the
message is left-wing (m < 0). This is intuitive, an agent is more likely to believe an article to be truthful
when its message agrees with her prior. Observe also that if an agent's belief of truthfulness increases,
then sharing becomes more attractive relative to inspecting or killing.
       The following definition leverages this idea:

Definition 1. We say that agent i employs a cutoff strategy if there exist b     
                                                                            i , bi such that:


   1. If m > 0 (right-wing news) and agent i receives the article in the initial phase, she kills if bi < bi
         and shares if bi > bi , whereas if agent i receives the article in the viral phase, she inspects if
         bi < b                      
               i and shares if bi > bi .

   2. If m < 0 (left-wing news) and agent i receives the article in the initial phase, she kills if bi > bi and
         shares if bi < b                                                                                      
                         i , whereas if agent i receives the article in the viral phase, she inspects if bi > bi
         and shares if bi < bi .


       We say that an (equilibrium) action profile is in cutoff strategies if all agents i employ a cutoff
strategy.

Theorem 1. There exists a cutoff-strategy equilibrium and all equilibria are in cutoff strategies.

       Proof: See Appendix A.
       The intuition for Theorem 1 is straightforward. All equilibria are in cutoff strategies because the
(posterior) belief of agent i,  i , that the article is truthful is monotone in her ideology bi , and the
expected utility of sharing is monotone in  i . Thus, a cutoff (in the ideology or prior space) determines
when an agent's best response is to share rather than kill (in the initial phase) or share rather than
inspect (in the viral phase). Existence then follows directly as a consequence of Brouwer's fixed point
theorem.
       Theorem 1 implies that, for any given equilibrium, we know almost surely the equilibrium action
of agent i if we know her prior bi . Note because agent i's prior is drawn randomly from Hi , this induces
a probability distribution over the actions of agent i in equilibrium. In particular, when m > 0 we know
the probability that the agent shares and kills in the initial phase is 1 - Hi (b             
                                                                                 i ) and Hi (bi ), respectively.
Similarly, the agent shares and inspects in the viral phase with probabilities 1 - Hi (b             
                                                                                        i ) and Hi (bi ).
These probabilities are flipped when m < 0.
       Because of the symmetry of the analysis between left-wing and right-wing news, and to avoid any
confusion with alternating back and forth, in what follows we fix, without any loss of generality, m >
0.16
  16
   In particular, the same analysis for m < 0 holds if one considers f    ~(m) = f (-m) (i.e., a reflection of f across the line
m = 0), message m ~ = -m > 0, and "flips" all the priors of the agents, ~
                                                                        bi = 1 - bi .




                                                              14
3.2     All-Share Equilibrium

The most "viral" equilibrium is when all agents share regardless of their prior, i.e., (b                       
                                                                                         1 , b1 , . . . , bN , bN ) =
0 (of course, such an equilibrium may not exist). We call this the all-share equilibrium.
      Our first observation is that given an all-share equilibrium in the viral phase, there is also an all-
share equilibrium for agents in the initial phase:

Lemma 1. If there is an equilibrium with all-share in the viral phase, then there is an all-share
equilibrium (in both phases).

      The proof of this lemma, like all others unless indicated otherwise, is in the (online) Appendix B.
(We provide the proofs of Theorems 1, 2, 3 and 7 in Appendix A.)
      Lemma 1 proves that to establish existence of an all-share equilibrium in both phases, it is sufficient
to check whether an all-share equilibrium can be sustained in just the viral phase. Thus, all-share
equilibrium existence only depends on whether sharing is a best response for viral phase agents, given
that all other viral phase agents are also sharing.
      We now give a sketch of the argument for Lemma 1. First, the cutoffs employed by initial-phase
agents have no bearing on the strategic decisions of viral-phase agents, because conditional on
receiving the article, viral-phase agents know all initial-phase agents must have shared. Thus, if there
is an equilibrium with all-share in the viral phase, then any equilibrium cutoffs supported in the initial
phase are an equilibrium for both phases. Hence, to establish Lemma 1, it is enough to show that the
payoff of playing ai = S in the initial phase is positive (and thus is a better response that ai = K which
gives zero payoff), conditional on all other agents playing S .
      Consider some agent i acting in the initial phase when all other agents are sharing. Recall that
agent i gets the benefit vinitial from share cascades in an all-share equilibrium. We can express
            1
vinitial = vinitial    2
                    + vinitial          1
                               , where vinitial                                  2
                                                is given by equation (1), while vinitial is given by equation
(2) and is equal to the expected share cascade from the viral phase, discounted by   1 , and hence
 2
vinitial = E[  1 vviral ]. Since all-share is an equilibrium of the viral phase, we know the payoff
from sharing exceeds that of inspecting which, in turn, exceeds that of killing (Assumption 1), so
vviral  E[  2 -1 C и 1 =M ]--that is, the share cascade payoff exceeds the expected punishment
from sharing misinformation. In comparison, the expected punishment for an initial phase agent
is E[  1 + 2 -1 C и 1 =M ] = E[  1 (  2 -1 C и 1 =M )], which is the same expected punishment for the
viral-phase agents, but discounted by   1 . Thus, it must be the case that vinitial
                                                                            2       exceeds the expected
                                                1
punishment for the initial phase agents. Since vinitial                  1
                                                        > 0, vinitial = vinitial    2
                                                                                 + vinitial must exceed the
expected punishment, making sharing in the initial phase a best response.
      We remark that Lemma 1 does not extend to uniqueness: a unique all-share equilibrium in the viral
phase does not prove it is unique in the initial phase. This is because of the strategic complementarities
in sharing in the initial phase. When fewer initial-phase agents share, the payoff to sharing in the initial
phase decreases because of lower share cascades. Killing may then be supported in an initial-phase
equilibrium even if in the viral phase all agents are sharing.

                                                         15
Existence. Lemma 1 implies that to establish whether an all-share equilibrium exists, it is sufficient to
                                                                                          N
consider whether an all-share equilibrium exists in the viral phase. Let b = inf { b :    i=1 Hi (b)   > 0}
(i.e., the lowest prior support across all N agents) and L(m) = f (m| = R)/f (m| = L) > 1 denote the
likelihood ratio for message m (which, by assumption, satisfies m > 0). We define three mathematical
objects (one of which was introduced in Section 2.4):

                                                                        -1
                                                q     L(m)b + (1 - b)
                               1- =      1+         и
                                              1 - q b + L(m)(1 - b)
                                               (1 - e-2 )
                               vviral =
                                        (1 - e-2 )(1 - e-2 )
                                            C (1 - e-2 )
                                   C=+
                                             1 - e-2

   We obtain the following existence result:

Theorem 2. An all-share equilibrium exists if and only if:

                                        (1 -  )(C - vviral )  K

   Proof: See Appendix A.
   We provide some context for the three objects used in Theorem 2:

 (i) Worst-case posterior, 1 -  : If agent i knows that all other agents are sharing, then when she
     receives the article, she knows with probability 1 that no one has inspected it yet. Thus, before
     reading the message, the agent assigns likelihood q that the article is truthful. After reading
     message m, she then develops a posterior 1 -  i about the likelihood the article contains
     misinformation. Because 1 -  i is monotonically decreasing in bi when the news is right-wing, we
     know the highest posterior belief the article contains misinformation is the posterior held by the
     most left-wing agent, who has prior b. This is given by the expression 1 -  .

 (ii) Expected share cascade, vviral : This is the discounted total share value of an agent who shares in
     the viral phase and expects all other future agents to share. The share cascade ends only when
     the article transitions into the obsolescent phase as explained in Section 2.4.

(iii) Expected punishment, C : Note that when all agents share, the only punishment that can occur is
     when the article transitions into the obsolescent phase and is inspected by an outside source.
     This is determined by the random clock which ticks at time  2 after ti with probability (1 -
     e-2 )e-2 ( 2 -1) . To compute the expected punishment from inspection by the outside source,
     it is enough to calculate the expected discount factor E[  2 -1 ] applied to the (undiscounted)
     punishment C . We let C denote this expected discounted punishment plus  (because the agent




                                                   16
        simultaneously sacrifices  when sharing an article containing misinformation). Explicitly:

                                          
                                                                                    C (1 - e-2 )
                             C =+C              (1 - e-2 )  2 -1 e-2 ( 2 -1) =  +
                                                                                     1 - e-2
                                         2 =1


       Therefore, C - vviral is the "net punishment" from a share action, which is realized only if the article
contains misinformation, and must be compared against the cost of inspection K . To see that the
inequality in Theorem 2 is a necessary condition, suppose that (1 -  )(C - vviral ) > K . Then the agent
with prior b prefers to inspect than share when all other agents are sharing; this is a contradiction
that all-share is an equilibrium. To see that is sufficient, observe that for every agent i we have that
(1 -  i )(C - vviral )  (1 -  )(C - vviral )  K by the definition of  . That is, if the agent with the lowest
belief b finds it profitable to share, then all agents (with any prior bi ) find it profitable to share. So
all-share is in fact an equilibrium. Finally, we note:

Corollary 1. The existence of an all-share equilibrium does not depend on the stochastic network
structure P.

       As should be clear from Theorem 2, none of the necessary and sufficient conditions for existence
of an all-share equilibrium depend on the underlying network structure. In an all-share equilibrium,
share cascades do not depend on the identities (or ideologies) of the agents that receive the article
before or after, and inspection is conducted only by an outside source determined by a random clock.
Thus, in this most viral equilibrium, the shape of the sharing network plays little role in the spread of
misinformation; we will contrast this with results presented in Sections 4 and 5.

Uniqueness. We next present our uniqueness result for all-share equilibria:

Theorem 3. The all-share equilibrium is unique if both of the following conditions hold:

                                                 (1 -  )C   (1 - e-1 )vviral
                                        (1 -  )(C +  )  K

       Proof: See Appendix A.
       To prove the all-share profile is the unique equilibrium profile, we establish lower bound payoffs
for sharing (independent of the strategies of other agents) and argue that these must dominate the
payoffs from inspecting or killing. This proves that sharing is a dominant strategy for all agents, and
thus all-share must be the unique equilibrium.17
       In the initial phase, the worst sharing payoff attainable for some agent i would occur if all initial-
phase agents after her kill and all viral-phase agents after her inspect (the strategies of the agents
preceding her do not affect her payoff). The initial-phase agent gets shares only when the first clock
  17
   Note these conditions are only sufficient (not necessary) for uniqueness and that unlike with existence conditions in
Theorem 2, tight uniqueness conditions may depend on the network structure.


                                                           17
immediately ticks and transitions into the viral phase in the following period, which occurs with
probability 1 - e-1 . It then goes into the hands of a viral-phase agent who inspects it: with probability
 i it is truthful, and then gets shared until it becomes obsolete (which has expected share cascade
utility vviral ), and with probability 1 -  i , it is revealed as containing misinformation, and agent i
gets no share cascade (and is instead punished). Therefore, the worst-case payoff from sharing is
 i (1 - e-1 )vviral   (1 - e-1 )vviral less the expected punishment. The punishment occurs if either:
(i) the Poisson clock does not tick, another initial-phase agent receives it, she kills it, and then it is
revealed by the outside source to be misinformation, or (ii) the Poisson clock does tick, a viral-phase
agent receives it, she inspects, and it is revealed to contain misinformation then. Both yield the same
undiscounted punishment C . Thus, the expected worst-case punishment is (1 -  i )C  (1 -  )C .
Since the payoff from killing is 0, every initial-phase agent in the population finds the worst-case share
payoff to be positive if and only if the first condition in Theorem 3 holds.
      In the viral phase, the worst sharing payoff attainable for some agent i is if all viral-phase agents
who acted before her chose to share but all viral-phase agents acting after her chose to inspect.
This leads to the minimal posterior belief the article is truthful (no information is gained from
receiving the article) and the maximal potential for punishment. If the article is truthful, the agent
receives vviral regardless of whether she inspects; thus, all that needs to be compared are the expected
punishment and the inspection cost. If the article contains misinformation, the agent forgoes  (the
exposing utility) and also faces punishment C by not inspecting. For all agents in the population, the
punishment of sharing without inspection is upper bounded by (1 -  )(C +  ). Agent i can avoid
this possibility by inspecting, which costs K . However, if the inspection cost exceeds the worst-case
punishment, agent i would necessarily prefer to "risk it" and simply share without inspection. This is
the second condition in Theorem 3.


3.3     Comparative Statics

Next, we conduct comparative statics on the existence of an all-share equilibrium in general networks.
Throughout we will say, with a slight abuse of terminology, that an all-share equilibrium becomes more
likely following a shift in (some) parameters if an all-share equilibrium is never "destroyed" by making
this shift.

Basic comparative statics. We begin with some simple comparative statics on the primitives of our
model:

Proposition 1. All-share equilibria become more likely when  and  increase and when C and 2
decrease. Moreover, there exists   such that if  >   , then all-share equilibria become more likely
when  increases, whereas if  <   , all-share equilibria become more likely when  decreases.

      We provide some intuition for this result, along with how it connects to the past empirical literature
on social media:


                                                     18
 (i) Social utility of share cascades : All-share equilibria persist when  (the marginal utility of each
     share) increases. As  increases, the appeal of sharing a story, even if it is likely to contain
     misinformation, becomes too large to bother with inspection. Duffy et al. (2020) document this
     effect: online users often share a story that is "too good not to share" even when realizing it is "too
     good to be true."

     One can interpret  as the value an agent assigns to the actions of other agents much further
     downstream (i.e., how much "friends of friends" matter).           This includes both the value of
     additional shares and the expected punishment from sharing misinformation. When this loss
     C decreases the all-share equilibrium is more easily supported. However, note that shares
     grow at an exponential rate whereas the punishment C remains a constant. When these shares
     grow rapidly, the social utility from higher-order shares outweighs any potential loss from being
     exposed by higher-order friends. In this case, caring significantly about downstream effects tends
     to promote recklessness over caution.

     In contrast to previous social media sites, such as MySpace and Friendster, modern social media,
     like Facebook and Twitter, are primarily designed to spread information and content among
     users (Cuthbertson et al. (2015), Edosomwan et al. (2011)). While the former focused on virtual
     hangouts (MySpace's slogan was "a place for friends"), according to McWilliams (2009) the latter
     were built to diffuse content quickly and profusely throughout one's social circle (Facebook's
     promise is "to help you connect and share with the people in your life"). The effusive propagation
     of content to friends and friends of friends, etc. amplifies the social utility from sharing content
     and promotes less fact-checking and more engagement. The value of "deep" share cascades is
     determined by the parameter  .

 (ii) Depth and size of share cascades : All-share equilibria persist when  (the rate at which the
     article spreads) increases and 2 (the speed of the clock transitioning to the obsolescent phase)
     decreases. One can interpret  as a proxy for the size of the share cascade and - 1
                                                                                    2 as a proxy
     for its depth. Figure 6, provided by Vosoughi et al. (2018), shows evidence that the spread of
     misinformation is more powerful and deeper than truthful articles, indicating that the accuracy of
     the information is less relevant for the existence of all-share equilibria when  and - 1
                                                                                          2 are larger.



Message space. We obtain the following comparative statics with respect to m (where, recall, we fix
m > 0):

Proposition 2. If b > 1/2, then a more extreme message (m > m) makes all-share equilibria more likely.
Conversely, if b < 1/2, then a more extreme message (m > m) makes all-share equilibria less likely.

   In environments where b > 1/2, the entire population holds right-wing beliefs, so (mis)information
spreads more easily when the message advocates more strongly for ideas that agree more with the
entire population. Guess et al. (2018) find evidence of this: users with strong ideological preferences in

                                                    19
                 Figure 6. Depth and Size of Share Cascades from Vosoughi et al. (2018).


the 2016 presidential election consumed extreme politically-congruent content more than any other
viewpoint (including moderate, but still politically-congruent, material). In environments where b <
1/2, at least some of the agents hold left-wing priors, and these agents tend to believe stronger right-
wing messages are less likely to be accurate (as they disagree more ). Thus, in a population with at least
some diversity of beliefs, moderate messages tend to support all-share more often. This result comes
as a direct consequence of comparative statics on the worst-case posterior, 1 -  .
   Next, we consider what it means for the distribution f of truthful messages to become more
informative :

Definition 2. We say that f~ is more informative than f if (i) f
                                                               ~(m| = R)/f (m| = R) is monotonically
                         ~(m| = L)/f (m| = L) is monotonically decreasing in m.
increasing in m and (ii) f

    A more informative message distribution f ~ more clearly differentiates between the R and L states
                                                    ~(m| = R)/f
for a given message m, because the likelihood ratio f            ~(m| = L) increases more quickly for
m > 0 than for f (m| = R)/f (m| = L). We observe the following comparative static with respect to
informativeness:

Proposition 3. If b > 1/2, all-share equilibria are more likely if f~ is more informative than f . Conversely,
                                                       ~ is less informative than f .
if b < 1/2, all-share equilibria become more likely if f

   Just as with Proposition 2, the comparative statics depend on the distribution of prior beliefs
within the population. As the informativeness of f increases, right-wing agents are encouraged
to spread right-wing articles and left-wing agents become more skeptical of them.                 When the
informativeness decreases, right-wing agents are less confident in the message but the left-wing agents
are simultaneously less skeptical that it may contain misinformation.
   One can interpret the informativeness of the message as how "correlated" or "orthogonal" the
message is to state  (in our case, the political content of the message). For instance, articles which
are apolitical in nature, such as "Los Angeles Dodgers Sign 12-year, $365-million Contract Extension
with Mookie Betts," have little informativeness relative to more political ones, such as "Obama Signs

                                                     20
Executive Order Banning The Pledge of Allegiance in Schools Nationwide" (Fourney et al. (2017)).
Similar intuition as Proposition 2 shows that informativeness/political relevance fuels blind sharing
with a right-wing demographic, but admits healthy skepticism with a more diverse set of prior beliefs.

Distribution of Priors. Finally, we consider the effects of perturbing the distribution of priors, H , held
by the population:

Proposition 4. When b increases, all-share equilibria become more likely.

    The intuition for Proposition 4 is clear: as the lowest prior in the population increases, the worst-
case posterior that the article contains misinformation, 1 -  , decreases, so right-wing misinformation
spreads more easily. This result has consequences for more traditional shifts in the distribution of
priors seen in the literature:

Definition 3. We say H2 is more right-leaning if H2 first-order stochastically dominates H1 . We say H2
                                                                                  -1       -1
is more polarized than H1 if it satisfies the monotone-single crossing property: H2  () - H1  () is a
nondecreasing function in  which crosses (zero) at  = 1/2 with H1 (1/2) = H2 (1/2) = 1/2.

    Definition 3 encompasses two notions of distributional shifts in priors: one which moves the entire
belief distribution toward one state, and another which "stretches" the belief distribution around the
moderate candidate (i.e., b = 1/2) while preserving an equal distribution of left-wing and right-wing
agents (i.e., H (1/2) = H (1/2) = 1/2).
    When H2 is more right-leaning or less polarized, then b increases: in the former case, the entire
distribution shifts to the right (including the lower support), whereas in the latter, the most extreme
left-wing agents become less extreme, which increases the lower support closer to 1/2 as well. Both
have the effect of making agents more sympathetic toward right-wing news, even if it contains
misinformation.
    Increasing b can be associated with the rise of unified-demographic social media sites.            For
instance, Parler, a social media site intended for "right-wing politicians and influencers," arose out
of the 2020 presidential election as a social media site for sharing right-wing ideas and has already
exceeded 10 million users. Independent third-party fact-checkers have identified the site as a forum
for sharing rampant misinformation that goes unchecked: "Along with its success comes the reality
that extremist movements like QAnon and the Boogalooers have thrived in the platform's unregulated
chaos" (according to PBS (2020)).


4    Island Networks and the Implications of Homophily

We now specialize the network P in order to focus on one of our main results--the effects of homophily
on misinformation. Specifically, we adopt a lower dimensional model of connections, known as island
networks (or the stochastic block model), where homophily can be parameterized simply.


                                                    21
      In island networks, agents are partitioned into k blocks of size N1 , N2 , . . . , Nk , called islands each
with some constant (but not necessarily equal) share of the population N . Each agent i has a type
 i    {1, . . . , k } corresponding to which block (or "island") she is in. Link probabilities are given by the
standard stochastic-block model:                             
                                                             ps , if   i   =   j
                                                       pij =
                                                             p , if        =
                                                              d        i       j

where ps  pd . We refer to this as the homophily structure. As a special case, we have ps = pd , which
reduces to just a single-island model. On the other end of the spectrum is the segregated islands model,
whereby ps > 0 but pd = 0, which corresponds to the network with maximal homophily, where agents
interact only with others from their own "community"/island.
      We make the following assumption about how priors are distributed on each of the islands:

Assumption 2. The prior distribution for agents on the same island is the same, H , and the
distributions across the islands can be ordered by a first-order stochastic dominance relation:
H1      F OSD   H2      F OSD     иии   F OSD   Hk .

      Assumption 2 suggests a form of homophily where agents of similar ideological beliefs tend to
interact with each other on social media more often than those with opposing beliefs. This is consistent
with Bakshy et al. (2015), who show that "friend networks" on Facebook are ideologically segregated,
with the median share of friends from the opposing ideology around only 20%. Other evidence from
a Twitter field experiment shows that the same ideological homophily may exist on other social media
sites. In particular, the connections formed between users on Twitter (in the form of "following") were
strongly influenced by whether the users shared a common partisanship (Mosleh et al. (2021)).
      By Theorem 1, the equilibrium set consists of cutoff-strategy equilibria of the form
(b                       
  1 , b1 , . . . , bN , bN ).   In fact, because of the symmetry of the island model, we obtain:

Lemma 2. In the multiple island model, as min {N }  , all equilibria are in symmetric island-
dependent cutoff strategies. In other words, in every equilibrium, there exists {(b , b )}k=1 such that
b                  
 i = b i and bi = b i for all agents i.

      This lemma shows that as the population becomes large, equilibrium cutoffs are no longer agent-
dependent, but only island-dependent. This is true in every equilibrium, not just some equilibrium.
Intuitively, an agent's cutoff strategy depends on the anticipated actions of others acting before
and after her, given her network position. Thus, if agent i and agent j 's strategies differ, each
anticipates different actions before or after her, which may in turn reinforce those different strategies
in equilibrium. But, when the population is large, the network positions of any two agents on the same
island are identical and the influence that one's strategy has on the "average" strategy of the rest of the
population is minimal, and hence their best responses must be identical.




                                                                 22
4.1      Single-Island Model

First, we start with the uniform connection (or single-island) model, where any two agents in the
population have the same probability of being linked as any other pair of agents. In particular, we
assume that pij = p  (0, 1) for all agents i, j . Similarly, we assume the distribution of priors is the
same for all agents, i.e., Hi = H for some distribution H . This is pictured in Figure 7.18




Figure 7. Sample network from uniform-connection model: agents are equally-likely to receive and
share content from others of any ideology (blue = left; red = right).

       A special case of Lemma 2 shows that in a single-island model, all agents employ the same cutoffs
in every equilibrium. Thus, the equilibrium set can be characterized entirely by the set of (b , b )
supported in equilibrium.

Equilibrium Structure. In our model, sharing decisions of different agents are neither strategic
substitutes nor strategic complements. When others share more, an agent might worry that nobody
else has inspected an article and may be tempted to inspect more and thus share less (creating
an instance of strategic substitutes), or expecting others in the future not to inspect, she may be
encouraged to share as well (an instance of strategic complements). We next prove that despite these
mixed incentives, the equilibrium in the single-island case has a lattice structure.

Theorem 4. The equilibrium set of cutoffs (b , b ) form a lattice structure according to the natural order.

       Theorem 4 therefore establishes that there is always a minimum and maximum sharing
equilibrium (we refer to these as the extremal equilibria ).                 In particular, the maximum-sharing
equilibrium has fewer agents killing, fewer agents inspecting, and more agents sharing (in both
phases), than in any other equilibrium.
       The intuition for the lattice structure in Theorem 4 is as follows. First, notice that the cutoff in the
initial phase b does not affect the strategic decisions of agents acting in the viral phase. When agents
change their cutoffs in the initial phase, they affect only the probability that the article will reach the
viral phase, but not the posterior probability the article is truthful upon reaching the viral phase (by
definition, no agents have inspected up until this point). Because an agent receiving the article in the
viral phase knows the article did indeed reach the viral phase, the initial phase cutoff is immaterial.
  18
     Observe that an equivalent formulation of the single-island model is to have k islands with prior distributions
H1 , H2 , . . . , Hk , but where ps = pd (i.e., links between islands are the same as across islands). In this case, as N  
and connections between agents occur uniformly at random, one can replace this model with a single-island, where
H = k=1 N        N
                   H .


                                                            23
This implies that independent of b , there exists a set of possible b that form an equilibrium in the
viral phase.
      Second, for a fixed b , initial-phase agents always play a game of strategic complementarity with
each other (unlike viral-phase agents, where both strategic forces exist). Moreover, notice that b ,
the cutoff for killing, is always increasing in b . This is because, as more viral-phase agents inspect,
misinformation becomes more likely to be detected, discouraging share cascades and increasing the
threat of punishment. This economic force ensures that the set of equilibrium cutoffs is a lattice, as
pictured in Figure 8.




      Figure 8. Example of lattice structure of (b , b ) equilibrium cutoffs in the single-island model.



4.2     Multi-Island Model

In contrast to the single-island case, the set of equilibria is in general not a lattice in the multi-island
model and a "maximal sharing equilibrium" may not exist. This motivates our definition of virality,
which we now provide:

Definition 4. Consider the seeding of some agent i with the article at t = 1. Let T1 (i ), T2 (i ) be the
(random) times at which the article's lifetime ends under equilibria  1 ,  2 , respectively, conditional on
agent i being seeded. Call ST (i ) the total amount of sharing that occurs before stopping time T (i ).

 (i) We say that  1 exhibits more content engagement than  2 if maxi E[ST1 (i ) ]  maxi E[ST2 (i ) ]
       unconditional on the article's veracity.

 (ii) We say that  1 exhibits more viral misinformation than  2 if maxi E[ST1 (i ) ]  maxi E[ST2 (i ) ]
       conditional on the article containing misinformation.

      Virality and engagement measure how deep an article can spread when the initial seed is chosen
in a way that is most conducive to the article's spread. The difference between the two notions
is based on whether the article contains misinformation. Platforms like Facebook may care about
content engagement, while policymakers care about viral misinformation.               In the single-island
model, because there is a well-defined maximal sharing equilibrium, the equilibrium with the most
content engagement and the most viral misinformation coincide. But this is not necessarily the

                                                     24
case with multiple islands. In the rest of this section, we focus on the equilibrium with most viral
misinformation, or for short, on the most viral equilibrium.
      We next define the other key notion of this section, homophily:

Definition 5. We say (ps , pd ) has more homophily than (ps , pd ) if ps  ps and pd  pd (with at least one
strict).

      In other words, an increase in homophily corresponds to either a decrease in the across-island link
probability or an increase in the within-island link probability, or both. The net effect is an overall
increase in the likelihood that an agent receives the article from someone on her own island, as well
as an increase in the likelihood that an agent will pass the article to other agents on her own island.
Equivalently, every agent is more likely to interact with agents of congruent ideological beliefs, both
before and after receiving the article. We refer to these as echo chambers, because content is passed
between agents who agree and echo each others' decisions, which worsen as the homophily in the
network increases.
      As mentioned in works like Bakshy et al. (2015), echo chambers occur as a natural phenomenon
when connected social media users tend to have congruent ideological beliefs. Our focus is on
how these echo chambers affect the spread of content and misinformation, and for the purposes of
Section 4, we take the social network P (determined by (k, ps , pd )) as given. In Section 5, we consider
how the designer of the platform can shape these parameters to maximize their personal objectives.


4.3     Comparative Statics: Homophily

We investigate how changes in the homophily parameters affect the virality of misinformation in the
most viral equilibrium. The effects of local changes in homophily will depend on whether strategic
substitutes or strategic complements forces dominate.           Recall that when strategies are strategic
substitutes, agents want to choose opposing actions from each other; in other words, more sharing in
the population creates incentives to share less. On the other hand, strategies are strategic complements
when agents tend to choose similar actions, or put differently, when more sharing entices others to
share more.
      We first observe that, for a fixed strategy of the agents in the viral phase, sharing decisions in the
initial phase are strategic complements. This is because sharing by other initial-phase agents increases
the likelihood of share cascades and reduces the imminence of punishment from inspection by outside
sources.
      Strategic interactions in the viral phase are more subtle, however. Agents play a game of strategic
complements with future agents but a game of strategic substitutes with past agents. When more
agents inspect, the fear of future punishment from sharing is greater; this makes sharing less attractive
because of future inspections, i.e., strategic complements. On the other hand, more inspections
indicate to agents that an article in circulation is more likely to be accurate because past agents are
likely to have inspected it already, and found the article to be truthful (i.e., the hard work of inspecting

                                                     25
has already been done). This makes sharing less attractive when most other agents are sharing (and
not inspecting), i.e., strategic substitutes. In general, this makes it ambiguous whether strategic
complements or substitutes will "win out" for viral phase agents.
       We next define what it means for complements to dominate ("net" complements) or substitutes to
dominate ("net" substitutes). Let I denote the fraction of agents inspecting connected to an agent on
island in the viral phase:
                                                   ps i N + pd       =    i N
                                             I 
                                                     ps N + pd        =   N

Similarly, let  (b) be the difference in the inspecting and sharing payoff for an agent with prior b in
                                                                                             
the viral phase. There are net strategic complements at prior b for island if                I    (b) > 0 whereas there
                                    
are net strategic substitutes if    I   (b) < 0.
       Note a sufficient condition for the complements effect to dominate is that 2 or  is sufficiently
large (i.e., the article spreads quickly in the viral phase or the clock for transition to obsolescence is
fast, or both). Because we think of the viral phase as relatively short-lived (fast clock, so 2 is large), but
with deep and extensive share cascades (large  ), much of our attention in the rest of the paper will be
when net strategic complements exist for viral-phase agents.19
       With this in mind, we obtain the following result about how homophily affects viral
misinformation:

Theorem 5. Suppose there exists some island that is all-share (i.e., b = b = 0) and has net strategic
                                       » <  such that
complements. Then, there exist 1 < p < p

(a) If ps /pd < p and we have two equal-sized islands, a (marginal) increase in homophily decreases the
       virality of misinformation;

(b) If ps /pd > p
                », an increase in homophily increases the virality of misinformation.

       Theorem 5 establishes that an increase in homophily has a non-monotonic effect on the spread
of misinformation: with little initial homophily, more homophily is beneficial.20 In contrast, when
we start with a significant degree of homophily, increasing it further leads to more viral spread of
misinformation. We next provide the intuition for these results.
       In both cases, an increase in homophily means that agents are more likely to receive the article
from their own island, but also more likely to pass it to their own island. The former effect pushes in
the direction of strategic substitutes, while the latter is a source of strategic complements. In part (a),
we start in a situation in which all islands are highly connected to each other and, by hypothesis, one
of the islands has an all-share equilibrium and strategic complement effects dominate. Now consider
an increase in homophily and suppose that the article in question has a right-wing message and the
  19
     Additionally, in the simulations reported in Appendix B.9, we find the case of strategic complements to be much more
common than strategic substitutes.
  20
     This result is stated for two equally-sized islands for technical reasons, because behavior in islands with intermediate
ideology turns out to be more complex.


                                                             26
right-wing island is at all-share. All agents now expect that the article will be shared within their island,
and this motivates greater sharing in the right-wing island. In the left-wing island, on the other hand,
expecting that the article will be shared more with other left-wingers, there will be more inspection.
Such inspection disciplines behavior both on the left-wing island and also on the right-wing island,
which in this case is well-connected with the left-wing island.
      In contrast, in part (b), we start with sufficiently high homophily, so a further increase in homophily
makes it more likely that agents find themselves in an echo chamber. This implies that it is now less
likely that an article shared within a right-wing island will reach one of the left-wing islands and be
inspected there. This removes the disciplining effect that comes from left-wing islands and encourages
further sharing and exacerbates the virality of misinformation.
      Another implication of Theorem 5(b) is worth noting: when there are islands with sufficiently left-
wing and right-wing ideologies, then a very extreme message--a message m with a sufficiently high
or a sufficiently low likelihood ratio L(m)--will necessarily lead to all-sharing in the most extreme
communities. Thus, it will be the most extreme messages that become most viral.
      The results in Theorem 5 are closely linked to the empirical literature on the spread of
(mis)information in the presence of echo chambers. Tе
                                                    ornberg (2018) and Vicario et al. (2016), among
others, demonstrate that homophily in sharing behavior propagates ideologically-congruent ideas,
with little incentive to question the source or veracity of this information. Quattrociocchi et al. (2016)
present evidence of these echo chambers on Facebook: conspiracy theories and poor science spread
rapidly within polarized groups because of confirmation bias and "favored narratives." Levy (2020)
shows that social media sites, like Facebook, have recently exploited echo chambers in their algorithms
to create "filter bubbles." In particular, Facebook's algorithms tend to artificially create echo chambers
in order to maximize engagement with content, at the cost of possibly spreading misinformation.
We investigate this result relative to Theorem 5(a) in more detail in Section 5 when we discuss the
incentives of a social media platform in shaping recommendation algorithms.


4.4     Comparative Statics: Extremism and Polarization

We now present related comparative statics with respect to the message m and the distribution of
priors H in the population with uniform connections. Our main focus is on how extremism and
polarization affect the equilibrium cutoffs of the most viral equilibrium as a function of the homophily
structure.
      Extremism in the message space is a measure of how strongly a message advocates for one state
or the other; increasing m when m > 0 or decreasing m when m < 0 increases the extremism of the
message. Similarly, an increase in polarization, as defined in Definition 3, spreads ideologies on both
the left and right sides of the moderate belief b = 1/2 toward the more extreme ends of the spectrum,
b = 0 (extreme left) and b = 1 (extreme right).
      For simplicity, for the next result, we focus on the case of just two islands, a left-wing and



                                                      27
                                       Figure 9. Two-Island Model.


a right-wing one with prior distributions HL and HR , respectively, as pictured in Figure 9. Our
main comparative result with respect to extremism and polarization follows a similar contrast as in
Theorem 5:

Theorem 6. Let HR and HL have disjoint support, i.e., HR has support on [bR , »bR ] and HL has support on
[b , »
 L   bL ], with »
                bL < 1/2 < b . Moreover, suppose there are net strategic complements and the right-wing
                            R
island is at all-share at the most viral equilibrium. Then:

(a) In the single-island model (no homophily), an increase [decrease] in the extremism of the message m
     or in the polarization of H (weakly) decreases [increases] the virality of misinformation;

(b) In the segregated-island model (extreme homophily), an increase [decrease] in the extremism of the
     message m or in the polarization of H (weakly) increases [decreases] the virality of misinformation.

     Theorem 6 shows that the environments where homophily ignites the spread of misinformation
through echo chambers are exactly the environments where the forces of extremism and polarization
are most dangerous. Similar forces as Theorem 5 drive these comparative statics. An increase in
extremism and polarization lead to more discipline from the left-wing community (who disagree
with the right-wing ideas even more strongly) but less scrutiny from the right-wing community.
When homophily is low (Theorem 6(a)), additional discipline in one community helps control
misinformation. However, once homophily is high (Theorem 6(b)), echo chambers become stronger
because agents echo even more similar beliefs and actions, leading to more virality on islands where
the content begins and remains for a long time.
     Theorem 6(a) connects closely to the second major finding of Levy (2020), which finds that
engagement with counter-attitudinal news can reduce strong attitudes about politically-congruent,
extremist content. We offer a related, but slightly different insight. In social networks with little
homophily, where news cuts across ideological lines, agents are exposed more to counter-attitudinal
news. Simultaneously, because agents must then share this content with others of opposing ideology,
strong feelings about propagating extremist (politically-congruent) content are diminished, because
the likelihood of future inspection is higher. Therefore, similar to Theorem 5, messages with more
extremist content or higher polarization simultaneously generate forces towards greater sharing and
greater disciplining because of inspections of agents with different ideologies. However, when there

                                                    28
is sufficiently high homophily, the latter force becomes moot and more extremist messages or greater
polarization exacerbate the virality of misinformation.


5    Platform Design and Filter Bubbles

We now turn to another one of our main results: how platform behavior affects misinformation. We
assume that the social media platform is interested in maximizing the engagement of users with
an article. However, the platform does directly value the welfare of the agents: engagement with
misinformation is equally valuable to the platform as engagement with truthful content.
    Let there be k communities with disjoint prior distributions b1 < »
                                                                      b1 < b2 < и и и < bk < »
                                                                                             bk .21 We
also assume that the communities are ideologically symmetric in the sense that b = 1 - »   bk- +1 and
»
b = 1 - bk-          holds for all . There is also at least one fully left-wing community (i.e., »
                                                                                                 b1 < 1/2) and
                +1
one fully right-wing community (i.e., bk > 1/2). For simplicity, we suppose the platform has an initial
(political) opinion of bplatf orm . This is all common knowledge.
    We introduce a time period t = 0, before the article is introduced into the population. The platform
receives a collection of n articles, drawn i.i.d. from the distribution detailed in Section 2. After viewing
all n articles, the platform picks an article z  {1, . . . , n} and chooses whether to inspect it for truth at
cost KP > 0. If after an inspection the platform finds an article to be truthful, it "tags" it as verified, for
example, including endorsement from a trusted third-party independent fact-checker. If it discovers
it to contain misinformation, it kills this news article and selects another one.22 We denote by z  as the
article selected by the platform (whether "tagged" as verified or not).
    In addition to picking an article to recommend to users of the platform, the platform chooses
how content is shared across users. That is, the platform not only picks the seed agent at t = 1 to
whom it recommends the article z  , it also chooses the sharing network by selecting the matrix of link
probabilities P. The platform's choice of P can be interpreted as its "algorithm" to determine how users
are exposed to content from others in their social circle. This algorithm optimizes over which content
is shared between users (of certain communities) and which content is not.23
    The platform chooses its strategy at t = 0 to maximize engagement minus inspection costs. This
is motivated by the fact that social media sites, like Facebook, primarily rely on advertising revenue,
which becomes more valuable as users increase their activity on the site. For example, 85% of
  21
     As in Section 4, we assume these communities are large, so that there are enough users with any distinct ideology that the
platform need not worry about exhausting that entire community while the content is still going viral. For example, in the
case of two communities, it will (almost) never occur that all right-wing agents will have seen a piece of right-wing content,
incentivizing the platform to then push the content to left-wing agents.
  22
     This behavior is incentive compatible for the platform, since tagging a truthful article increases its engagement, while
maintaining an article with misinformation is inconsistent with paying the cost of inspection in the first place.
  23
     For example, the platform starts with a sufficiently connected social network, but can then "hide" or "show" content
across other users' shares as it sees fit.
  The platform can also easily introduce homophily into the sharing behavior by increasing the probability that an agent
shares only amongst her own community, thereby increasing the likelihood that agents only see news that is ideologically
congruent. In other words, the platform's algorithm can identify which agents belong to which (ideological) communities,
and then can decide how different news articles "cross-over" to different communities during the sharing process.



                                                              29
Facebook's total revenue in 2011 was from advertising, and from 2017-2019, around 98% was.24 For
simplicity (though also realistically), we will assume the inspection cost KP is small relative to the
profits from engagement.


5.1      Extreme Articles and Filter Bubbles

Recall that L(m) is the likelihood ratio of the article's message: L(m) = f (m| = R)/f (m| = L). With
respect to the articles' messages, we define:

Definition 6. We say message m is more extreme than message m if max{1/L(m), L(m)} 
max{1/L(m ), L(m )}.

       The extremity of the message does not depend on whether it is left-wing or right-wing, just how
extreme it is. For instance, the most moderate message is at 0 with L(0) = 1/L(0) = 1, and increasing
the message when m > 0 increases L(m) > 1, whereas decreasing the message when m < 0 increases
1/L(m) > 1. We obtain a simple characterization for the platform's design as a function of the extremity
of the message:

Theorem 7. There exists  such that:

(a) If maxm max{1/L(m), L(m)} <  , there exists a sequence {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn } such that the platform
       chooses articles in this sequential order until one can be verified, "tags" it as truthful, and then adopts
       a uniform-connection model;

(b) If maxm max{1/L(m), L(m)} >  , the platform chooses the most extreme article, does not inspect it,
       and adopts the segregated islands connection model, i.e., P has maximal homophily.

       Proof: See Appendix A.
       Theorem 7 is one of our main results.            Part (a) shows that when all articles have relatively
moderate content, then the platform behaves responsibly--inspecting the articles for the veracity
of their content--and also refrains from introducing algorithmic homophily. In contrast, part (b)
demonstrates that when there are articles with sufficiently extremist content, then the platform selects
exactly these articles and creates an extreme filter bubble--by designing its algorithms to achieve a
sharing network with the greatest homophily. The result is a form of double whammy: it is precisely
when articles have extremist content that the platform creates (endogenous) echo chambers, or filter
bubbles, and they spread virally within these like-minded communities. Put differently, when there
are extremist messages, neither the platform nor the users themselves inspect, and these news items
with extremist content spread virally.25
  24
    See Andrews (2012) and https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/what-facebooks-revenue-breakdown-2019-03-28-0
  25
    When the platform can share multiple articles, which may have different degrees of extremism, it can create different
sharing networks, with greater homophily for those with more extremist messages. Facebook's algorithms induce different
sharing networks depending on features of the message, such as whether it contains videos or political content. See https:
//about.fb.com/news/2021/01/how-does-news-feed-predict-what-you-want-to-see/.


                                                           30
      It is also worth noting that this theorem builds on but, in many ways, significantly strengthens
Theorem 5. In Theorem 5, echo chambers are not always bad for misinformation. In contrast, in part
(b) of Theorem 7, homophily is always bad for viral misinformation, precisely because the platform
creates homophily when there are news items with extremist content. Also in contradistinction to
Theorem 5, the results in Theorem 7 do not require that strategic complements dominate locally.
      In addition, Theorem 7 shows that when a platform can shape the network topology through its
recommendation algorithm, the echo chamber effect that arises from Theorem 5(b) is exactly what
fuels misinformation (whereas in Theorem 5(a), echo chambers were harmless). This corroborates and
extends much of the previous literature mentioned earlier on the interaction between recommender
systems, echo chambers, and misinformation.

Remark Г In Theorem 7, we assume the platform can select any network P it desires through its
recommendation algorithm. This is without loss of generality. If we assume the social network
originally begins as an arbitrary island network in Section 4, and the platform can hide and emphasize
content across different links, the same result is established.


5.2     Comparative Statics on 

The threshold  in Theorem 7 captures the conditions under which the platform is incentivized
to spread misinformation and induce homophily in its sharing algorithm.               When  is smaller,
these incentives are stronger. Next, we perform some comparative statics on  to understand the
circumstances that lend itself most to the platform's adoption of a filter bubble:

Proposition 5. If there is (a) an increase in polarization; (b) the addition of another community; or (c)
an increase in K , then  is non-increasing.

      The three parts of Proposition 5, taken together, show which conditions encourage the platform
to adopt "filter bubble" algorithms. Part (a) mimics the conclusion of Theorem 6(b): as polarization
increases, articles with even slight ideological bias are consumed by extremist communities with
intentionally-constructed echo chambers. Filter bubbles are most advantageous to the platform in
these settings. Communities with extreme beliefs (following polarization) feel more strongly about
news in general, rarely second-guess politically-congruent news, but often doubt counter-attitudinal
news. Increases in political polarization from social media consumption and the lack of much counter-
attitudinal news allows the platform to more easily induce effective echo chambers (see Levy (2020)).
      Part (b) shows that when new, ideologically-distinct communities form, the platform has an
opportunity to target a whole new group of users with politically-congenial material. In part (c), when
users have higher inspection costs, they are less likely to investigate content seen on the platform.
Similar to the situation in the presence of extremist messages in Theorem 7, when users are less likely
to inspect, the algorithm itself becomes less likely to inspect and more likely to create filter bubbles. In
fact, part (c) shows the platform has disincentives to make content easy to verify (e.g., will not provide


                                                    31
context or direct links to news stories), because inspection limits the extent to which filter bubbles can
be effective.

Remark Г In practice, certain demographic groups, such as users over 65 years old, appear more
likely to accept and spread misinformation, perhaps because of poor media interpretation skills (see
Grinberg et al. (2019) and Guess et al. (2019)). This can be introduced in our model as heterogenous
inspection costs, Ki , across agents. Our results from Theorem 7 and Proposition 5 extend to this
setting: the platform would now have incentives to create filter bubbles amongst communities that
both have high Ki and strongly agree with the content. Moreover, in this case, more diversity of
Ki would increase the virality of misinformation by providing the platform an opportunity to locate
demographic groups that are least likely to fact-check.

         Proposition 5 also provides a possible (albeit of course speculative) interpretation for why
accelerating political polarization (part (a)) and identity politics (part (b)) in the last 10 years may have
come with more aggressive filter bubble algorithms from social media sites (Apprich et al. (2018)). To
take the most prominent example in this domain, it is generally agreed that Facebook's algorithms
are designed to maximize commercial success, since Facebook's primary method of monetization is
through ad revenue.26 Thus, this platform's "commercial success" is closely linked to user engagement.
As the recent documentary The Social Dilemma puts it: "The way to think about it is as 2.5 billion
Truman Shows. Each person has their own reality with their own facts. Over time you have the
false sense that everyone agrees with you because everyone in your news feed sounds just like you."
Tellingly in this context, while Facebook cracked down on misinformation prior to the 2020 election
in part due to political pressure, Facebook's algorithms have resumed promotion of misinformation in
November and December of 2020: "...the measures [Facebook] could take to limit harmful content on
the platform might also limit its growth: In experiments Facebook conducted last month, posts users
regarded in surveys as `bad for the world' tended to have a greater reach - and algorithmic changes that
reduced the visibility of those posts also reduced users' engagement with the platform...".27


6         Regulation

Our analysis so far raises the natural question of what types of regulations might counter the viral
spread of misinformation and platform choices leading to excessive ideological homophily. We
now briefly discuss three distinct types of regulations that have been discussed in this context: (1)
regulations that force platforms to reveal articles' provenance ; (2) censorship (on the basis of extremist
    26
      We presume that shares also serve as a good proxy for "time on platform" engagement and ad revenue for social media
sites (e.g., time spent clicking on links, reading content, etc).
   27
      See Vanity Fair :
   https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2020/12/with-the-election-over-facebook-gets-back-to-spreading-misinformation
and also https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/03/11/1020600/facebook-responsible-ai-misinformation/.




                                                       32
messages or misinformation); (3) network regulations, restricting the extent of ideological homophily
or segregation introduced by platform algorithms intended to maximize engagement.


6.1     Article Provenance

For simplicity, we focus on the case in which the sharing network P is the single-island network. This
is without much loss of generality, since, from Theorem 7, the platform will either choose uniform
connections throughout the entire network or a completely segregated sharing network, in which case
each island has uniform connections.
      Suppose news is either reputable or sketchy. In the latter case the article is truthful with ex-ante
probability qs  1/2, while in the former case, it is truthful with ex-ante probability of qr > qs  1/2. In
addition, G(и) follows a binomial distribution, with the probability of reputable news being  and the
probability of sketchy news being 1 - . The next proposition explores the implications of a regulatory
policy that requires the platform to reveal the provenance (and hence quality) of the article's source.

Proposition 6. Let H be a multinomial distribution. Then, there exists » < 1 such that:

(a) If  > » , a policy that reveals the source of the news reduces the virality of misinformation in the
      most sharing equilibrium;

(b) If  < 1 - » , a policy that reveals the source of the news increases the virality of misinformation in
      the most sharing equilibrium.

      This proposition implies that if most news comes from a reputable source, a policy that requires
the platform to disclose whether the source is sketchy will cut down on misinformation. The flip side
of this, however, is that when most of the news is sketchy, reviewing the provenance of articles will
backfire: revealing that a source is reputable hurts the spread of misinformation. The intuition for the
latter result is related to the "implied truth" effect found in Pennycook et al. (2020): when sketchy news
is flagged by the platform with sufficient frequency, then users tend to believe articles without the tag
are more likely to be truthful relative to the case where none of the content is tagged. In our model,
this is the inference Bayesian agents draw when most of the news is indeed sketchy.
      The next example shows that the paradoxical case in part (b) of this proposition does not require
extreme parameter values. Specifically, even if news is equally likely to come from a reputable or
sketchy source, a policy of provenance revelation could be counterproductive.

Example 1. Suppose the initial phase is long (1 is small) and so all-share is supported in some
equilibrium (the most viral equilibrium) of the initial phase. This allows us to concentrate on the
spread of misinformation in the viral phase as a consequence of provenance revelation policies.
      When provenance is revealed, equilibria separates into two cases, where qr = 0.9 and qs = 0.5; when
it is not revealed, the probability the article is truthful is q = 0.7. The (unique) equilibrium in all three
cases is shown in Figure 10, which plots the expected payoff from inspecting less sharing, given that

                                                     33
                                     Figure 10. Equilibria for Example 1.


other agents in the population employ (prior) cutoff strategy b . When the payoff line lies above the
indifference cutoff at zero, all-inspect is unique; when the payoff line lies below the indifference cutoff,
all-share is unique. Otherwise, the intersection of the payoff with the indifference cutoff determines
the equilibrium cutoff strategy, as implied by Theorem 1.
      Figure 10 shows that when there is no revelation, because there is sufficiently high probability of
the article coming from a sketchy source, over 90% of the agents inspect the article before sharing, just
to be safe (when beliefs are uniformly distributed).
      In contrast, if the article's provenance is revealed, inspections drop from 90% to 50% on average
(recall, half of the articles are sketchy, and equilibria separate into all-share and all-inspect). This
leads to a 5% likelihood that an article with misinformation is not inspected as opposed to only a 3%
likelihood when the source is kept hidden.


6.2     Censorship

In this subsection, we discuss the censorship policy of a planner wishing to limit misinformation.
We capture the strategic interactions between the planner and the platform via a simultaneous-move
game. We now describe two versions of this problem, one in which the planner stochastically observes
whether an article contains misinformation, and another in which she can only identify how extreme
the message of an article is. Since this is the only difference between these two versions, we provide a
unified description as follows:

 (i) Planner : The planner observes the article with some probability > 0 (capturing the fact that she
       will have access only to a small fraction of billions of articles circulating on a typical platform). If
       the planner does not observe the article, there is no censoring. If the planner observes the article,
       she decides whether to censor it (in which case it ceases to circulate). In the first version, she
       receives a signal about the accuracy of the article. We suppose that there are type I errors but
       no type II errors (truthful articles are never misidentified, but misinformation is identified with

                                                      34
       some probability less than one). In the second version, she observes a signal about the extremism
       (as before, defined as max{L(m), 1/L(m)}). In this version, too, there are no type II errors, and if
       the extremism of the article is greater than  (where  is the same as in Theorem 7), the planner
       identifies it with some probability less than one.

 (ii) Platform: The platform chooses its sharing network/recommendation algorithm, P, and decides
       whether to verify content as discussed in Section 5.

Corollary 2. In both versions, there is a unique Nash equilibrium and in this equilibrium, the platform
inspects all articles, adopts the uniform-connection model for P, and the planner does not censor any
content.

      This result follows as a straightforward corollary of Theorem 7, but its message is interesting.
Censoring some of the content with the most obvious misinformation or the most extremist messages
transmutes the architecture of news sharing significantly because it alters the platform's incentives.
Once the platform knows that it cannot propagate these articles (which were beneficial for maximizing
engagement), it opts for a sharing network with minimal homophily and it behaves responsibly itself,
inspecting articles for the veracity of their content. Notably, in the case of censoring content based on
extremism, the planner does not need to believe that an article with {L(m), 1/L(m)} >  contains
misinformation (or even that it is more likely to contain misinformation). Rather, this censorship
policy is effective because, despite its limited reach, it modifies the platform's optimal strategy.

Remark Г Note that in the equilibrium, no content is actually censored. Hence, just the threat
of censorship is sufficient to remove the platform's incentives to adopt filter bubbles and spread
unverified content.      This corollary thus contains relevant lessons for the broader literature on
censorship of misinformation on the effectiveness of the threat of (limited) censorship (see, for
example, Marantz (2019), Cerf (2016), Risch and Krestel (2018)).


6.3     Network Regulations

Finally, we consider limits on ideological homophily. Such limits are similar to "ideological segregation
standards", discussed in Sunstein (2018), which aim to encourage moderation by restricting the extent
to which content is curated specifically to the ideology or interests of the group of users. For simplicity,
we will consider the island networks of Section 4 (as Theorem 7 shows this is the class of networks from
which the platform optimally chooses). In terms of our model, the regulation corresponds to a bound
on the feasible homophily ratio ps /pd that platforms' algorithms will induce. We say that a network
regulation is binding if it forces the platform to change its choice of P, and we focus on the case of
filter bubbles from Theorem 7(b), where there is a possibility of binding regulations.

Corollary 3. Suppose that maxm max{1/L(m), L(m)} >  and there is no all-share equilibrium. Then,
there exists p <  such that a regulation ps /pd  p is binding for the platform and minimizes

                                                     35
misinformation by inducing the platform to inspect all articles and adopt the uniform-connection
model for P.

    Note that in general p > 1 so that the planner should not necessarily eliminate all homophily
(recall Theorem 5(a)). In fact, computing the exact value of p is far from straightforward because of
the rich strategic interactions discussed in Section 4.



7    Conclusion

This paper has developed a simple model of the spread of misinformation over social media platforms.
A group of Bayesian agents with heterogeneous priors receive and share news items (articles)
according to a stochastic sharing network, determined by the social media platform. Articles may
be truthful and thus informative about an underlying (political) state, or may contain misinformation,
making them anti-correlated when the underlying state. Upon receiving an article, an agent can decide
to share it with others, kill it, or inspect it at a cost to find out its veracity. Misinformation spreads when
agents decide to share an article without inspecting it.
    Though simple and parsimonious, the model encapsulates several rich strategic interactions.
Agents receive utility from sharing an article, but suffer a (reputational) punishment if they are found
out to have shared misinformation. When an agent expects others to have inspected the article, she is
less likely to inspect it because misinformation is likely to have been eliminated before reaching her.
This creates a force towards strategic substitutes in the game. In contrast, when an agent expects the
article to face high likelihood of inspection in the future, she is more likely to inspect it herself because
she does not want to be discovered to have shared misinformation. This generates a force towards
strategic complements.
    The ideological congruence between an agent and those in her sharing network, which we capture
with the notion of homophily, matters for sharing decisions. Because individuals are more likely to
inspect articles that disagree with their prior beliefs, an agent will be more cautious in sharing an article
that disagrees with the views of those in her sharing network.
    We provide several comparative static results for (sequential) equilibria of this dynamic game.
Some of those are very intuitive, though still useful for interpreting a range of results in the emerging
empirical literature on social media and misinformation. For example, we find that when a community
holds exclusively right-wing (left-wing) beliefs, right-wing (left-wing) misinformation is more likely to
spread. More interestingly, greater polarization tends to increase misinformation.
    Of particular interest are the comparative statics with respect to homophily--measuring whether
agents tend to share articles with others with similar or dissimilar beliefs. We show that when
there is very limited homophily to start with, a small increase in homophily reduces the spread of
misinformation. The intuition for this result can be seen from an example with two islands, one with
right-wing views and the other with left-wing views, and with a news item with a right-wing slant.

                                                      36
With an increase in homophily, the left-wing island starts sharing the article more within itself. But
since left-wing agents know that other left-wingers tend to inspect a right-wing article, they themselves
become more likely to inspect because of the discipline other left-wingers impose on them and their
incentives than spills over to right-wingers who become more cautious in sharing right-wing articles.
This disciplining role becomes immaterial, however, when we have a high degree of homophily. Now
left-wing and right-wing agents are unlikely to interact, and a further increase in homophily reassures
right-wingers that the article they share will not be inspected by left-wingers. In the resulting echo
chambers, misinformation spreads rapidly. (We also obtain similar non-monotonic comparative static
results with respect to certain types of polarization increases).
   Importantly, our framework enables a tractable study of platform incentives in designing
algorithms that determine who shares with whom. To do this, we assume that the platform aims to
maximize user engagement (which is a good approximation to the objectives of major social media
platforms such as Facebook or Twitter), and allow it to choose the stochastic sharing network. We
also allow the platform to inspect articles for veracity itself. Our main result is a striking one. When
all available articles have moderate messages, the platform chooses a sharing network with minimal
homophily and inspects articles to find out whether they contain misinformation. It tags truthful
articles, which are then shared among users, who can then further share them, safe in the knowledge
that they contain no misinformation. In striking contrast to this case, however, when there are
articles with extreme messages, the platform chooses a network with maximal homophily, selects
the most extreme article and never inspects it. The article spreads rapidly in the "filter bubble" the
platform's algorithms have created--because now ideologically like-minded individuals know that
they are unlikely to be caught sharing misinformation in their extreme echo chambers.
   We also study regulations aimed at minimizing the spread of misinformation. Providing the
provenance of a news item (in particular, whether it comes from a reputable or a sketchy source) can
be useful, because this additional information may encourage more inspection for sketchy articles.
However, we also show that this type of regulation may backfire, because tagging some of the articles
from sketchy sources may make agents less likely to inspect those that are untagged--thus creating a
Bayesian version of the "false sense of security". We also show that a limited type of censorship may
be effective by preventing articles with the most extremist messages from circulating. This type of
regulation is effective precisely because it is such extremist articles that are most likely to be the source
of misinformation and, as we have seen, they also encourage platforms to create filter bubbles that
maximize homophily. Interestingly, our analysis shows that even the (stochastic) threat of censorship
may be enough to discipline platforms.
   Our framework was purposefully chosen to be simple and several generalizations would be
interesting to consider in future work. Most importantly, our assumption that agents are Bayesian
rational should be viewed as a useful, albeit not fully realistic, benchmark. In our setting, it brought
out certain new strategic forces--highlighting how inspection decisions can be strategic complements
or substitutes, and how the degree of homophily changes agents' strategic behavior. Nevertheless,


                                                     37
misinformation may be particularly important when agents have cognitive limitations and are only
boundedly rational. Incorporating such considerations is one of the most important directions for
future research. Interesting questions that emerge in this case relate to whether the platform, in
addition to designing algorithms that create filter bubbles, may also choose strategies that exploit the
cognitive limitations of users.
    Other theoretical generalizations that might be interesting to consider include extensions to
repeated interactions with incomplete information, which would enable agents to also update their
beliefs about the ideological position of others in their sharing network. More challenging but arguably
more interesting would be to endogenize the reputational concerns by assuming that others update
about whether an individual is an extremist or has an unreliable type. In this case, the existing
reputational capital of an agent will determine how likely she is to risk sharing misinformation. We
can also use this extended setup with repeated interactions to study how agents update their initial
political views. When there is limited misinformation, agents will gradually learn the true state. In
contrast, when there is a significant probability of misinformation, agents will be uncertain about how
to interpret articles that disagree with their priors and this may put a limit to learning (see Acemoglu
et al. (2016)).
    Despite its simplicity, our model makes several new empirical predictions, most notably related to
the non-monotonic effects of homophily and polarization and to platform incentives and algorithmic
decisions. Investigating these predictions empirically as well as generating new stylized facts about
patterns of this information cascades on social media, is another important and exciting area for future
research.


A    Selected Proofs

Proof of Theorem 1. We fix the message m > 0 and note that a symmetric analysis applies when m <
0 using the reflection principle of Footnote 16. Let  i denote the strategy profile of agent i, which
maps priors on [0, 1] to a distribution over actions {S , I , K} and  as the joint strategy profile (not
necessarily in cutoff strategies). Then there exists some j ( ) which is the probability the article has
been inspected upon agent j 's receipt of the article, which depends on  . Conditional on receiving the
article, the agent's posterior belief  j (m,  ) of the article being truthful is given by the system:

                              q
            q
            ~=
                  (1 - q )(1 - j ( )) + q
                                       (f (m| = R)bj + f (m| = L)(1 - bj ))~ q
     j (m,  ) =
                  (f (m| = R)bj + f (m| = L)(1 - bj ))~
                                                      q + (f (m| = L)bj + f (m| = R)(1 - bj ))(1 - q
                                                                                                   ~)

(For simplicity, we omit the dependence of q
                                           ~ on  .) Similarly, let j,s ( ) be the probability the article
is inspected within j 's sharing subtree for the first time at s (after the agent j shares it), which also
depends on  . Let us consider the initial phase and viral phase separately, where we know based on the

                                                     38
assumptions in Section 2.4, killing dominates inspecting in the former whereas inspecting dominates
killing in the latter. Note that the share cascade Si, depends on  and the veracity of the article  .
However, it is easy to see that for a fixed  , Si, ( , T )  Si, ( , M) state-wise. Thus, the initial-phase
agent solves:
                      
                      0,                                                                          if aj = K
                      
                      
 aj  arg max uj (aj )      =1 
                                -1
                                   ( j (m,  )Sj, ( , T ) + (1 -  j (m,  ))Sj, ( , M))
        aj {K,S}      
                      -C (1 -  j (m,  ))   s-1  ( ),
                      
                                                                                                  if aj = S
                      
                                           s=1        j,s

                                                                                                          (3)

where we observe the payoff from aj = S is monotonically increasing in  j (m,  ). For a viral-phase
agent, she chooses the action:
                      
                          -1  j (m,  )Sj, ( , T ) +  (1 -  j (m,  )) - K,
                      
                                                                                                  if aj = I
                           =1
                      
 aj  arg max uj (aj )      =1 
                                -1
                                   ( j (m,  )Sj, ( , T ) + (1 -  j (m,  ))Sj, ( , M))
        aj {I ,S}     
                      -C (1 -  j (m,  ))   s-1  ( ),
                      
                                                                                                  if aj = S
                      
                                           s=1        j,s

                                                                                                          (4)

Note that S is preferred to I if and only if:

                                                                      
                                                s-1
                   (1 -  j (m,  )) C                  j,s ( ) +  -            -1 Sj, ( , M)   K
                                       s=1                             =1

                 -1                          s-1
Either      =1      Sj, ( , M)   >C     s=1      j,s ( )+ , in which case the inequality holds for all values
of  j (i.e., agent j shares regardless of its prior), or is decreasing in  j (m,  ) (whereas the right-hand
side is constant). Therefore, either the viral-phase agent j plays share unconditional on her prior
(which is a special case of the cutoff form) or once again the payoff from aj = S is monotonically
increasing in  j (m,  ). Note, rewriting  j (m,  ):

                                     (f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)bj + (1 - bj ))~ q
   j (m,  ) =
                (f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)bj + (1 - bj ))~
                                                     q + (bj + f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)(1 - bj ))(1 - q
                                                                                                   ~)
                                                                                                     (5)
which we see is increasing in bj for m > 0 by the MLRP property (i.e., that f (m| = R)/f (m| = L) > 1).
Thus the payoff for S over either K (initial phase) or I (viral phase) is monotonically increasing in
 j (m,  ). Thus, there exist some cutoffs b     
                                           j , bj for each agent j that determine whether she chooses S
instead of K or I taking  as given.
   Finally, to show existence of a cutoff equilibrium, we construct the map  : [0, 1]2N  [0, 1]2N which
maps a vector of cutoffs  = (b                       
                              1 , b1 , . . . , bN , bN ) to another vector of cutoffs that are best responses
to the first set of cutoffs. (By the argument above, the best response to any strategy profile  takes



                                                           39
the cutoff form, so this map exists.) Continuity of  follows from the continuity of Sj, ( , и), j ( ),
s ( ), and  j (m,  ) in  . Thus,  is a continuous map from a compact set to itself, which by Brouwer's
fixed point theorem implies that  has at least one fixed point. This fixed point, is by definition, an
equilibrium.

Proof of Theorem 2. Note that q
                              ~ = q in Equation (5) because in an all-share equilibrium, no agent
inspects and so the posterior belief the article is truthful is exactly equal to her prior. Agent j updates
her belief for a message m > 0 as follows:

                                       (bj + f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)(1 - bj ))(1 - q )
1 -  j (m,  ) =
                 (f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)bj + (1 - bj ))q + (bj + f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)(1 - bj ))(1 - q )
                            (bj + L(m)(1 - bj ))(1 - q )
               =
                 (L(m)bj + (1 - bj ))q + (bj + L(m)(1 - bj ))(1 - q )
                                                        -1
                           (L(m)bj + (1 - bj ))q
               =   1+
                        (bj + L(m)(1 - bj ))(1 - q )
                                                       -1
                          q    L(m)bj + (1 - bj )
               =   1+        и
                        1 - q bj + L(m)(1 - bj )

(a) Sufficiency : To see if an all-share equilibrium can be supported, we need to check that all agents in
    the viral phase have a best response to share given that all other agents are also sharing (and then
    leverage Lemma 1). An agent receives share utility vviral when she plays S , but faces an expected
                                          2 -1
    punishment of C (1 -  i )      2 =1        (1 - e-2 )e-2 ( 2 -1)   = (1 -  i )(C -  ). Thus, her payoff from S
    is vviral - (1 -  i )(C -  ). When this agent plays I , she shares and receives vviral only if the inspection
    reveals that  = T . If  = M, the she receives  for exposing misinformation. Thus, playing I gives
    payoff  i vviral + (1 -  i ) - K . Comparing these payoffs, we see that S is a best response for agent
    i if (1 -  i )(C - vviral )  K . Finally, we note that (1 -  i ) is maximized at prior belief b. Thus, if this
    inequality holds for b, it holds for all values of b that exist in the population, and sharing is a best
    response for all agents.

(b) Necessity : Suppose that (1 -  )(C - vviral ) > K . Then there exists some agent in the population (an
    agent near prior b) who prefers to play I instead of S when all other agents are sharing. Because
    this is a profitable deviation, an all-share equilibrium is not supported.




Proof of Theorem 3. We prove this by establishing conditions under which sharing is a dominant
strategy in both phases, thus making it the unique equilibrium. Consider some strategy profile 
played by the rest of the agents in the population and let   be the strategy profile where all initial-
phase agents kill and viral-phase agents inspect. Clearly ui (S| )  ui (S|  ) for all initial-phase
agents i, and thus if S is a best-response under   it is a dominant strategy. If the article contains
misinformation, then at time ti + 1, the article is inspected and the punishment C is realized, which
occurs with probability (1 -  i ). On the other hand, if the article is truthful, with probability 1 - e-1 is

                                                            40
transitions to the viral phase, where the share cascade vviral is realized for the agent. Thus, sharing is a
dominant strategy for initial-phase agent i if (1 -  i )C   i (1 - e-1 )vviral . Because the left-hand side
is maximized when bi = b and right-hand side is minimized also when bi = b, S is a dominant strategy
for all agents in the population if the inequality holds when  i =  .
                                  ~  q for all strategy profiles  , and ui (S ) is always increasing in q ,
   For the viral phase, note that q
so it is sufficient to prove S is dominant when agent i holds ex-ante beliefs q about the truthfulness of
the article. The least share utility and greatest potential for social punishment occurs for the strategy
profile   where all agents inspect in the viral phase. If agent i in the viral phase plays S , she receives
vviral if the article is truthful (probability  i ) and otherwise is punished by C in the next period. If agent
i plays I , she receives vviral if the article is truthful (probability  i ) and otherwise gets  (probability
1 -  i ), but always pays K to inspect. Combining these facts shows that S is a best response under  
if (1 -  i )(C +  )  K . Once again, the left-hand side is maximized when bi = b, so S is a dominant
strategy for all agents in the population if the inequality holds when  i =  .

Proof of Theorem 7. As the platform wishes to maximize engagement and the cost of inspection KP is
small, the platform will inspect the article unless it can choose a network P where the article will be
shared (and not inspected or killed) amongst all agents who could receive it, with probability 1. For a
fixed left-wing article (i.e., m < 0),  j (the belief the article is truthful) is monotonically decreasing in
agent j 's prior bj . Similarly, for a fixed right-wing article (i.e., m > 0),  j is monotonically increasing
in agent j 's prior bj . From the same reasoning as Theorem 1, the payoff from S relative to I and K (in
the initial and viral phases, respectively) is increasing in the agent's belief that the content is truthful,
 j . Note that communities are assumed to be large and ideologically distinct, and given 1 , 2 < ,
the article will reach only a finite subset of agents within these communities, if the platform were to
share it with them. Thus, if the platform does not verify the article, it will always choose P such that
there are no links across communities, and the article will either be shared with (and remain within)
community 1 or community k .
   Recall the article will either be credibly verified by the platform and tagged, which would lead to
an all-share equilibrium, or the platform will pick P and the initial seed i as to have an all-share
equilibrium amongst the agents connected to i . As we saw in Proposition 3, the belief  j for any agent
j in community k is increasing in L(m) (because bk > 1/2). Similarly, the belief  j for an agent j in
community 1 is increasing in 1/L(m) (because »b1 < 1/2). By ideological symmetry, we observe that
 j for agent j having prior »
                            b1 or bk with message m and likelihood ratio L(m) or 1/L(m), respectively,
is identical. Moreover, because community bk > 1/2,  j for j  k is monotonically increasing in m
(Proposition 4). Similarly, because »
                                    b1 < 1/2,  j for j  1 is monotonically decreasing in m. Thus, there
exist cutoffs for the platform, m                                                 
                                 L and mR , where it knows that if m < mL or m > mR , sharing the article
with community 1 or community k (respectively) leads to all-share within this community. Because of
ideological symmetry, the cutoff is determined by L(m) and 1/L(m), with the former being the cutoff
for right-wing messages (shared with community k ) and the latter being a cutoff for left-wing messages


                                                      41
(shared with community 1).
   Finally, note that if no article exists such that community 1 or community k has an all-share
equilibrium, the platform verifies the content. If it fails to do this, E[ST (i ) ] is not maximized because
with positive probability the article both contains misinformation and it is inspected by a user of the
platform. The platform will verify the articles sequentially based on its own belief the articles are
truthful, bplatf orm (e.g., if bplatf orm > 1/2, it will verify the messages in order from greatest to least). Once
the article is tagged as verified, the share cascade is determined by how many agents the article reaches
before the obsolescent phase (as there will be no inspections or kills). Thus, the platform chooses P
such that every agent has a complete neighborhood as to maximize the likelihood the article is passed
to other agents who have not already received it. In particular, it is optimal to simply pick P to be the
uniform-connection model with sufficiently high link probability.




                                                        42
References

Abramowitz, Alan I. (2010), The Disappearing Center: Engaged Citizens, Polarization, and American
  Democracy. Yale University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, and Muhamet Yildiz (2016), "Fragility of asymptotic
  agreement under bayesian learning." Theoretical Economics, 11, 187Г225.

Acemoglu, Daron, Giacomo Como, Fabio Fagnani, and Asuman Ozdaglar (2013), "Opinion
  Fluctuations and Disagreement in Social Networks." Mathematics of Operations Research, 38, 1Г27.
  Publisher: INFORMS.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Ali ParandehGheibi (2010), "Spread of (mis)information in
  social networks." Games and Economic Behavior, 70, 194Г227.

Allcott, Hunt and Matthew Gentzkow (2017), "Social media and fake news in the 2016 election." Journal
  of economic perspectives, 31, 211Г36.

Allen, Jennifer, Baird Howland, Markus Mobius, David Rothschild, and Duncan J. Watts (2020),
  "Evaluating the fake news problem at the scale of the information ecosystem." Science Advances,
  6, eaay3539. Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science Section: Research
  Article.

Allon, Gad, Kimon Drakopoulos, and Vahideh Manshadi (2019), "Information Inundation on Platforms
  and Implications." In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, EC
  '19, 555Г556, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.

Altay, Sacha, Anne-Sophie Hacquin, and Hugo Mercier (2020), "Why do so few people share fake news?
  It hurts their reputation." New Media & Society, 1461444820969893. Publisher: SAGE Publications.

Andrews, Lori (2012), "Facebook is using you." The New York Times, 4.

Apprich, Clemens, Florian Cramer, Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, and Hito Steyerl (2018), Pattern
  Discrimination. meson press. Accepted: 2020-05-04T14:50:47Z.

Aral, Sinan and Paramveer S. Dhillon (2018), "Social influence maximization under empirical influence
  models." Nature Human Behaviour, 2, 375Г382. Number: 6 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

Bakshy, Eytan, Solomon Messing, and Lada A. Adamic (2015), "Exposure to ideologically diverse
  news and opinion on Facebook." Science, 348, 1130Г1132. Publisher: American Association for the
  Advancement of Science Section: Report.

Breza, Emily, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2018), "Seeing the forest for the trees?
  An investigation of network knowledge." arXiv:1802.08194 [physics, stat]. ArXiv: 1802.08194.


                                                  43
Buchanan, Tom (2020), "Why do people spread false information online? The effects of message
  and viewer characteristics on self-reported likelihood of sharing social media disinformation." PLOS
  ONE, 15, e0239666. Publisher: Public Library of Science.

Budak, Ceren, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi (2011), "Limiting the spread of misinformation
  in social networks." In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on World wide web, WWW
  '11, 665Г674, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.

Candogan, Ozan and Kimon Drakopoulos (2017), "Optimal Signaling of Content Accuracy:
  Engagement vs. Misinformation." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3051275, Social Science Research
  Network, Rochester, NY.

Centola, Damon (2010), "The spread of behavior in an online social network experiment." science, 329,
  1194Г1197. Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Centola, Damon and Michael Macy (2007), "Complex Contagions and the Weakness of Long Ties."
  American Journal of Sociology, 113, 702Г734. Publisher: The University of Chicago Press.

Cerf, Vinton G. (2016), "Information and misinformation on the internet." Communications of the
  ACM, 60, 9Г9.

Chen, Li and Yiangos Papanastasiou (2019), "Seeding the Herd: Pricing and Welfare Effects of Social
  Learning Manipulation." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3456139, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY.

Cuthbertson, Richard, Peder Inge Furseth, and Stephen J. Ezell (2015), "Facebook and MySpace: The
  Importance of Social Networks." In Innovating in a Service-Driven Economy: Insights, Application,
  and Practice (Richard Cuthbertson, Peder Inge Furseth, and Stephen J. Ezell, eds.), 145Г158, Palgrave
  Macmillan UK, London.

Duffy, Andrew, Edson Tandoc, and Rich Ling (2020), "Too good to be true, too good not to share:
  the social utility of fake news." Information, Communication & Society, 23, 1965Г1979. Publisher:
  Routledge eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2019.1623904.

Eckles, Dean, Ren┤
                 e F. Kizilcec, and Eytan Bakshy (2016), "Estimating peer effects in networks with
  peer encouragement designs." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 7316Г7322.
  Publisher: National Academy of Sciences Section: Colloquium Paper.

Edosomwan, Simeon, Sitalaskshmi Kalangot Prakasan, Doriane Kouame, Jonelle Watson, and Tom
  Seymour (2011), "The history of social media and its impact on business." Journal of Applied
  Management and entrepreneurship, 16, 79Г91.

Fiorina, Morris P., Samuel A. Abrams, and Jeremy C. Pope (2008), "Polarization in the American Public:
  Misconceptions and Misreadings." The Journal of Politics, 70, 556Г560. Publisher: The University of
  Chicago Press.

                                                  44
Fourney, Adam, Miklos Z. Racz, Gireeja Ranade, Markus Mobius, and Eric Horvitz (2017), "Geographic
  and Temporal Trends in Fake News Consumption During the 2016 US Presidential Election." In
  CIKM, volume 17, 6Г10.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro (2006), "Media Bias and Reputation." Journal of Political
  Economy, 114, 280Г316. Publisher: The University of Chicago Press.

Grinberg, Nir, Kenneth Joseph, Lisa Friedland, Briony Swire-Thompson, and David Lazer (2019),
  "Fake news on Twitter during the 2016 U.S. presidential election." Science, 363, 374Г378. Publisher:
  American Association for the Advancement of Science Section: Research Article.

Guess, Andrew, Jonathan Nagler, and Joshua Tucker (2019), "Less than you think: Prevalence and
  predictors of fake news dissemination on Facebook." Science Advances, 5, eaau4586. Publisher:
  American Association for the Advancement of Science Section: Research Article.

Guess, Andrew, Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler (2018), "Selective exposure to misinformation:
  Evidence from the consumption of fake news during the 2016 US presidential campaign." European
  Research Council, 9, 4.

Guriev, Sergei, Emeric Henry, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2020), "Checking and Sharing Alt-Facts."
  SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3603969, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Hsu, Chin-Chia, Amir Ajorlou, and Ali Jadbabaie (2020), "News Sharing, Persuasion, and Spread of
  Misinformation on Social Networks." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3391585, Social Science Research
  Network, Rochester, NY.

Kamenica, Emir (2019), "Bayesian Persuasion and Information Design." Annual Review of Economics,
  11, 249Г272. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080218-025739.

Kamenica, Emir and Matthew Gentzkow (2011), "Bayesian Persuasion." American Economic Review,
  101, 2590Г2615.

Keppo, Jussi, Michael Jong Kim, and Xinyuan Zhang (2019), "Learning Manipulation Through
  Information Dissemination." Available at SSRN 3465030.

Lazer, David MJ, Matthew A. Baum, Yochai Benkler, Adam J. Berinsky, Kelly M. Greenhill, Filippo
  Menczer, Miriam J. Metzger, Brendan Nyhan, Gordon Pennycook, and David Rothschild (2018),
  "The science of fake news." Science, 359, 1094Г1096. Publisher: American Association for the
  Advancement of Science.

Lee, Chei Sian, Long Ma, and Dion Hoe-Lian Goh (2011), "Why Do People Share News in Social Media?"
  In Active Media Technology (Ning Zhong, Vic Callaghan, Ali A. Ghorbani, and Bin Hu, eds.), Lecture
  Notes in Computer Science, 129Г140, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.



                                                 45
Levy, Roee (2020), "Social Media, News Consumption, and Polarization: Evidence from a Field
  Experiment." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3653388, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Marantz, Andrew (2019), Antisocial: Online Extremists, Techno-Utopians, and the Hijacking of the
  American Conversation. Penguin. Google-Books-ID: wG1QwgEACAAJ.

McWilliams, Jenna (2009), "How Facebook beats MySpace." Section: Opinion.

Mosleh, Mohsen, Cameron Martel, Dean Eckles, and David G. Rand (2021), "Shared partisanship
  dramatically increases social tie formation in a twitter field experiment." Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 118.

Mostagir, Mohamed, Asuman E. Ozdaglar, and James Siderius (2019), "When is Society Susceptible to
  Manipulation?" SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3474643, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Mostagir, Mohamed and James Siderius (2021), "Inequality in Social Learning." Working Paper.

Nguyen, Nam P., Guanhua Yan, My T. Thai, and Stephan Eidenbenz (2012), "Containment of
  misinformation spread in online social networks." In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Web Science
  Conference, WebSci '12, 213Г222, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.

Papanastasiou, Yiangos (2018), "Fake News Propagation and Detection: A Sequential Model." SSRN
  Scholarly Paper ID 3028354, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

PBS (2020), "Right-wing users flock to Parler as social media giants rein in misinformation." Section:
  Nation.

Pennycook, Gordon, Adam Bear, Evan T. Collins, and David G. Rand (2020), "The Implied Truth Effect:
  Attaching Warnings to a Subset of Fake News Headlines Increases Perceived Accuracy of Headlines
  Without Warnings." Management Science, 66, 4944Г4957. Publisher: INFORMS.

Pennycook, Gordon and David G. Rand (2018), "Lazy, Not Biased: Susceptibility to Partisan Fake News
  Is Better Explained by Lack of Reasoning Than by Motivated Reasoning." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
  3165567, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Pew Research Center (2014), "Political Polarization in the American Public."

Prior, Markus (2013), "Media and Political Polarization." Annual Review of Political Science, 16, 101Г
  127. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242.

Quattrociocchi, Walter, Antonio Scala, and Cass R. Sunstein (2016), "Echo Chambers on Facebook."
  SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2795110, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Risch, Julian and Ralf Krestel (2018), "Delete or not delete? Semi-automatic comment moderation for
  the newsroom." In Proceedings of the first workshop on trolling, aggression and cyberbullying (TRAC-
  2018), 166Г176.

                                                   46
Sunstein, Cass R. (2018), #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media. Princeton University
  Press. Google-Books-ID: oVBLDwAAQBAJ.

Taylor, Sean J. and Dean Eckles (2018), "Randomized Experiments to Detect and Estimate Social
  Influence in Networks." In Complex Spreading Phenomena in Social Systems: Influence and
  Contagion in Real-World Social Networks (Sune Lehmann and Yong-Yeol Ahn, eds.), Computational
  Social Sciences, 289Г322, Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Tе
 ornberg, Petter (2018), "Echo chambers and viral misinformation: Modeling fake news as complex
  contagion." PLOS ONE, 13, e0203958. Publisher: Public Library of Science.

Vicario, Michela Del, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
  H. Eugene Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi (2016), "The spreading of misinformation online."
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 554Г559. Publisher: National Academy of
  Sciences Section: Physical Sciences.

Vosoughi, Soroush, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral (2018), "The spread of true and false news online." Science,
  359, 1146Г1151. Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science Section: Report.




                                                  47
B     Online Appendix (not for publication)

B.1    Auxiliary Lemmas

Lemma B.1. In every (sequential) equilibrium with cutoffs (b                                
                                                                     1 , b1 , . . . , bN , bN ), the viral-phase cutoffs
(b , . . . , b ) are best responses to any set of initial-phase cutoffs (~
  1           N                                                           b , . . . , ~
                                                                            1       N b ).

Proof of Lemma B.1. In a sequential equilibrium, every viral-phase assigns possibly vanishing (but
always non-zero) probability to the information set I that the article is not killed during the initial
phase. The cutoffs played during the initial phase, conditional on viral-phase agent i's receipt of the
article, have no bearing of her belief about the article's veracity nor the payoffs she will receive following
her actions. Because this information node is reached with positive probability, her best response
cannot depend on the actions of agents in the initial phase.

Lemma B.2. For a single-island model, the most-sharing equilibrium cutoff in the viral phase takes one
of the following three forms: (i) all-share, (ii) all-inspect, or (iii) b  (0, 1) such that if w(b) denotes
(b) (the difference in inspecting and sharing payoff) when b itself is the viral phase cutoff, then dw/db
at cutoff b is negative.

Proof of Lemma B.2. Consider the curve w(b) mapping prior cutoffs to the difference between inspect
and share payoffs. All intersections of the form w(b ) = 0 can be supported in some equilibrium
for the viral phase cutoff b , by Lemma B.1 and Theorem 1. Moreover, if w(0) < 0, then all-share is
an equilibrium (in both phases by Lemma 1), which is most viral. Thus, it is sufficient to consider
w(0) > 0. If w(b) > 0 for all b, then all-inspect is the unique strategy profile for the viral phase played
in every equilibrium (via Lemma B.1), so must be the most viral one. Otherwise, w(b) crosses 0 for the
first-time from w(0) > 0, which must be from above. Thus, the slope of the tangent line at this first
intersection (which is the most viral equilibrium) must negative.

Lemma B.3. An increase in polarization of beliefs can always be constructed via the following process:
take every belief bi and either (i) add some        i   > 0 to bi if bi > 1/2, or (ii) subtract some     i   > 0 to bi if
bi < 1/2.
                                                                                         -1
Proof of Lemma B.3. For part (i), note that H1 (b1
                                                 i ) =  > 1/2, so by single-crossing at H1 (1/2) =
 -1                      -1       -1                                           -1
H2  (1/2), we know that H2  () - H1  () > 0. Thus, for some b2    1                    2
                                                             i > bi , we have H2 () = bi , or in
other words, H2 (b2
                  i ) = . Setting      i   = b2    1
                                              i - bi > 0 in this fashion for all bi > 1/2 accomplishes claim (i).
                                                                      -1         -1
For part (ii), note that H1 (b1
                              i ) =  < 1/2, so by single-crossing at H1 (1/2) = H2 (1/2), we know that
 -1       -1                                           -1
H2  () - H1  () < 0. Thus, for some b2    1                      2                           2
                                     i < bi , we have H2 (1 ) = bi , or in other words, H2 (bi ) = .
Setting   i   = b1    2
                 i - bi > 0 in this fashion for all bi < 1/2 accomplishes claim (ii).


B.2    Omitted Proofs from Section 3

Proof of Lemma 1. By Lemma B.1, we know that it is sufficient to show that when all agents play ai = S ,
it is a best response for agent j acting in the initial phase to play aj = S , regardless of her prior bj . By

                                                           B-1
Assumption 1, we know that killing dominates inspecting for the initial-phase agent, so it is enough to
prove the payoff of sharing is positive, conditional on it being a best response for agent i in the viral
phase to play S when all other agents in the viral phase play S as well.
   Note that agent i gets share utility vinitial given by:

              1            (1 - e-1 )
             vinitial =               >0
                          (1 - e-1 )2
                                                              2
                                              1 + 2 -1
              2
             vinitial   =                                                  e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 )
                             1 =1  2 =1                      =1
                         1          2
             vinitial = vinitial + vinitial

and gets (expected) social punishment:

                                                   
               Cinitial  C (1 -  i )                       1 + 2 -1 e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 )
                                           1 =1  2 =1


Whereas agent j acting in the viral phase receives share utility:

                                                                       2
                                                             2 -1
                                   vviral =                                       e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 )
                                                 2 =1                =1


and gets (expected) social punishment:

                                                                    
                                    Cviral  C (1 -  i )                     2 -1 e-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-2 )
                                                                   2 =1


Because sharing for agent i is a better response than inspecting, which in turn dominates killing by
Assumption 1, we know that vviral - Cviral > 0. However, observe that:

                                                         
                                         2
                                        vinitial   =             1 e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )vviral
                                                        1 =1
                                                        
                                        Cinitial =               1 e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )Cviral
                                                        1 =1


Therefore,
                                                    
                         2
                        vinitial   - Cinitial =               1 e-1 ( 1 -1) (1 - e-1 )(vviral - Cviral ) > 0
                                                    1 =1

                      1
by assumption. Since vinitial > 0, we have that vinitial - Cinitial > 0, which implies that sharing is a best
response for agent i in the initial phase.

Proof of Corollary 1. This is a direct consequence of the conditions in Theorem 2, which depend on


                                                                          B-2
q, m, b, , , 2 , , , and C , but not on the network structure P.

Proof of Proposition 1. We use the conditions of Theorem 2, which are tight. Only vviral depends on 
and  , which is an increasing function of both. This decreases the left-hand side of the expression in
Theorem 2 while holding the right-hand side constant, making all-share equilibria more likely. Only C
depends on C , which is a decreasing function in C , and decreases the left-hand side of the expression
in Theorem 2 while holding the right-hand side constant. Note that C is increasing in 2 , whereas vviral
is decreasing in 2 , so the left-hand side of the expression in Theorem 2 is increasing in 2 . Finally,
vviral and C are both functions of  with:

                             vviral   (1 - e-2 )e-2 (1 +  (1 - 2e-2 ))
                                    =
                                            (1 - e-2 )2 (1 - e-2 )2
                                C     C (1 - e-2 )e-2
                                    =
                                        (1 - e-2 )2

Since   2, we know that 1 - 2e-2 > 0 as we require e-2 < 1, otherwise the game is trivial
because viral-phase sharing gives an infinite payoff. Thus, both vviral and C are increasing functions
in  . Finally observe that  C / is not a function of  , but vviral / is an increasing function in  , so
there exists a threshold   such that  C / < vviral / for all  >   .

Proof of Proposition 2. As in the proof of Proposition 1, we use the conditions of Theorem 2. Only (1 -  )
is a function of the message m. Notice:

                     (1 -  )                  (1 - 2b)(1 - q )q             L(m)
                             =                                           2
                      m        (b(1 - 2q )(1 - L(m)) - q L(m) + q + L(m)) m

By the MLRP, we know that  L(m)/m > 0. Thus, 1 -  is decreasing in m when b > 1/2 and increasing
in m when b < 1/2. In the former case, an increase in m decreases the left-hand side of the expression
in Theorem 2, making all-share equilibria more likely. In the latter case, an increase in m increases the
left-hand side of the expression in Theorem 2, making all-share equilibria less likely.

                                               ~ is more information than f , then L
Proof of Proposition 3. First, we show that if f                                   ~(m) > L(m) for all
m > 0. Note that:

                     ~(m)
                     L      ~(m| = R)/f
                            f          ~(m| = L)    ~(m| = R) f (m| = L)
                                                    f
                          =                       =           и
                     L(m)   f (m| = R)/f (m| = L)   f (m| = R) f~(m| = L)

                                               ~(0) = L(0), we see that L
which is an increasing function in m and since L                        ~(m) > L(m) for all m > 0.
Next, we use the conditions in Theorem 2, and note that L(m) only affects 1 -  . Differentiating with
respect to L(m):

                         (1 -  )                (1 - 2b)(1 - q )q
                                 =
                          L        (b(2q - 1)(L(m) - 1) - q L(m) + L(m) + q )2


                                                   B-3
which is negative when b > 1/2 and positive when b < 1/2. In the former case, an increase in
informativeness with m > 0 increases L(m), which decreases (1 -  ), and makes all-share equilibria
more likely. In the latter case, an increase in informativeness with m > 0 increases L(m), which
increase (1 -  ), and makes all-share equilibria less likely.

Proof of Proposition 4. As in the proof of Proposition 1, we use the conditions of Theorem 2. Only (1 -  )
is a function of the lower support prior b. Notice:

                          (1 -  )            (1 - L(m))(1 + L(m))(1 - q )q
                                  =
                            b       (L(m)q (1 - 2b) + L(m)b - L(m) + 2qb + q + b)2

Because m > 0, we know that L(m) > 1, so the above expression is negative, and 1 -  is decreasing in
b. This makes all-share equilibria more likely because it decreases the left-hand side of the expression
in Theorem 2.


B.3     Omitted Proofs from Section 4


Proof of Lemma 2. Suppose there are two agents i and j on some island with the same prior belief b.
We show that both agents must have the same best response to any strategy profile  , and thus must
employ the same cutoff strategy, as N  .
   Note that because min N   and (ps , pd ) are fixed, the degree of every agent grows unboundedly.
Thus, given (, 2 ) are constant, the probability that agent i or agent j receives the article at any point in
the sharing process vanishes as N  . Moreover, agent i (resp. agent j ) believes the probability that
agent j (resp. agent i) will receive the article after her in the sharing process has vanishing probability
(as N  ). Let ^ i be an arbitrary strategy profile for agent i and let [ -i , ^ i ] be a strategy profile
that replaces agent i's strategy with strategy ^ i . Because agent i and agent j have symmetric network
positions, we know that the following limits coincide for any choice of ^i, ^j :

                                   lim Si, ([ -j , ^ j ], и) = lim Si, ([ -i , ^ i ], и)
                                  N                             N 

                                        lim i,s ([ -j , ^ j ]) = lim j,s ([ -i , ^ i ])
                                    N                           N 


Note that it is impossible that agent j sees agent i shared the article with her and simultaneously
that agent i sees agent j shared it with her; without loss of generality, suppose i does not receive
it from j . Then i ([ -j ]) does not depend on j and therefore limN                   i ([ -j , ^ j ])   must converge
to the same limit regardless of ^ j , and in particular converges to i ( ). This moreover implies that
limN     i (m, [ -i , ^ i ])   = limN     i (m,  ),     so agent i plays according to  .
   In turn, this implies that once j receives the article (even if from i), she holds the identical beliefs
limN     j (m,  )    = limN       i (m,  )      because agents i and j hold the same prior beliefs and have the
same lim i ( ), lim j ( ). These show that, in particular, all limits coincide for the true strategy profile


                                                            B-4
 . Thus the payoffs shown in Equations( 3) and (4) are identical for agents i and j , which means agents
i and j must have identical best responses.

Proof of Theorem 4. By Lemma 2, all equilibria on a single island take the form of two cutoff strategies
(one for the initial phase and one for the viral phase), (b , b ). We define a partial equilibrium of the
initial (viral) phase as a cutoff b (b ) that could be supported in an equilibrium taking the cutoff of the
other phase b (b ) as given. The set of equilibrium cutoffs are the partial equilibria that intersect.
   Let B  (b ) be the partial equilibria of the viral phase for a given b . By Lemma B.1, initial-phase
cutoffs do not affect the viral-phase cutoffs that can be supported in equilibrium. Thus, B  (b ) has a
trivial dependence on b and we can call this set of cutoffs B  . Note that j ( ) = 0 for the initial phase
because inspecting is a dominated strategy, so  j (m,  ) has no dependence on  , and we can just write
 j (m). Moreover, the payoff from sharing in the initial phase is then given by:

                                                                                         
                     -1 ( j (m)Sj, ( , T ) + (1 -  j (m))Sj, ( , F )) - C (1 -  j (m))          s-1 j,s ( )
              =1                                                                         s=1


which is supermodular in the proportion of the population who is sharing in both the initial and viral
phases (i.e., 1 - H (b ) and 1 - H (b )). Thus, the partial equilibrium cutoffs B  (b ) in the initial phase
form a lattice according to Tarski's theorem and by Topkis's theorem, have monotone comparative
statics in 1 - H (b ) (which is monotone in b ). Thus, the set of (full) equilibrium cutoffs is given by
the lattice {(b , b ) | b  B  , b  B  (B  )}.

Proof of Theorem 5. We prove part (a) first. Without loss of generality, let island 1 be the one at all-share.
Then:

                                                          i2 N2
                                              I1 =
                                                   (ps /pd )N1 + N2
                                                     (ps /pd )i2 N2
                                              I2 =
                                                   N1 + (ps /pd )N2

and following an increase in ps or decrease in pd , I1 decreases but I2 increases. When ps /pd is
sufficiently close to 1, we have the single-island model of Section 4.1, and both islands have nearly the
same cutoffs b                                  
              1 , b2 in the initial-phase and b1 , b2 in the viral phase by Lemma 2. Thus, for any            > 0,
we can take ps /pd sufficiently close to 1 to bound the killing probability and inspection probability on
island 2 to at most , before the increase in homophily.
   Similarly, both islands have almost the same difference in payoffs from inspecting and sharing,
1  2 and the same exposure to individuals inspecting, I1  I2 , when starting near the single-
island model. Thus, given that island 1 has net strategic complements, by continuity, island 2 does
as well; hence, both  1 (b )/I1 > 0 and  2 (b )/I2 > 0 hold. A marginal increase in homophily




                                                       B-5
yields:

                                     1 (b )       1 (b ) I1
                                               =                <0
                                     (ps /pd )    I1  (ps /pd )
                                     2 (b )       2 (b ) I2
                                               =                >0
                                     (ps /pd )    I2  (ps /pd )

Because island 1 is at all-share, and the payoff from marginally increasing homophily decreases
1 (b ), which implies the payoff from playing ai = S is higher relative to ai = I after this
increase. Hence, all-share remains in the viral phase. Whether all-share remains in the initial phase is
indeterminate, but assuming it does only increases the virality of misinformation (we cannot leverage
Lemma 1 here because island 2 is only        close to all-share, but is not required). Thus, if we want to
show the increase in homophily decreased the virality of misinformation, it is sufficient to assume that
there is all-share in both phases on island 1.
   Conversely, island 2 (at the most viral equilibrium) can either be at all-share or an equilibrium
where (b ) crosses the indifference line  = 0 from above (and thus, has a negative tangent line) by
Lemma B.2. In the first case, both islands are at all-share (so the most viral equilibrium has all-share
for the initial phase too, per Lemma 1), so an increase in homophily does not increase or decrease
virality by Corollary 1. In the second case, the curve 2 shifts upward, moving the intersection with
the indifference line to some higher b2 . Because this was an internal equilibrium (by assumption),
the fraction of inspections on island 2 increases in the most viral equilibrium (i.e., i2 / (ps /pd ) > 0).
By the same argument as in Theorem 4, this necessarily increases the fraction of agents killing in the
initial phase as well as on island 2, given that island 1 is at all-share. Once again, for ease and to show
a stronger claim, we will assume the fraction of agents killing in the initial phase remains the same for
the purposes of studying virality (and engagement) with an article containing misinformation.
   To find the most viral equilibrium (for misinformation), we need to consider the expected
engagement with an article containing misinformation. Because we have assumed that the strategy
profile of initial phase agents has remained unchanged, it is sufficient to simply consider engagement
that stems from interactions in the viral phase.           Engagement satisfies the following fixed-point
equation:


                                     ps /pd                             1 - i2
 E[ST (i ) | island 1] =  + e-2               E[ST (i ) | island 1] +             E[ST (i ) | island 2]          (6)
                                   1 + ps /pd                         1 + ps /pd
                                        1                             (ps /pd )(1 - i2 )
 E[ST (i ) | island 2] =  + e-2               E[ST (i ) | island 1] +                    E[ST (i ) | island 2]   (7)
                                   1 + ps /pd                            1 + ps /pd

Note that when i2 = 0 (i.e., exactly at ps = pd ), engagement has no dependence on (ps , pd ):

                                                                                
                          E[ST (i ) | island 1] = E[ST (i ) | island 2] =
                                                                            1 - e-2



                                                     B-6
for all ps /pd , which implies that for fixed i2 = 0,

                                  E[ST (i ) | island 1]    E[ST (i ) | island 2]
                                                        =                        =0                                  (8)
                                      (ps /pd )                (ps /pd )

locally at ps = pd . Differentiating at ps = pd and accounting for the fact i2 is a function of (ps , pd ), as
discussed before, and using Equation (8) we get that:

 E[ST (i ) | island 1, i2 (ps )]               1                                      1 - i2
                                 =e-2                  2
                                                          E[ST (i ) | island 1] -                  E[ST (i ) | island 2]
          (ps /pd )                     (1 + (ps /pd ))                           (1 + (ps /pd ))2
                                        1        i2
                                  -
                                    1 + ps /pd  (ps /pd )

and

 E[ST (i ) | island 2, i2 (ps )]                   1                                     1 - i2
                                 =e-2 -                      E[ST (i ) | island 1] +                  E[ST (i ) | island 2]
          (ps /pd )                         (1 + (ps /pd ))2                         (1 + (ps /pd ))2
                                      ps /pd      i2
                                  -
                                    1 + ps /pd  (ps /pd )

with the change in total engagement being roughly:

                  E[ST (i ) | island 1, i2 (ps )]  E[ST (i ) | island 2, i2 (ps )]      i2
                                                 +                                 =-            <0
                           (ps /pd )                        (ps /pd )                  (ps /pd )

as i2 / (ps /pd ) > 0 by our previous argument. Thus, total engagement with homophily near ps /pd = 1
decreases and establishes the claim from part (a).
   For part (b), we first show that given some island                   has strategic complements and an all-share
equilibrium, an increase in homophily preserves the all-share equilibrium on this island. Without
loss, we again will assume = 1. We have:

                                                            k
                                                                =2 i    N
                                             I1 =                       k
                                                    (ps /pd )N1 +           =2 N
                                                                    k
                                       I1                N1     =2 i N
                                =               =-                          <0
                                      (ps /pd )    ((ps /pd )N1 + k =2 N )2

for all ps /pd and . Thus, similar to the proof in part (a), we have:

                                             1 (0)        1 (0) I1
                                                       =           <0
                                             (ps /pd )    I1 ps

for all ps /pd due to strategic complementarity. As a result, the difference in sharing payoff and
inspecting becomes larger as compared to before the increase in homophily (for the worst-case prior
of bi = 0), so all-share on island 1 is still part of the most viral equilibrium.
   Second, we establish that for sufficiently high homophily ratio p
                                                                   ~, all ps /pd > p
                                                                                   ~ satisfy the property
that all-share remains on island 1 in the initial phase as well in the most viral equilibrium. We employ

                                                          B-7
                                                                     2
a similar technique to the proof of Lemma 1. Recall that vinitial > vinitial > Cinitial , so sharing is a best
response when others in the initial phase are also sharing. Next, we compute the probability that if the
article starts with agent i            1   in the initial phase that it ever leaves island 1 (and thus could be killed
or inspected in the future). A loose union bound gives us:

                                                                 2
                    pd (N - N1 )
                                                        1 +                   e-1 ( 1 -1)-2 ( 2 -1) (1 - e-1 )(1 - e-2 )
                ps N1 + pd (N - N1 )
                                        1 =1  2 =1               =1
                      N - N1             (1 - e-1 )                 (1 - e-1 )(1 - e-2 )
            =                                              +
                (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N         (1 - e-1 )2         (1 - e-1 )(1 - e-2 )(1 - e-2 )

which is finite and converges toward 0 as ps /pd  . Taking ps /pd sufficiently large bounds this
probability, call it  , below (vinitial - Cinitial )/(vinitial + C ), so that (1 -  )vinitial - C - Cinitial > 0
and all-share is still supported in the initial phase.
    In the trivial case where all of the islands are at all-share, we know by Corollary 1 that following any
change in homophily will not destroy the all-share equilibrium, so the virality of misinformation does
not improve. Thus, we assume without loss of generality that there exists some island                            with either kill
rate k      > 0 or inspection rate i           > 0.
    Next, consider the engagement fixed-point equation for island 1 that we studied in part (a), but for
the more general island model and looking at both phases of the sharing game:

                                                                       (ps /pd )N1
                E[ST (i ) | island 1; initial] = 1 + e-1                               E[ST (i ) | island 1; initial]
                                                                 (ps /pd )(N1 - 1) + N
                                                   k
                                                             (1 - k )N
                                               +                           E[ST (i ) | island ; initial]
                                                        (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                                                   =2
                                                                      (ps /pd )N1
                                               + (1 - e-1 )                         E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                                                 (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                                                   k
                                                             (1 - i )N
                                               +                           E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                                        (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                                                   =2
                                                                          (ps /pd )N1
                 E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral] =  + e-2                                  E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                                                     (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                                                   k
                                                             (1 - i )N
                                               +                           E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                                        (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                                                   =2


We prove that  E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]/ (ps /pd ) > 0 for sufficiently high homophily; the case for the
initial phase follows similarly. The derivative (with respect to ps /pd ) of the term associated with island
1 is:

                  N1 (N - N1 )                                         (ps /pd )N1    E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
e-2                              2
                                   E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral] +
            ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )                                 (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N           (ps /pd )




                                                                     B-8
whereas the derivative of the term associated with island              is:

                  (1 - i )N N1                                                N                                       i
 e-2 -                                 E[ST (i ) | island ; viral] -                    E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
             ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2                                  (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N                              (ps /pd )
       (1 - i )N         E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
+
  (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N              (ps /pd )

Rearranging, we have that:

 E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]     e-2 [(ps /pd - 1)N1 + N ]        N1 (N - N1 )
                              =                                                     E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
          (ps /pd )             ((1 - e-2 )ps /pd - 1)N1 + N ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2
                                  k
                                            (1 - i )N N1
                             -                                E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                       ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2
                                  =2
                                            N                                       i
                                 +                    E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                   (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N                              (ps /pd )
                                        (1 - i )N      E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                 -
                                   (ps /pd - 1)N1 + N             (ps /pd )

Multiplying all sides by ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2 :

                                            E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                     ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2
                                                     (ps /pd )
                           - 
                        e 2 [(ps /pd - 1)N1 + N ]
                    =                                  N1 (N - N1 )E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                      ((1 - e-2 )ps /pd - 1)N1 + N
                        k
                    -        (1 - i )N N1 E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                        =2
                                                                         i
                    +N ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                                                        (ps /pd )
                                                      E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                    -(1 - i )N ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )
                                                               (ps /pd )

We argue that both the last two terms go to 0 (for all ) as ps /pd  :

  (i) Penultimate term: Note that as ps /pd  , i                   i for some i because the island model
     converges to the segregated islands model, which will yield most sharing equilibrium on each
     individual island (as in Theorem 4). Moreover, in the vicinity of i , i will converge monotonically
     to i because either strategic complements or substitutes will dominate near i and the effect on
     i will be consistent after some ps /pd  p . Hence, integrating i / (ps /pd ) after p reveals that it
     must converge superlinearly, as linear monotone converge would imply i is unbounded, which
                                                                                                        i
     it clearly cannot be. Thus, limps /pd  N ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]  (ps /pd ) = 0.

 (ii) Final term:       A     symmetric        argument     to   the     one   above    shows   that   ((ps /pd   -
     1)N     +   N )2  E[ST (i ) |     island ; viral]/ (ps /pd ) is a function of N1 ((ps /pd - 1)N              +
     N ) E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]/ (ps /pd ) among the other parameters from the equation above.


                                                           B-9
     Thus,  E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]/ (ps /pd ) must converge to 0 at the same rates of convergence in
     ps /pd , which is quadratic.

Therefore, for large enough ps /pd , the above is approximately equal to:

                             E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]     e-2
   ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2                                 =         N1 (N - N1 )E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                      (ps /pd )             1 - e-2
                                                            k
                                                        -        (1 - i )N N1 E[ST (i ) | island ; viral]
                                                            =2
                                                              e-2
                                                                    N1 (N - N1 )E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                                            1 - e-2
                                                            k
                                                        -        (1 - i )N N1 E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                                            =2


By assumption i      > 0 for some island    ;   thus,

                             E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]     e-2
   ((ps /pd - 1)N1 + N )2                                 >         N1 (N - N1 )E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral]
                                      (ps /pd )             1 - e-2
                                                            k
                                                        -        N N1 E[ST (i ) | island 1; viral] = 0
                                                            =2




Proof of Theorem 6. We prove this theorem for a decrease in message extremism or polarization, and
the proof for an increase is analogous.
   For part (a), we start with the case of message extremism, then polarization, and then show how
these conclusions decrease virality on the single island.
   We know that b < 1/2 and b < 1/2 because the right-wing island is at all-share. Following an
decrease in the extremism of the (right-wing) message m, the belief of a left-wing agent  i that the
article is truthful increases, as observed in Proposition 2. As seen in Theorem 1, sharing payoffs net
inspecting or killing are monotone in  i . Thus, in the viral phase, (b ) decreases. If the extremal
equilibrium is all-share, it remains all-share. If the extremal equilibrium is all-inspect, inspections
can only increase. If the extremal equilibrium crosses the indifference line  = 0 at some interior
cutoff b (at negative slope), then b decreases as  shifts down for all cutoffs below 1/2. These are
the only three possibilities by Lemma B.2. Thus, inspections decrease in the most viral equilibrium
and applying Topkis's theorem for the initial phase shows that kills must decrease in the initial-phase
extremal equilibrium too.
   Following a decrease in the polarization, by Lemma B.3, we know that i = H (b ) has decreased
since b < 1/2 (i.e., inspections have gone down, holding the cutoff b fixed).                         By strategic
complementarity, note that       (b )/I     > 0, so once again      (b )    decreases, and the same conclusion
of the previous paragraph applies to show that b and b both decrease. Finally, this implies that


                                                        B-10
H (b ) and H (b ) also decrease (because of the reduction in polarization), so kills and inspections also
decrease in the most viral equilibrium.
   Finally, note that in the single-island model, if the inspection rate and kill rate are both lower in
a new equilibrium, virality necessarily increase, because the choice of the seed agent i at t = 0 is
immaterial to engagement with misinformation, as the connections are uniformly at random. Thus,
part (a) shows virality of misinformation increases as intended.
   For part (b), because we are in the segregated islands model, we can apply the comparative statics
of Theorem 2 to the right-wing island. Following a decrease in extremism of the message, all-share
becomes less likely on this island by Proposition 2. Similarly, following a decrease in the polarization,
all-share becomes less likely on this island by Proposition 4 because all agents on the right-wing island
hold beliefs bR > 1/2. Starting with an initial seed agent i on the right-wing island guarantees all-
share, which is the most viral equilibrium for misinformation. Decreasing extremism or polarization
might destroy the all-share equilibrium on the right-wing island, which would necessarily destroy the
all-share on the left-wing island (if it existed, see the discussion following Definition 3 in the text), and
lead to inspections on both islands. Any choice of i would lead killing and/or inspection with positive
probability. This establishes the claim for part (a) that virality of misinformation indeed decreases.


B.4   Omitted Proofs from Section 5


Proof of Proposition 5. For part (a), we note that by Lemma B.3, an increase in polarization necessarily
(weakly) decreases »b1 < 1/2 and (weakly) increases b > 1/2. By Proposition 4, this necessarily
                                                              k
increases the likelihood of all-share equilibria within these communities when P is chosen to be
the segregated-islands model. Because of the monotonicity in messages for all-share equilibria
(Proposition 2) when »
                     b1 < 1/2 and bk > 1/2, this implies that  weakly decreases following this increase
in polarization.
   For part (b), the addition of a new community that neither becomes community 1 or community
k does not affect the platform's decision problem, as described in the proof of Theorem 7. However, if
the additional community ends up being the most left or right extreme one (i.e., becomes community
1 or community k ), then this decreases »
                                        b1 or increases b , and the same comparative static with respect
                                                          k
to polarization holds in this case.
   Finally, for part (c), the platform only need check whether an all-share equilibrium can be sustained
in community 1 or community k when adopting the segregated-islands model of P. This is equivalent
to checking the conditions of Theorem 2. The inspection cost K appears only on the right-hand side
of these conditions, and by increasing K , all-share equilibria become more likely. Given that »
                                                                                               b1 < 1/2
and bk > 1/2, this allows for a greater right-hand side of the inequality in Theorem 2 and still permit
all-share. Because (1 -  ) is decreasing in the extremity of the message (when the platform targets
community 1 or community k ), this permits the platform to adopt the algorithm of Theorem 7(b) with
a less extreme message, thus decreasing the threshold  .


                                                   B-11
B.5     Omitted Proofs from Section 6


Proof of Proposition 6. It is sufficient to prove parts (a) and (b) separately for thresholds 1 , 2  (0, 1),
respectively, and then take   » = max{ , 1 -  }. Note that q (when provenance is not revealed) satisfies
                                          1      2
q = qr + (1 - )qs .

(a) In the single-island model, we compare the most-sharing equilibrium before provenance is
      revealed to the most-sharing equilibria (one for sketchy and one for reputable news) after
      provenance is revealed. We denote the former cutoff as (b , b ) and the latter cutoffs as (b     
                                                                                                  r , br )
      and (b     
            s , bs ) for reputable and sketchy news, respectively.

      We focus on the most-sharing equilibrium when the news source is revealed as reputable, (b     
                                                                                                r , br ).
      This falls in one of three categories by Lemma B.2 (and these cutoffs can be analyzed before
      considering the initial-phase cutoffs, per Lemma B.1).

      First, if all-inspect is the most viral with reputable news, it is unique, and then is unique for sketchy
      news and when provenance is hidden. Moreover, by the arguments in Theorem 4, sharing in the
      initial-phase extremal equilibria will be monotonically affected by sharing in the viral phase, which
      is as low as it can be, as well as q , the likelihood the article is truthful. Thus, taking 1 close to 1,
      guarantees b           
                  r = b and br = b
                                   = 1, whereas for the sketchy source b < b and b = 1. This
                                                                        s         s
      means viral misinformation is reduced given qs < qr .

      Second, is that all-share is the most viral equilibrium and the most-sharing equilibrium is all-share
      in both phases by Lemma 1. Any policy here, including revealing provenance, (weakly) reduces the
      virality of misinformation

      Third, is that w(b) intersects the indifference curve at b with a negatively-sloped tangent line.
      Once again, taking 1 close to 1 guarantees that b           
                                                       r = b and br  b
                                                                       for the most-sharing

      equilibrium. However, revealing the ex-ante probability the article is truthful is qs increases (b ),
      which increases the viral-phase cutoff for sketchy news to bs , and thus increases inspections of
      sketchy news. By the argument in Theorem 4, this also increases killing in the initial phase in the
      most-sharing equilibrium.

(b) Conversely, we focus on the most-sharing equilibrium when the news source is revealed as sketchy,
      (b     
        s , bs ). As before, the most-sharing equilibrium in the viral phase falls in one of three categories
      by Lemma B.2 (which are unaffected by initial-phase strategies, per Lemma B.1).

      First, is that all-inspect is the unique viral-phase equilibrium for sketchy news. Then, when 2 is
      sufficiently close to 0, all-inspect is unique when provenance is not revealed. Moreover, by the
      arguments in Theorem 4, sharing in the initial-phase extremal equilibria will be monotonically
      affected by sharing in the viral phase, which is as low as it can be. Thus, revealing provenance can
      only increase the virality of misinformation.



                                                      B-12
      Second, is that the most viral equilibrium is all-share. Similar to the first case in (a), when 2 is
      close to 0, revealing provenance retains the all-share equilibrium for both news sources.

      Third, is that w(b) intersects the indifference curve at b with a negatively-sloped tangent line.
      As before, when 2 is sufficiently close to 0, b                
                                                     s = b and bs = b . Revealing qr for a reputable
      source decreases (b ) and decreases the cutoff from b to some b     
                                                                     r < b . This implies there is
      more sharing in the initial phase as well when the news source is revealed as reputable. Hence, the
      revelation of reputable news increases the virality of misinformation for this type of news while not
      affecting the virality of sketchy news.




Proof of Corollary 2. Following Theorem 7, if the platform does not tag an article and either (i) it does
contain misinformation or (ii)  > max{L(m), 1/L(m)}, and in either case, the planner censors it with
positive probability. This strictly decreases E[ST (i ) ] given the platform does not inspect. When KP is
sufficiently small, this implies the platform should instead inspect first, and by Theorem 7, choose the
uniform-connection model for P. Because all content is tagged, the planner need not censor any of it.



Proof of Corollary 3. Note that p = 1 gives the outcome of Theorem 7(a) and p =  gives the outcome
of Theorem 7(b). When ps /pd < p
                               » for p
                                     » sufficiently close to 1, the probability of inspection during the
share cascade is bounded away from 0, given there is no all-share equilibrium (which does not depend
on P per Corollary 1). Thus, taking KP to be sufficiently small, the platform prefers to inspect and
tag the article than risk this loss in engagement in the event of the article containing misinformation
(which occurs with positive probability).


B.6     Misinformation Structures

In Section 2, we assumed that the message distribution for misinformation (i.e., articles with  = F )
followed f (m| = г), i.e., a mirror image of truthful information. Here, we relax that assumption,
and allow for a more general structure of misinformation. Let  (m|) be the likelihood (density) of
misinformation given state , where  divides the message space at m = 0 as f does, which is
without loss of generality. We assume that misinformation is less strongly correlated with the truth
than accurate information (which includes, as special cases, noise or anti-correlation). Thus, while
misinformation is less strongly grounded to the truth, it is still possible for misinformation to advocate
for the correct state . We make the following assumption:

Assumption B.1. Misinformation is less informative than true information in the sense that f (m| =
R)/ (m| = R) is increasing in m and f (m| = L)/ (m| = L) is decreasing in m.

   Our anti-correlation assumption in the text is a special case of Assumption B.1 (given the MLRP
property of f ). Formally, Assumption B.1 requires the ratio of the likelihood of accurate information

                                                    B-13
advocating for the correct state to the likelihood of misinformation advocating for the correct state be
monotone in the strength of the message. The following result looks at how the posterior belief of an
article's veracity (for some agent i) is affected by her initial belief bi :

Proposition B.1. Fix a right-wing message m > 0 and let q
                                                        ~ be the ex-ante probability (conditional on
receiving the article) that it is truthful. There exists   (0, 1) such that all agents with bi <  have  i < q
                                                                                                            ~
whereas all agents with bi >  have  i > q
                                        ~.

   In the baseline model (Section 2), left-wing agents believe more extreme right-wing news is more
likely to contain misinformation, whereas right-wing agents believe more extreme left-wing news is.
In this baseline,  = 1/2. However, for more general structures, while  need not be equal to 1/2, the
qualitative properties of the model remain intact. In particular, any results or definitions that explicitly
divide the prior space into beliefs less than 1/2 and greater than 1/2 can be be generalized using the 
of Proposition B.1, whereas all others remain entirely unaffected.


B.7    Proof of Proposition B.1

Under the more general misinformation structure of Appendix B.6, the posterior belief the article is
truthful is:


                                                  (L(m)bi + (1 - bi ))~
                                                                      q
                    i =
                                                        (m|=R)            (m|=L)
                          (L(m)bi + (1 - bi ))~
                                              q+       f (m|=L) bi   +   f (m|=L) (1   - bi ) (1 - q
                                                                                                   ~)

Differentiating with respect to bi :

                              i                 (m| = L)  (m| = R)
                                 (1 - q q L(m)
                                      ~)~                 -
                             bi                f (m| = L)   f (m| = L)

which is positive if and only if:
                                                          (m| = R)
                                               L(m) >
                                                          (m| = L)
                                            (m|=L)                                                       (m|=L)
When m = 0, we know that L(m) и             (m|=R)    = 1, and by Assumption B.1, we know L(m) и         (m|=R)
                             (m|=L)
is increasing, so L(m) и     (m|=R)      > 1 for all m > 0, which satisfies the desired inequality. So  i is
monotonically increasing in bi . Finally, note that  i = q
                                                         ~ when:

                                                        (m|=L)
                                                       f (m|=L)   -1
                                  bi =
                                            (m|=L)                          (m|=R)
                                           f (m|=L)   - 1 + L(m) -         f (m|=L)


Note that when m > 0,  (m| = L)/f (m| = L) > 1 and that f (m| = R) >  (m| = R) by
                             (m|=L)                             (m|=R)
Assumption B.1, so both     f (m|=L)   - 1 > 0 and L(m) -      f (m|=L)     > 0. Thus, bi =   (0, 1).




                                                        B-14
B.8    Endogenous Reputation

In the baseline model of Section 2, we assume that agents care about getting caught sharing
misinformation, in the form of an exogenous discounted societal punishment C , following an
inspection (in her sharing subtree) revealing the article contains misinformation. In this section, we
show that this formulation can be microfounded by an endogenous concern to build a reputation of
sharing only quality content.
    At t = 0, every agent is born as either a careless user, a cautious user, or a normal user.28 The careless
user and cautious user are behavioral types that share and kill/inspect every article with probability 1,
respectively, whereas a normal user is a fully rational agent of the model in Section 2. The user is
born careless with probability  careless > 0 and born cautious with probability  cautious > 0 which is
i.i.d. across all agents and immutable. If an article is revealed as containing misinformation (either by
another agent in the sharing subtree or by the outside source), the sharers of this misinformation are
broadcast to all agents in the population. Consequently, after the article is out of circulation, agents in
the population hold posterior beliefs  careless
                                       i        about agent i's likelihood of being the careless type.
    We assume each agent i intrinsically values the population's perception 1 -  careless
                                                                                 i        (i.e., the public
belief that she is not a careless user). This utility can exist for a few reasons. First, the agent may
want other agents to believe she is socially responsible and only shares content she believes to likely
be true, and does not spread "click-bait" articles with likely misinformation. Second, a bad reputation
will also cut down on future share cascade opportunities: with higher  careless
                                                                       i        , agents will inspect more
often following agent i's share because of the strategic substitutes effect.29 In particular, we assume
the social punishment takes the form C~ ( careless
                                          i
                                                                        ~ is a scaling factor that determines
                                                   -  careless ), where C
an agent's aversion to reputation loss.
    For agents who share accurate news or kill/inspect, we observe  careless
                                                                    i          careless , so as in
the baseline model, there is no societal punishment.30 On the other hand, for those who shared
misinformation,  careless
                 i        >  careless for all such agents i. Note that because agent i's belief distribution
is unknown, all sharers of misinformation have the same  careless
                                                         i        >  careless , with the (non-zero)
reputation gap determined by averaging the Bayesian posterior of each agents' likelihood of being
careless over all the equilibrium cutoffs (per Theorem 1). This translates to a model with some
reputation cost C and  = 1, but where C is endogenously determined as an equilibrium object.


B.9    Numerical Simulations

We now present some simulations to investigate how often all-share equilibria exist and are unique.
When all-share exists, we also investigate the likelihood that strategic complements exist at this
   28
      Note in equilibria other than all-share, the cautious user is superfluous to the reputation argument (i.e., careless and
normal users suffice).
   29
      Note the strategic complements effect here is absent because the probability the article ends up at agent i is vanishing as
N  .
   30
      The benefit from revealing misinformation,  , can also be microfounded in this way if the agent who inspects is revealed:
in this event,  careless
                 i       <  careless , and there is in fact a reputational reward for exposing misinformation.


                                                             B-15
equilibrium, i.e., at the cutoff b = 0. In these simulations, we draw the model primitives in the
following ranges, all independently and uniformly at random: q  (1/2, 1), f (m| = L)  (1/2, 1),
f (m| = R)  (1, 2), C  (5, 20),   (0, 1), K  (0, 5),   (K, 5), 1  (0, 4), 2  (0, 4),
  (1, min(5, 1/ )), and   (0, 1/5). We employ rejection sampling to make sure Assumption 1 holds
in all simulations.

                              Property      Sufficient Condition   Truth
                             Existence             34.3%           34.3%
                            Uniqueness              7.3%           16.6%
                           Complements             98.6%           98.6%



   Because existence and complements criteria for all-share have closed-form expressions, we have
both necessary and sufficient conditions for each, which means the underlying truth and the derived
conditions yield the same results. We see that existence and uniqueness of all-share equilibria occur
relatively often. However, more importantly, we see that the complements property is extremely
common in all-share equilibria. Thus, in the what follows, we will often focus on environments where
strategic complements dominates for agents in the viral phase.




                                                B-16
