                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   POLITICS AND GENDER IN THE EXECUTIVE SUITE

                                         Alma Cohen
                                         Moshe Hazan
                                         David Weiss

                                      Working Paper 28893
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28893


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Lucian Bebchuk, Nittai Bergman, Louis Kaplow, David Matsa, Itay Saporta, Analia
Schlosser, Kathy Spier, Dan Zeltzer, and participants in the workshop at Harvard Law School and
Tel-Aviv University for valuable comments and discussion, and Shay Achrich and Alon Bebchuk
for excellent research assistance. Alma Cohen acknowledges financial support from the Israel
Science Foundation ­ the Recanati Foundation and the IDB Group (grant No. 1935/18), and the
Harvard Law School. This paper is part of the research work of the Project on Corporate Political
Spending of the Harvard Law School Program on Corporate Governance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alma Cohen, Moshe Hazan, and David Weiss. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Politics and Gender in the Executive Suite
Alma Cohen, Moshe Hazan, and David Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 28893
June 2021
JEL No. G30,J16,J30,M12,M14,M51

                                         ABSTRACT

Are the political preferences of CEOs associated with the representation and compensation of
women in the executive suite? We find that Democratic CEOs (those who contribute more to
Democratic candidates) are associated with higher representation of women in the executive
suite. To explore causality, we use an event study approach and show that replacing a Republican
with a Democratic CEO is associated with 20%-60% in more women in the executive suite.
Finally, we show that Democratic CEOs associated with a significant reduction (or even
disappearance) of the gender gap in the level and performance-sensitivity of executive pay.


Alma Cohen                                     David Weiss
Harvard Law School                             The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
1525 Massachusetts Avenue                      Tel Aviv University
Cambridge, MA 02138                            P.O.B. 39040
and NBER                                       Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978
alcohen@law.harvard.edu                        Israel
                                               davidweiss@post.tau.ac.il
Moshe Hazan
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel-Aviv University
P.O. Box 39040
Tel-Aviv 69978
Israel
and CEPR
moshehaz@tauex.tau.ac.il
1 Introduction

This paper investigates the relationship that CEO's political preferences have on
the representation of women in the team of top non-CEO executives ("the execu-

tive suite"), as well as with the level and structure of the compensation of female
executives in the executive suite. Our analysis covers all U.S. companies listed on
the S&P 1500 during the period 2000-2018.

We hypothesize that CEOs who are more supportive of the Democratic Party

(have "stronger Democratic preferences") are associated with higher female rep-
resentation in the executive suite. We also hypothesize that CEOs who display
preferences for Democratic candidates ("Democratic CEO") are associated with a
smaller gender gap in the level and performance sensitivity of pay in the execu-
tive suite. We discuss (Section 2) a number of mechanisms that could contribute

to producing the hypothesized associations. Our analysis provides evidence that
is consistent with both hypotheses.

To study our subject, we put together data about the political preferences of CEOs
with data about the gender and compensation of top executives. Following the

literature (see, e.g. Bonica, 2016; Hutton et al., 2014), we assume that the political
preferences of CEOs are reflected in their political contributions, and we base
our analysis on a dataset that we constructed that contains information about the
political contributions of all CEOs extracted from Federal Election Commission

records. In addition to merging this dataset with the standard ExecuComp and
Compustat datasets, we add a novel dataset that we put together based on Form
4 filings by executives. This novel dataset enables us to include in our analysis
of the executive suite all executives that are sufficiently senior to be required to

publicly report their trades under the securities laws. We discuss the assumption
that CEO political contributions reflect their personal beliefs and the construction
of our dataset based off of Form 4 data in depth in Section 3.


                                          1
Using an OLS analysis, we find that CEOs with stronger Democratic preferences

are associated with higher representation of women ­ to an extent that is both
statistically and economically significant ­ among members of the executive suite.
In particular, a CEO who contributes only to Democratic candidates is associated
with an increase of about 15-25% in the fraction of women in the executive suite

compared to a CEO who only contributed to Republican candidates.

To explore further the association between political preferences and female repre-
sentation in the executive suite, we use an event-study approach to study events
where companies replace their CEOs.1 We classify an outgoing CEO or an in-

coming CEO as a Republican CEO (Democratic CEO) if the fraction of the CEO's
contributions to Republicans (Democrats) exceed a specified threshold (using for
robustness three alternative specifications of the threshold). We find that replac-
ing an outgoing Republican CEO with an incoming Democratic CEO, rather than
an incoming Republican CEO, is accompanied by an increase in female represen-

tation in the executive suite. This effect, we show, is statistically significant and
economically significant, and could reach as much as 60% over three years. We
also show that these results are driven by the new Democratic CEO hiring more
women into the executive suite rather than reducing the size of the executive suite

while keeping the number of women intact.

Using ExecuComp data on executive compensation, we find that non-CEO exec-
utives do not receive different compensation, in level or performance sensitivity,
depending on whether the CEO at their firm is a Democrat or Republican CEOs.

However, gender compensation gaps differ greatly by the political preferences of
the CEO. In particular, we find that the level of compensation paid to female ex-
ecutives is lower than that paid to their male counterparts, and similar to the gap
documented in the literature discussed below. However, once we also control for
   1 Xuan   (2009) also exploits changes of CEOs to understand how CEOs allocate capital within
firms.



                                                2
CEOs' political preferences, we find that CEOs with Democratic preferences are

associated with a significantly smaller gender pay gap. To illustrate, a move from
a CEO that contributes only to Democrats to a CEO who contributes only to Re-
publicans is associated with a more than doubling of the gender pay gap. Under
some measures of CEO political preferences, we cannot reject the hypothesis that

there is no gender pay gap under CEOs who only donate to Democrats.

In addition, using three standard measures of the performance sensitivity of com-

pensation, we find that the compensation of female executives is less sensitive to
performance.2 However, we find a significant association between the magni-
tude of these gender gaps and CEOs' political preferences. Using each of the
three standard measures, the gender gap in the performance sensitivity of pay is

significantly smaller, or even non-existant, for CEOs who are more supportive of
the Democratic Party than for CEOs who are more supportive of the Republican
Party. Thus, our findings indicate that the gender gaps in the level and struc-
ture of pay identified by the literature are substantially related to CEOs' political

preferences.

To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to study the relationship

between CEOs' political preferences and the representation and compensation of
women in the executive suite. However, there is a substantial literature on each
of these subjects separately, and our work contributes to these three literatures.

Literature on the hiring of female non-CEO executives in the U.S. is sub-
stantial.     Studies on the gender composition of the executive suite, which

have thus far not considered CEOs' political preferences, include Bell (2005);
Matsa and Miller (2011). The literature on gender pay gaps in the executives
suite includes Bertrand and Hallock (2001); Munoz-Bullon (2010); Gayle et al.
(2012); Albanesi et al. (2015); Newton and Simutin (2015); Carter et al. (2017);
Quintana-Garcia and Elvira (2017). Like the literature on female representation
  2 This   is also as documented by prior literature discussed below.

                                                 3
among top executives, this literature has thus far not examined the relationship

between its subject of investigation and the political preferences of CEOs.

The literature on the political preferences of CEOs is also significant. Stud-
ies that focus on the distribution of CEO preferences between the two major
parties include Bonica (2016) and Cohen et al. (2019).                 A number of studies

have examined the relationship between CEOs' political preferences and vari-
ous decisions made by their companies, including decisions regarding mergers
and acquisitions (Elnahas and Kim, 2017), riskiness of investments and corpo-
rate debt levels (Hutton et al., 2014), tax sheltering (Francis et al., 2016), lobby-

ing (Unsal et al., 2016), types of litigation (Hutton et al., 2015), corporate social
responsibility (Di Giuli and Kostovetsky, 2014), transparency of political spend-
ing (Cohen et al., 2019), pay dispersion and diversity in the executive suite
(Chin and Semadeni, 2017), the political donations of employees (Babenko et al.,
2019), and dividend policy (Bayat and Goergen, 2020). However, researchers

have not yet considered how CEOs' political preferences are associated with
gender-related choices in general and in the hiring and compensation of female
executives in particular.3

Finally, our research is part of and contributes to the broad literature that high-
lights the impact of CEOs' personal characteristics and circumstances on cor-
porate decisions.       This literature includes studies that show how corporate
decisions are related to a CEO attributes, such as whether the CEO is over-
confident (Malmendier and Tate, 2009; Malmendier et al., 2011), the CEO is op-

timistic and risk-tolerant (Graham et al., 2013), whether the CEO has daugh-
ters (Cronqvist and Yu, 2017; Dahl et al., 2011; Dasgupta et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
   3 Though  we are unaware of other papers on how CEOs' political preferences influence gender
issues in corporate America, Cohen and Yang (2019) examines how judges appointed by Repub-
licans and by Democrats treat female defendants. The authors find that Republican-appointed
judges give shorter sentences to female defendants. Relatedly, Carnahan and Greenwood (2018)
show that law firms with more politically liberal partners, as measured by their political contri-
butions, are more likely to hire female associates.



                                                4
2019), whether the CEO is in the media limelight (Malmendier and Tate,

2009), whether the CEO served in the military (Malmendier et al., 2011;
Benmelech and Frydman, 2015), the cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds of
the CEO (Nguyen et al., 2017; Duchin et al., 2020), and the timing of the decisions
within the CEO's lifecycle (see, e.g. Pan et al., 2016).

We proceed as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional background and our
hypotheses. Section 3 describes our data sources and the calculation of our main
variables of interest. Section 4 studies how the political preferences of a CEO
influence the gender composition of the executive suite, and analyzes our event

study. Section 5 examines differences in level and structure of compensation be-
tween men and women in light of the CEO's political preferences. Finally, Section
6 concludes.


2 Institutional Background and Hypotheses

There has been a growing interest in the representation of women in high-level
positions in general, and in the ranks of corporate executives in particular. Many

companies have expressed an interest in or even a commitment to growing the in-
cidence of female executives (see, e.g.,Larcker and Tayan (2020)) . In recent years,
more investors and the media have been playing close attention to this issue.
Thus, understanding all the factors that shape the hiring and compensation of

women in top executive positions is of significant interest. In this section, we first
discuss the CEO's role in hiring and compensating executives, which establishes
that it is plausible that CEO preferences can impact the executive suite. We then
discuss various hypotheses as to how CEO preferences may be associated with
the facts we document in this paper.




                                           5
2.1 CEOs' Role in Hiring and Compensating Other Top Executives

CEOs are widely assumed to be key players in the making of corporate decisions,
and this assumption motivated the large body of literature noted in Section 1

regarding the association between personal characteristics of CEOs and corporate
decisions. One type of corporate decisions that CEOs have notable impact on is
decisions regarding the hiring and compensation of members of the executive
suite.4 It is desirable for the CEO to be comfortable working with members of
the executive team and to have confidence in their ability to effectively carry out

responsibilities assigned to them by the CEO.

Furthermore, the CEO is likely to have private information pertaining to the suit-
ability and performance of executive suite members. Thus, corporate directors
are likely to attach substantial weight, if not largely defer, to the CEO's pref-

erences and recommendations concerning the hiring and compensation of the
CEO's top executive team. This discussion regarding the significant influence
that CEOs have on such hiring and compensation is consistent with input on
these issues we have received from a number of senior experts from leading ex-

ecutive pay and search advisory firms.5
  4 For  a further discussion on the role of the CEO on executive compensation, see
Chin and Semadeni (2017) and the references contained therein.
   5 The experts from whom we received input on these questions are from the advisory firms

of FW Cook, Spencer Stuart, Russell Reynolds, and Meridian. Among other things, the experts
observed that:
   · "CEOs normally recommend selection of their senior office teams for approval by board
     nominating & governance committees, and pay by compensation committees . . . In my ex-
     perience, general approach is to support the CEO unless issue over rationale".
   · "Generally the CEO puts forth pay recommendations for the executive team and the Com-
     pensation Committee reviews, adjusts as needed, and approves. . . . The CEO is . . . in the
     best position to judge individual performance, which definitely plays into pay recommen-
     dation."[T[he management team (including the CEO) drives the recruiting and interview
     process for executive team members . . . and brings a final candidate to the board for ap-
     proval."
   · "[T]he C-suite reports exclusively to the CEO . . . " [T]he CEO has the final say on hiring
     her/his team. The CEO has a lot of influence on individual executive compensation."




                                              6
2.2 Hypotheses

We hypothesize that the political preferences of CEOs are associated with deci-
sions regarding both the hiring and compensation of female executives. We have

identified the following mechanisms as contributing, individually or in some
combination, to produce such an association:


   · Gender Perceptions: CEOs with stronger Democratic preferences may have
     more favorable views regarding women's relative skills and their effective-
     ness in top executive positions. They would thus be more willing to include

     women in the executive suite.

     This mechanism can also contribute to understanding how gender pay gaps

     differ by the CEO's political preferences. A Democratic CEO with a more
     favorable view of female executives might be more willing to pay female
     executives on par with their male counterparts. Similarly, such a CEO might
     attach more importance to providing incentives to female executives, and

     thus narrow the gender gap in the performance-sensitivity of pay.

   · Network Effects: CEOs with stronger Democratic preferences may have more
     exposure to career-focused and high-level professional women (e.g., in fund
     raising and related activities), increasing both their network for hiring such

     women and their comfort working with such women.

   · Affinity Effects: Female executives are more likely to have Democratic pref-
     erences than male executives (see, e.g. Cohen et al., 2019). To the extent
     that CEOs may feel more affinity towards executives with similar political

     views, and consequently prefer to include such executives in their executive
     suite, CEOs with stronger Democratic preferences may be more open to in-
     cluding in their executive suite women who are likely to have Democratic
     preferences. Under this mechanism, the association between Democratic

                                        7
  preferences of the CEO and female executives is driven by CEOs' preference

  for like-minded executives rather than by CEOs' preferences for women.

  Similarly, this mechanism would predict that Democratic CEOs are more
  likely to offer equal pay to female executives, for whom they feel an affinity,
  thus reducing the gender gap in pay.

· Openness to Change: Increasing the representation of women in the execu-
  tive suite may well involve significant changes to the work environment

  ("the old boys club") and to corporate culture, increasing uncertainty. To
  the extent that liberal CEOs (those with stronger Democratic preferences)
  are more open to changes in the work environment than conservative CEOs
  (those with stronger Republican preferences), liberal CEO will be more will-
  ing to include women in their executive teams.

· Corporate Strategies: Companies that have or that adopt strategies requiring

  more interaction with or appeal to Democratic or female audiences (e.g.,
  Democratic or female politicians or public officials) might be more likely
  to hire a Democratic CEO. In such cases, the value of having a Democratic
  CEO might also lie in the expectation that such a CEO would facilitate more

  women and Democratic executives in the executive suite. These executives
  will in turn assist the CEOs in interacting with the relevant audiences.

· Preferences for Gender Diversity/Equality: CEOs with stronger Democratic
  preferences may be more inclined to attache independent weight to greater
  gender diversity. This tendency could contribute to an association between
  Democratic preferences of the CEO and higher female representation in the

  executive suite.

  Similarly, this mechanism may yield a reduction in gender pay gaps under a
  Democratic CEO. This would be true even if the female executive has worse
  outside options than her male colleague.

                                     8
Whereas the potential presence of these mechanisms informs and motivates our

hypotheses, we do not attempt to identify the relative role and importance of
these mechanisms. Our focus is on examining whether the hypothesized associ-
ations do exist. Given our findings that they do, we leave for future research the
investigation into the extent to which the different mechanisms drive our find-

ings.

Finally, we note that we do not attempt to evaluate normatively the outcomes
produced by any group of CEOs, and we do not assess whether any such group
makes gender-related choices in an optimal or sub-optimal way. We focus on ex-

amining whether the gender-related outcomes associated with Democratic and
Republican CEOs are different, not on which group makes better decisions.
Thus, while our results indicate that Democratic CEOs are associated with more
women in the executive suite than Republican CEOs, these results do not indicate
whether and to what extent any of these groups is acting sub-optimally.


3 Data and Summary Statistics

This section describes how we build our data sets and construct our main vari-
ables of interest. Section 3.1 describes the companies that make up our data uni-
verse, and the financial information we collect on them. In Section 3.2, we de-
scribe the two samples of corporate executives that we employ for our analyses,

drawn from ExecuComp and Form 4 data. Section 3.3 explains how we infer an
executive's gender, if it is not explicitly given in any of our data sources, and how
we calculate our stock-option-based measures of incentive pay (delta and vega).
In Section 3.4, we describe in detail how we determine the political preferences
of the CEOs in our sample. Section 3.5 provides summary statistics of the main

variables used in our analyses.




                                         9
3.1 Companies

Our sample consists of executives at companies included in the S&P 1500 at any
point during the period 2000-2018. The S&P 1500 is a composite index that com-

bines three separate indices: the S&P 500, which consists of 500 companies with
large market capitalization (currently, $6.1 billion or more); the S&P MidCap 400,
consisting of 400 companies with medium capitalization (currently, between $1.6
and $2.8 billion); and the S&P SmallCap 600, consisting of 600 companies with
small capitalization (currently, between $450 million and $2.1 billion) (S&P Dow

Jones 2019, p. 6). In the aggregate, the S&P 1500 represents about 90% of total U.S.
market capitalization. Thus our sample includes executives, including CEOs, of
companies representing the great majority of public-company assets.

In addition to data on executives at these companies, we collect corporate finan-

cial information from the Compustat database. Specifically, we obtain informa-
tion on industry (SIC code), headquarters location, assets, return on assets, book-
to-market ratio, cash, dividends, and total debt.


3.2 Executives

Our primary source of information on CEOs and top executives of public compa-
nies is Standard & Poor's ExecuComp database, which covers companies in the

S&P 1500 index. For all of the highest-paid executives (including CEOs), Execu-
Comp provides total compensation (TDC1), stock compensation, age, title, and
gender. From this data, we can also infer a CEO's tenure.

We complement the ExecuComp dataset with Form 4 filing data from the Secu-

rities and Exchange Commission (SEC), accessed via EDGAR. These are reports
made in compliance with Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which
requires every director, officer, or owner of more than 10% of a company's equity
to report to the SEC his or her relationship to the company and provide infor-


                                        10
mation about any acquisitions or dispositions of company securities.6 Under the

assumption that all officers transact in the company stock, this data should allow
us to paint a comprehensive picture of the officers in a firm.

To assess the reliability of Form 4 data, we first determined whether the execu-
tives listed in ExecuComp also appear in the Form 4 data. Very few executives

who appear in ExecuComp are absent from our Form 4 data. We then determined
whether executives employed at a given firm in our database are observed at a
high frequency, which provides an accurate indication of their continued employ-
ment. As the vast majority of executives file reports annually, their presence in

our data is continuous. For completeness, we assume that an executive who files
a Form 4 report at least once every four years is continuously employed. Overall,
less than 3% of our observations involve such imputations, and the vast major-
ity of those are cases of an executive filing a Form 4 report for one to two years.
Furthermore, we find no systematic differences in the frequency of imputations

between male and female executives under CEOs with different political prefer-
ences.

We then merge the Form 4 data by company and year with our ExecuComp data

to produce a more comprehensive list of executives by company-year.7
   6 The  definition of a corporate officer is less clear-cut than it seems. Although state statutes
and corporate by-laws typically define the role clearly with regard to day-to-day operations of
a firm, the term is not well defined in the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 with reference to
the responsibility to report transactions. It is not clear whether the failure to define the term was
a legislative mistake or reflected an assumption that the term would be defined in keeping with
contemporaneous usage in the corporate world. Thus the term has been the subject of multiple
SEC rules and court cases over the years. It is the general counsel's role to decide who does and
does not meet the definition of an officer, in keeping with the general counsel's understanding
of the law. Guidelines exist for designating the role of "officer" in a firm. For example, Hurley
(1975) discusses the history of the definition of an officer under the 1934 Act and recommends
three criteria: likelihood of obtaining confidential information, responsibility for corporate policy,
and participation in the executive council.
    7 We merge the two datasets in two phases. First, within each company we merge exact

matches of last names with the same first and middle initial. Second, we match names using
the Stata algorithm "matchit", which assigns a score to the relative similarity of the strings. Any
match with a similarity score of less than 0.67 is manually checked; this cutoff was chosen after
examining samples at various cutoffs and determining 0.67 to be an excellent measure of match
quality. An example of a match performed in this way is Anthony Fadell of Apple Computers.


                                                 11
As noted, using Form 4 data allows us to identify a larger set of corporate execu-

tives than merely the most highly paid. This advantage is crucial for our ability
to perform the event-studies described below in Section 4.2.

The disadvantage is that we lack a full set of information about these observa-
tions, including compensation packages and gender, age, and other demographic

characteristics.8 All of our analyses of the representation of women in the execu-
tive suite use two samples: the sample of all executives appearing in ExecuComp
(the "ExecuComp sample") and the union of executives appearing in the amal-
gamation of information on executives from ExecuComp and Form 4, described

here (the "Form 4 sample").


3.3 Gender and Compensation

Form 4 provides no data on gender, while ExecuComp includes gender begin-
ning in 2007. We thus determine gender by means of textual analysis of execu-
tives' first names, performed by gender-api.com. In cases for which we have data
from both gender-api.com and ExecuComp, they agree about 90% of the time,

increasing our confidence in this source of data. When they disagree, we defer to
the gender listed in ExecuComp.

We only have compensation data for executives listed in ExecuComp. To supple-
ment that data, which specifies total compensation, we also calculate each execu-

tive's delta and vega, or the price and volatility sensitivities, respectively, of their
stock-option portfolios.9
In ExecuComp he is listed as Tony Fadell; in Form 4 he is listed as Anthony Fadell. The lack
of matching first initials means that we only merge successfully in the second phase. Because
the score of the match between the strings "Anthony Fadell" and "Tony Fadell" is only 0.59, we
manually confirm that this is indeed the same person (in that Tony is a common nickname for
Anthony).
   8 We discuss below how we infer an executive's gender from his or her name.
   9 We do so using the procedure outlined in Core and Guay (2002), and using code developed

by Kai Chen and graciously made available on his website. His code is in turn based on that
published on Lalitha Naveen's website, used for her paper (Coles et al., 2006).




                                             12
3.4 Political Preferences

We obtain information on CEOs' contributions to political parties from records
made public by the Federal Election Commission (FEC). This is not a straightfor-
ward task; it involves linking the two datasets using names and companies, and
inferring political preferences from contributions. We describe this process more

fully in Appendix A.

To infer CEOs' political preferences we match CEOs with their political contribu-
tions, and identify the party that received their contributions. We derive a variety
of measures of a CEO's political preference for use in our econometric analyses
and use them in each of our exercises discussed below to show the robustness of

our findings.

Because many CEOs make significant contributions in some years but not others,
we define a CEO's political preference by calculate the fraction of a CEO's polit-
ical contributions to either Democrats or Republicans that went to Republicans
during a number of different periods.10 For example, a value of 0 (1) implies that
100% of a CEO's political contributions went to Democrats (Republicans), while

a value of 0.5 implies that political contributions were split evenly between the
parties. Within this set of measures, the differences come down to which time
periods are used together in order to measure a CEO's political preference.

Our first measure is the "election cycle". This measure groups all contributions
from a four-year presidential cycle together, such as 2001-2004 for the 2004 elec-

tion. As such, this measure of political preference is fixed by CEO during the
entirety of the presidential cycle. Our second measure is a "four-year moving
average". This measure sets a CEO's political preference in year t to be based
upon donations between years t - 2 and t + 1. Notice that this measure is some-

what similar to the election cycle measure, as they both cover a four year time
  10 Tobe clear, we ignore contributions to independent/third party candidates, or contributions
for which we could not identify the party to whom they belong.

                                              13
period and only one presidential election at a time. Our third measure is the "last

four years" ("Prev 4 Yr." in the tables). This measure determines a CEO's polit-
ical preference in year t to be based off of donations between years t and t - 3.
Our fourth measure is to combine contributions from all years to create a single,
constant measure of a CEO's average political contributions to Republicans. We

denote this measure the "sample average".

The question arises from our measures of CEO political preferences as to whether
our measure captures CEOs' actual political preferences, as opposed to strategic
considerations. Bonica (2016) performs a number of analyses to show that cor-

porate elites make political contributions to advance their personal preferences
or their business interests. Using companies from Fortune 500 he shows that the
vast majority of CEOs contribute to only one party, whereas their corporation
contributes strategically. He also shows that CEOs are much less likely to pick
winners than are their corporations.

Consistent with Bonica's work, Hutton et al. (2014) also argue that, unlike cor-
porate PACs which contribute strategically to serve corporate purposes, CEOs'
political contributions reflect their personal beliefs.     11



3.5 Summary Statistics

Figure 1 shows the average fraction of CEO's political contributions that go to

Republicans by each of our four measures over time. On average, 60-70% of
contributions from CEOs in our sample go to Republicans.12 This fraction is most
stable for the sample average measure, as that measure does not allow individual
CEOs to change preferences over time.13 All measures detect a slight decline in
  11 Cooper   et al. (2010) show that the number of candidates a corporate PAC supports is cor-
related with subsequent abnormal stock-market returns, suggesting that these PACs are indeed
focused on firm profits.
  12 For more on the breakdown in contributions from CEOs between Democrats and Republi-

cans, see Cohen et al. (2019).
  13 That is, all changes in the sample average measure reflect changes in the sample of CEOs.




                                              14
the average fraction of donations going to Republicans over time.

Tables 1 and 2 report summary statistics for our main analyses and our event
study, respectively. We report the mean and standard deviation (in parentheses)
for our variables of interest for all observations, as well as those conditional on the
political preferences of the CEO. We also report the number of observations for

each variable, both overall and by the CEO's political preference. Our measure of
a CEO's political preferences for these tables is the sample mean.

The first Column of Table 1 reports statistics on CEOs who contribute less
than 50% of their contributions to Republicans (and thus, more than 50% to

Democrats). The second Column reports statistics on CEOs who contribute
more than 50% of their contributions to Republicans (and thus, less than 50%
to Democrats). The third Column reports statistics on all CEOs who we identify
politically. The final Column reports statistics on CEOs not in our sample (NIS).

Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics on CEOs, including gender, age,
tenure as CEO, and whether they also chair the board of directors. Three percent
of all CEOs are female, while 4% (2%) of those who contribute more to Democrats
(Republicans) are female. Four percent of CEOs not in our sample are women.

The average age of all groups of CEOs in our sample is about 56 years old, while
those out of our sample are slightly younger. The average tenure for CEOs in
our sample is 7.6 years, with the average slightly higher (8.3 years) for CEOs
who contribute more to Democrats than to those who contribute more to Repub-

licans (7.3 years). CEOs not in our sample have slightly shorter tenure (5.2 years)
which is consistent with the idea that CEOs contribute more during their tenure
(Fremeth et al., 2013), such that CEOs with shorter tenure are less likely to have
contributed.

Fifty-five percent of all CEOs also chair their boards of directors, while this num-
ber is slightly lower for those who contribute more to Democrats (52%) than for

                                          15
those who contribute more to Republicans (56%). CEOs not in our sample are sig-

nificantly less likely to chair their board of directors (34%). It is likely that CEOs
who are not also chairs of their boards are less likely to give contributions, similar
to the fact that CEOs contribute most during their tenure.

Panel B presents summary statistics on the non-CEO executives in our samples:

their age, total compensation, ratio of salary and bonus to total compensation
("ratio"), delta, and vega, with total compensation, delta, and vega are reported
in thousands of dollars. All of this data comes from ExecuComp, and is thus
reported only for the ExecuComp sample. Finally, Panel B also reports whether

an executive is an insider (as defined above). Insider status is calculated using
Form 4 data, because that broader sample of data is more likely to capture an
executive having been employed at the firm in a previous time period. There
are no major differences in these variables between CEOs of different political
preferences. However, executives at firms outside of our sample are somewhat

less likely to be identified as insiders, have lower compensation (of all forms),
and a higher ratio of salary and bonus to total compensation. This is consistent
with the evidence, discussed below, that CEOs of larger firms are more likely to
be identified politically by our algorithm.

Panel C presents summary statistics on firm characteristics: number of female
executives, total number of executives, and fraction of female non-CEO execu-
tives in both the ExecuComp and Form 4 samples. There are approximately 5.7
and 9.6 executives in the ExecuComp and Form 4 samples respectively, numbers

that do not vary much in relation to CEO politics. Nine percent of ExecuComp
non-CEO executives and 12% of their Form 4 counterparts are female. In both
samples, CEOs who contribute more money to Democrats employ more women
than those who contribute more to Republicans.

Figure 2 shows the fractions of executives who are female, in both samples, by


                                         16
the political preferences of the CEO. This shows a more continuous measure of

how female representation in the executive suite varies by a CEO's political pref-
erences. In the ExecuComp sample, the fraction of women in the executive suite
declines monotonically with the fraction of a CEO's political contributions that
go to Republicans. In the Form 4 sample, the fraction of women in the executive

suite is roughly constant among CEOs who give no more than 40-60% of their
contributions to Republicans, but then declines monotonically among CEOs who
give to Republicans at higher rates.

Log of assets is roughly uniform among the three groups of CEOs. Compa-
nies run by CEOs who contribute more to Republicans have higher return on
assets (ROA) than other CEOs. Cash, dividends, and debt all vary somewhat

from group to group, but their variance can be attributed to differences in other
variables, such as industry and company size.14 In comparison, companies led
by CEOs outside of our sample have similar numbers of executives, executives
who are female, and fraction of executives who are female as those in the sample.

However, companies outside of the sample are substantially smaller, as measured
by total assets. They also have a lower return on assets, cash, dividends, and debt.
Their book to market ratio is approximately the same as firms in our sample.

Table 2 duplicates Panel A of Table 1 for a subset of CEOs who are new to the
position, if both their political preferences and those of their predecessors can be
identified, and who thus constitute the sample used in our event-study analysis,

reported in Section 4.2, as well as the CEOs not in the sample (NIS).

Relative to Table 2, we add the fraction of the executive suite that is female in the
year prior to the change in CEO. We report statistics of the incoming CEO by the
type of leadership change observed in the data. The first letter denotes the politi-
cal preference of the outgoing CEO; the second letter denotes that of the incoming
  14 Inuntabulated regressions, we confirm that this is the case, with the exception of dividends.
Companies run by CEOs who give more to Republicans tend to pay higher dividends, even after
conditioning for industry and company size.

                                               17
CEO: RR specifies a Republican CEO replacing a Republican, RD a Democratic

CEO replacing a Republican, DD a Democratic CEO replacing a Democrat, and
DR a Republican CEO replacing a Democrat. The column denoted "All" includes
statistics on all CEOs in our sample, while the column "NIS" includes statistics
on the CEOs not in our sample.

Panel A of Table 2 designates a CEO to be a Republican (Democrat) if they con-
tribute at least 50% of their contributions to Republicans (Democrats). Panels B
and C do the same, but set the cutoffs levels at 67% and 75% of contributions,
respectively.

Overall, there were 4,021 firms whose CEOs changed during our period of study.
Out of which, for a third we have information on the political preference of the
outgoing and incoming CEOs. Table 2 shows that 76%-83% of the firms who
switched a CEO for which we have information on both CEOs' political prefer-

ences, the outgoing CEO was a Republican.

Patterns in CEO gender are very similar to those reported in Table 1. Incom-
ing CEOs designated as Democrats are more likely to be women, and somewhat
younger than their Republican counterparts. We note that the stricter the cutoff

for designating a CEO's political preference, the smaller the number of observa-
tions in our sample and the greater the number outside of our sample.


4 The Gender Composition of the Executive Suite

This section documents differences in the gender composition of the top-
executive teams by the political preferences of CEOs. Section 4.1 looks at differ-
ences across the entire sample of companies. Section 4.2 then uses an event-study

approach to examine the dynamics of the executive suite's gender composition
around the time of a change in CEO.




                                       18
4.1 All Companies

Our first exercise studies the relationship between the political preference of a
company's CEO and the gender composition of its executives. To do so, we esti-
mate regressions of the following structure:


                                                                 
(1)            Yct = 0 +  · FracRepct +  · Femalect + dt + Ic + Xct  + ct ,


where Yct is the fraction of company c's non-CEO executives in year t who are
women. FracRepct is the fraction of a CEO's political contributions that went
to Republicans. As discussed above, we use four measures for this variable.

Femalect is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO is female. dt is a set of year
                                                      is a vector of firm character-
fixed effects and Ic represents firm fixed effects. Xct
istics, including (a) a quadratic in CEO age; (b) the log of the CEO's tenure; (c)
whether the CEO also chairs the board of directors; (d) whether the CEO is an
"insider", (defined above); (e) the interaction of insider status and being female,

and (f) the log of the firm's total assets.15 Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. We estimate (1) using either the Form 4 or the ExecuComp sample.

Table 3 shows the results of these regressions. Column 1 uses the sample of ex-
ecutives from Form 4 and defines FracRepct based on the election cycle measure

of political preference. The point estimate for FracRepct is -0.009, and statisti-
cally significant at the 10% level. This suggests that CEOs who contribute only to
Republicans (FracRepct = 1) have a lower fraction of women on their executive
teams of about 0.9 percentage points.

Given that the fraction of executives who are women is 12.1% at the Form 4 sam-
  15 The insider variable interacted with the CEO being female controls for a mechanical issue:
that promotion of a female executive to CEO status is likely to change the gender composition
of the remaining non-CEO executive suite because a promoted female executive is likely to be
replaced by a man, given that the vast majority of executives are male. Thus such an internal
promotion will create a negative relationship between a female CEO and the fraction of non-CEO
executives who are female. Controlling for the CEO's insider status, interacted with being female,
solves this issue.


                                               19
ple, this estimate is not small. CEOs who contribute at least 67% (FracRepct =

0.67) (75% (FracRepct = 0.75)) [100% (FracRepct = 1)] to Republicans employ 5%,
(5.6%) [7.4%] fewer women, than a CEOs who contribute 100% (FracRepct = 0) to
Democrats. Column 2 duplicates Column 1 using the sample of executives from
ExecuComp, and finds a coefficient of -0.014, which is statistically significant at

the 5% level. Given that the average fraction of executives who are women in
the ExecuComp sample is about 9%, this implies that CEOs who contribute at
least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans employ about 10.4% (11.7%) [15%] fewer
women than CEOs who contribute 100% to Democrats.

Columns (3)-(8) repeat this pattern, but use different definitions of FracRepct . Col-
umn (3) and (4) define FracRepct based on a four-year moving average measure
of political preference; column (5) and (6) define FracRepct based on the last four
years measure of political preference; and columns (7) and (8) define FracRepct
based on the sample average measure of political preference.

The results are virtually unchanged. For the sample of executives from F4, the
effect ranges from 5-9% (5.6-12%) [7.4-15.7%] fewer women, for CEOs who con-
tribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans compared to CEOs who con-

tribute all of their contributions to Democrats. For the sample of executives
from ExecuComp, this effect ranges from 10.4-17% (11.7-19%) [15-25.5%] fewer
women, for CEOs who contribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans com-
pared to CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to Democrats. All esti-
mates are significant at the 5% level (except for one who is marginally significant

at the 15% level).   16



We note that the magnitude of the estimates, as well as their statistical signifi-
cance, rises with the length of the time period used to calculate a CEO's political
  16 Another interesting result reported in Table 3 is the lack of a relationship between company
size, as measured by the log of total assets, and gender composition. Larger companies do not
seem to have more gender diversity in their executive suites.



                                               20
preference. This is as longer time periods include more contributions, and thus

both include more CEOs and may be less noisy.

We conclude that companies run by CEOs who exhibit a strong Republican pref-

erence employ fewer women. These findings hold both for the broad sample of
executives in the Form 4 sample, and for the more restricted sample of highly
paid executives in the ExecuComp sample.

4.2 Event-Study Design

The previous analysis established an association between a CEO's political pref-
erence and the gender composition of the executive suite. To explore the issue of
causation, we use below an event-study design, where the event is a change in

a company's CEO. Our event-study analysis compares the gender composition
of the executive suite at companies whose outgoing CEO is replaced by a suc-
cessor of the opposite political preference with companies whose outgoing and
incoming CEOs are of the same political preference.

We hypothesize that replacing a Republican CEO with a Democratic CEO will be
followed by an increase in the representation of women in the executive suite.
For our purposes, it does not matter whether the replacement of the Republican

CEO by the Democratic CEO was or was not intended to bring about such a
change in gender diversity in the executive suite. The company might have put
in place a Democratic CEO in part because of the expectation that this CEO would
facilitate an increase in gender diversity, or this increase might have been a mere

by-product of a CEO appointment motivated by completely different reasons. For
our purposes, what matters is only whether, as we hypothesize, a switch from a
Republican CEO to a Democratic CEO tends to be followed by an increase in the
incidence of women in the executive suite.

For an event study focusing on change, we need to use, instead of the continuous
measure of political preferences, a classification of some CEOs as Democratic or

                                        21
Republican if their contributions lean sufficiently strongly in favor of the relevant

major party.

To do so, we use the sample average measure of political preferences, and use
three possible cutoffs.17 The first one is to label a CEO as a Republican (Demo-
crat) if at least 50% of their contributions went to Republicans (Democrats). The

second and third are to set this cutoff at 67% and 75% of contributions, respec-
tively. The benefit of using a lower cutoff is that more CEOs are identified as
being with a political party, thus enlarging the sample, while the cost is that more
CEOs may be erroneously categorized with a political party, even if their political

preferences are more moderate.

A question that can arise in connection with our measure is whether CEOs' po-
litical preferences are relatively stable over time. Several studies document that,
during the years in which individuals serve as top corporate executives there is

very little change over time in their political preferences reflected in their po-
litical contributions (Bonica, 2016; Fremeth et al., 2013; Hutton et al., 2014, 2015;
Elnahas and Kim, 2017; Bayat and Goergen, 2020). We confirm that this stability
of preferences is also present in our data.

We begin by discussing the selection of companies in our sample. As discussed
in Section 3.5, Table 2, the main difference between companies in and out of this
event study sample is that the CEOs are slightly younger and less likely to chair
their board of directors. Another possible concern could be that the probability of

an event (a change in CEO) being included in our sample might change over time,
potentially biasing our results with data from time periods with more (or fewer)
women in the executive suite. Table 4 shows the number of changes of CEOs,
both in and out of our sample, by cutoff used to label CEO political preferences,
over time. We break our time period into four: 2000-2004, 2005-2009, 2010-2014,
  17 This event-study design leaves us with a small sample. Using the sample average measure of
political preferences allows us to maximize the sample size for a given cutoff.


                                              22
and 2015-2018.18 There is no clear pattern of the propensity for a change in CEO

to be included in our sample over time.

Similarly, one might be concerned that companies included in our sample have
different amount of gender diversity relative to those excluded from our sample.
Table 5 shows the fraction of women in the executive suite, using the Form 4

sample, in the year prior to a change in CEO for companies included and not
included the sample, by cutoff used to identify CEO political preferences, and
over time. When the cutoff is 50%, there is no meaningful difference in female
representation between the companies or over time. When the cutoff is 67% or

75%, there are slightly more women in the executive suite for those companies
not included in the sample, however this difference is roughly constant over time,
and may reflect small sample sizes, especially in later years.

We perform the event study exercises, detailed below, separately for companies

whose outgoing CEOs are Republicans and Democrats. This approach is advan-
tageous as it enables us to better measure trends in female executive employment
at companies run by Republicans or Democrats before a change in their leaders'
political preferences. That is, we are able to show that trends in executive gen-

der composition do not differ, prior to a change in CEO, between companies that
replace a Republican with a Democrat and those that select another Republican.
Doing so increases confidence that the event-study design captures the effect of
a change in the CEO's political preference on the gender composition of the ex-
ecutive suite, rather than differing trends at companies that replace a Republican

with a Democrat or with another Republican. It is important, however, to do the
event study separately by the identity of the outgoing CEO as companies run by
outgoing Democrats have more women as those run by outgoing Republicans.19
  18 We note that the last time period is shorter than previous time periods, and as such has fewer
observations.
  19 As discussed in Section 3.5, in particular regarding Table 2.




                                                23
We proceed in two steps. First, Section 4.2.1 performs the main event study, and

shows that replacing a Republican CEO with an incoming Democratic CEO yields
a dynamic increase in the fraction of the executive suite that is female. Second,
Section 4.2.2 breaks down this result, and shows that the increased fraction of
women among executives is due to hiring more women (an increase in the nu-

merator) rather than reducing the number of executives (a decrease in the de-
nominator). We relegate the event study, as well as the breakdown of results,
exploring the implications of replacing Democratic CEOs to Appendix B. We do
so as the sample is much smaller yielding estimates that are noisy.


4.2.1 Event Study

We estimate regressions of the following structure:


                            3                                 3
             Yctk =0 +            k · tk + Switch p,- p +           k · Switch p,- p · tk
                          k= -3                             k= -3
                            
                    + Ic + Xct  + ctk ,

where Yctk is the fraction company c's non-CEO executives who are women, k

years around the year of a change in CEO, t, where the lag k ranges from -3 to 3
(i.e., from three years before to three years after the change in CEO).20 The frac-
tion of executives who are female is measured using the Form 4 sample.21 tk is
a set of fixed effects for the lags before and after a switch in CEO, which allows

us to measure any potential trends around the time of a CEO's replacement. We
  20 There  is an issue regarding the exact timing of when a CEO began working. Some CEOs are
reported to have a tenure of 1 when they begin, while others are a tenure of 0. The difference
comes down to the calendar year- if a CEO began her job in December 2013, then in January 2014
she will have a tenure of 1. However, we are not sure which year the CEO actually began to work,
and thus how to center the event study. Accordingly, we set the fraction of executives who are
women in the first year of a CEO's tenure to be the average of the first and second year we see
the CEO as in the position of CEO, since we are not entirely sure when the CEO actually began.
As such, the observations we refer to as being two years after the switch might actually be three
years after the switch.
   21 This event-study approach naturally results in a greatly restricted sample size, as we are lim-

ited to observations where we identify the political preferences of both the incoming and outgoing
CEOs.


                                                 24
demean the dependent variable by year rather than include year fixed effects.

Specifically, we regress Yctk on year fixed effects using the whole sample of data
used in Section 4.1 above, and use the residuals in the estimation described here.
The use of all the data to demean by year implicitly allows us to estimate year
fixed effects using all available data, rather than the limited sample used in these

event studies, and to accurately control for the general rise in female representa-
tion in the executive suite over time.

Switch p,- p is a dummy variable indicating that an outgoing CEO of political pref-

erence p is replaced by an incoming CEO of the opposite political preference
- p.22 We also include the interactions of Switch with tk , with coefficients k ;
these interactions capture differences between (a) the fraction of non-CEO exec-
utives who are female in the years before and after a CEO of party p is replaced
with a CEO of party - p, and (b) the same changes at companies whose outgo-

ing and incoming CEOs share a political preference. Thus, k are our parameters
                                             is a vector of firm characteristics,
of interest. Ic are company fixed effects. Xctk
including (a) a quadratic in the CEO's age, (b) whether the CEO also chairs the
board of directors, (c) whether the CEO is female, (d) whether the CEO is an in-

sider, (e) the interaction of the CEO's insider status and being female, and (f) the
log of the firm's total assets, in year t + k. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

Table 6 reports the results of our event study when studying the sample of compa-

nies replacing a Republican CEO with either a Democrat or Republican. Column
1 uses the 50% cutoff to determine CEO political preferences, and does not in-
clude the firm controls in X . Column 2 repeats Column 1, but includes these firm
controls. Columns 3 and 4 (5 and 6) repeat Columns 1 and 2, respectively, but
use the 67% (75%) cutoff for determining CEO political preferences. We omit the
  22 For example, consider the event study of the sample of outgoing Republicans who are re-
placed by either Democrats or Republicans. Switch p,- p takes a value of 1 if a company replaces
a Republican with a Democrat. It thus measures difference in the gender composition of the ex-
ecutive suite between companies that replace a Republican with a Democrat and companies that
replace a Republican with another Republican.

                                              25
interaction between Switch and t0 . As such, the interpretation of the coefficients

on these interactions is a comparison to the year a company changed CEOs. In all
specifications, the coefficients on tk are generally economically and statistically
insignificant, indicating no trends in female executive employment around the
time of a change in CEO, for this sample of companies.

In Columns 1 and 2 Switch is positive and statistically significant, at the 5% and
10% levels, respectively; in Columns 3 and 4 this variable is close to 0 and in-
significant, and in Columns 5 and 6 it is negative and significant at the 1% level.
However, estimates on the interaction between Switch and tk prior to the change

in CEO indicate no difference in trend in the fraction of the executive suite that is
female between companies whose Republican CEOs are replaced with Democrats
and with Republicans in all specifications. All specifications find an increase in
female representation in the executive suite a year after a Republican CEO is re-
placed by a Democrat. This increase is 1.4 percentage points in Columns 1 and

2-2.2 percentage points. in Columns 3 and 4, and 3.0-3.2 percentage points in
Columns 5 and 6. The estimates are significant at the 10% level in all specifica-
tions.

Two years after the change in CEO, female representation in the executive suite
increases by 2.0-2.2 percentage points in Columns 1 and 2, 3.9-4.3 percentage
points in Columns 3 and 4, and 5.4-5.5 percentage points in Columns 5 and 6.
All of these estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level. Three years after
the change in CEO, female representation in the executive suite increases by 2.2-

2.4 percentage points in Columns 1 and 2, 3.5-4.1 percentage points in Columns 3
and 4, and 6.6-6.7 percentage points in Columns 5 and 6. The estimates are statis-
tically significant at the 5% level in Columns 1 and 2, 15% level in Column 3, not
significant in Column 4, and the 10% level in Columns 5 and 6.

We note that the magnitude of the estimates becomes larger when using stricter


                                          26
thresholds, but statistical significance does not always increase due to smaller

sample sizes. We also note that these estimates are quite large, considering that
the average fraction of executives who are women ranges from 11% (Columns 5
and 6) to 12.2% (Column 1). Indeed, when using a 50% (67%) [75%] cutoff, these
estimates represent an increase of about 20% (40%) [60%] in the fraction of the

executive suite that is female.


4.2.2 Breakdown of Results

We next break down the results of this exercise by asking: does the fraction of
women in the executive suite rise because incoming Democratic CEOs hire new
female executives (i.e., because the numerator increases). or because the num-
ber of executives drops (i.e., the denominator falls)?23 Figure 3 breaks down the

results described above for the 50% threshold event studies when replacing a
Republican CEO by the political preferences of the incoming CEO. The top left
panel shows that companies that replace a Republican with another Republican
see only a small trend in the increase in the number of female executives em-
ployed. In contrast, the top right panel shows that companies that replace the

Republican CEO with a Democrat see a large increase in the number of female
executives, of approximately 0.6 women.

The middle panel shows that both types of companies see only small fluctuations

in the number of executives they employ.24 The bottom panel shows the net effect
of these two facts: the fraction of executives who are women rises slightly when
a Republican replaces a Republican, but much more when a Democrat replaces
a Republican, when female representation rises from 12 to 18% of executives.
Considering that the number of executives is approximately constant at 10, these
  23 Toexamine this, we look at the raw data, as opposed to net of year fixed effects, as described
above.
  24 While it looks like companies that replace a Republican with another Republican may see a

decline in the number of executives, the decline is quantitatively not large.



                                                27
results suggest that the extra women added to the executive suite can account

fully for the change in the fraction of executives who are women.

Figures 4 and 5 repeat Figure 3 for the 67% and 75% threshold exercises, respec-
tively. The same patterns hold. Under the 67% (75%) threshold, the number of
female executives increases when a Republican is replaced by a Democrat by ap-

proximately 0.8 (1.0) women. Considering that the fraction of executives who are
women rises by about 0.08 (0.1), and that the number of executives is approxi-
mately constant at 10, these results again suggest that the extra women added to
the executive suite can entirely account for the change in the fraction of execu-

tives who are women. Notice that the increase in the number of women in the
executive suite upon replacing a Republican with a Democrat is increasing in the
cutoff used to determine political preferences. This is consistent both with the
results shown in Table 6, as with the notion that stricter cutoffs yield CEOs with
stronger political preferences.

We cannot completely rule out the possibility that confounding factors cause
companies to simultaneously replace a Republican CEO with a Democrat and
increase female representation in the executive suite. However, our results are

highly suggestive that replacing a Republican CEO with a Democrat yields an
increase in female representation among executives. As discussed above, the
sample of companies replacing a Democratic CEO is quite small, and thus the
analysis is relegated to Appendix B. However, we note that the results shown
there indicate that replacing a Democratic CEO with an incoming Republican

CEO does not seem to impact female representation in the executive suite. The
results presented here thus suggest that Democratic CEOs hire women, rather
than that Republican CEOs fire women.




                                       28
5 Gender Differences in Executive Pay

This Section documents how gender differences in total compensation (Section
5.1) and performance-sensitive pay (Section 5.2) vary with the political prefer-

ences of a company's CEO.


5.1 Total Compensation

To analyze gender differences in non-CEO executive total compensation between
companies run by CEOs of different political preferences, we estimate regressions
of the following structure:




        Ypct =0 +  · FracRepct +  · Femalect +  · ExecFemale pct

(2)           +  · ExecFemale pct · FracRepct +  · ExecFemale pct · Femalect
                           
              + dt + Ic + Xct  + Zpct  +  pct ,


where Ypct is the log of total compensation of non-CEO executive p at com-

pany c in year t. FracRepct is the fraction of a CEO's political contributions that
went to Republicans. As in Section 4.1, we use the same variety of measures
for this variable. Femalect is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO is female.
ExecFemale pct is a dummy variable equal to 1 if executive p is female. We interact
ExecFemale pct with FracRepct , with coefficient . Our coefficients of interest are

 and ; they compare gender differences in compensation and how these gaps
change with the political preference of the CEO. We also include an interaction
between ExecFemale pct and Femalect (listed above with coefficient ). dt is a set
                                                            is a vector of firm charac-
of year fixed effects. Ic is a set of firm fixed effects. Xct

teristics.

As before, X includes a quadratic in the CEO's age; the log of the CEO's tenure;
an indicator of whether the CEO also chairs the board of directors; an indicator

                                          29
of whether the CEO is an insider, interacted with whether the CEO is female; and

the log of total assets. We now add the return on assets, book-to-market value,
cash, dividends, and total debt. Zpct is a set of individual controls for executive

p, including a quadratic in his/her age, an indicator of whether the executive is
an insider, and a set of dummy variables for the executive position's title.25 As

such, the controls we use are similar to those in the literature (Munoz-Bullon,
2010; Elkinawy and Stater, 2011; Carter et al., 2017; Quintana-Garcia and Elvira,
2017). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

Table 7 reports the estimation results. Column 1 regresses log total compensa-

tion on ExecFemale, Female, their interaction, and includes our firm controls X ,
individual controls Z, year fixed effects, and firm fixed effects, on the sample for
which we have the political preferences of CEOs using the election cycle mea-
sure.26 The estimate on ExecFemale suggests that female executives are paid
about 9% less than their male counterparts, with this difference statistically signif-

icant at the 1% level. Column 2 adds CEOs' political preferences FracRep, using
the election cycle measure, as well as an interaction of the political preference
with ExecFemale.

One might hypothesize that Republican CEOs may differ from Democratic CEOs
in the level of compensation offered to their executives. However, the estimated
relationship between CEO political preferences (FracRep) and the average level
of pay in the executive suite is quantitatively and statistically insignificant.27

The estimate on ExecFemale in Column 2 suggests that women are paid about
  25 Titlegroups include chief officers, an executive who is also a chairman, general counsel, hu-
man resources, vice president, other titles that include the word senior, and other.
  26 We use the sample for which we have the election cycle measure in order to make the es-

timates comparable with the those in Column 2, which includes these preferences. Notice that
this sample happens to be the same as with the four-year moving averages and the last four years
average. As such, we do not repeat this analysis again when using the four-year moving averages
and the last four years average. However, we redo this exercise when using the sample average
measure as discussed below.
  27 This finding is consistent across all specifications in the table.




                                               30
5% less than men, and is statistically significant at the 5% level. Notice that

this estimate is implicitly the gender compensation gap under CEOs who con-
tribute all of their contributions to Democrats. The estimate on the interaction
between FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.063, and is statistically significant at the
5% level. This implies that the gender compensation gap rises from 5% to 9.3%

(9.8%) [11.4%] under CEOs who contribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] of their con-
tributions to Republicans.

Column 3 repeats Column 2, but switches the measure of political preferences
to be the four-year moving average measure.28 The estimate on ExecFemale is
-0.039, implying that women under CEOs who contribute all of their contribu-
tions to Democrats earn about 4% less than their male colleagues. However, this

estimate is only statistically significant at the 15% level. The estimate on the inter-
action between FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.083, and is statistically significant
at the 1% level. This implies that the gender compensation gap rises from 4%
(with the estimate not statistically significant) under CEOs who contribute all of

their contributions to Democrats to 9.5% (10.1%) [12%] under under CEOs who
contribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] of their contributions to Republicans.

Columns 4 and 5 repeat Columns 1 and 2, but switches the measure of politi-
cal preferences to be the last four-year measure. The estimates in Column 4 are
virtually identical to those in Column 1, despite small differences in the sample.

Columns 6 and 7 also repeat Columns 1 and 2, respectively, but switch the mea-
sure of political preferences to be the sample average measure. The estimates in

Column 6 are virtually indistinguishable from those in Column 1, with the excep-
tion of a larger sample size, due to the sample average measure including more
CEOs, and a larger (but still insignificant) point estimate on the impact of having
a female CEO.29 In Column 7, the estimate on ExecFemale is -0.032, implying that
  28 As discussed in footnote 26, there is no need to replicate Column 1 under this sample, as the
samples happen to be the same.
  29 As explained in footnote 26, the purpose of this exercise is to show how the estimates change



                                               31
women under CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to Democrats earn

about 3% less than their male colleagues. As in Column 3, this estimate is not sta-
tistically significant, and thus, again we cannot reject the hypothesis that female
executives under CEOs who contribute 100% of their contributions to Democrats
do not experience any gender wage gap. The estimate on the interaction between

FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.091, and is statistically significant at the 1% level.
This implies that the gender compensation gap rises from 3% under CEOs who
contribute all of their contributions to Democrats (with the estimate not statisti-
cally significant) to 9.3% (10%) [12%] under CEOs who contribute at least 67%
(75%) [100%] of their contributions to Republicans.30

Our findings can thus be summarized as follows. The gender wage gap under
CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to Democrats is about 3-5%, and is
statistically significant only under some measures of political preferences. How-
ever, the gender wage gap under under CEOs who contribute at least 67% (75%)

[100%] of their contributions to Republicans is about 9% (10%) [12%], and is sta-
tistically significant under all measures of political preferences. These findings
suggest that much of the general gender wage gap among top executives in S&P
1500 firms can be accounted for by the political preferences of the firms' CEOs.

Ideally, we would perform an analysis along the lines of the event-study done
in Section 4.2. However, we only have data on executive compensation in the
ExecuComp sample. In that sample, more than half of firms do not employ any
female executives at all. Given that the event-study we perform is already on a

small sample, this data limitation renders the analysis impossible. Additionally,
our results above show that Democratic CEOs hire more women. We would not
when including a CEO's political preferences, as in Column 6. As such, we keep the sample
constant between Columns 5 and 6.
   30 We also note that there is no significant difference in levels of pay under CEOs of different

political preferences. Female CEOs tend to be associated with lower overall executive compensa-
tion, though this difference is not statistically significant. Finally, while the interaction between
ExecFemale and Female is positive, and suggests that female executives earn 4-6% more under a
female CEO than under a male CEO, this estimate is not statistically significant.


                                                 32
be able to analyze how the wages of these women change when a Democrat takes

over. Similarly, it is not clear how the CEO would affect wages of women who
were hired prior to the CEO taking office. While it is possible that the CEO would
work to equalize wages, it is also possible that the CEO would only do so for new
hires.

We next study gender differences in the performance-sensitivity of executive
compensation under different types of CEOs.


5.2 Performance-Sensitivity Compensation

To analyze gender differences in performance-sensitive non-CEO executive com-
pensation between companies run by CEOs of different political preferences, we
estimate regressions as in (2), but with different dependent variables. We use

three standard measures for Ypct : (1) the ratio of salary and bonus to total com-
pensation, which we call "the cash ratio," (2), the log of delta, and (3) the log of
vega.31 When the dependent variable is either log of delta or log of vega, we in-
clude as a control the sum of the executive's salary and bonus; higher levels of

non-stock-option compensation are presumably correlated with higher levels of
stock-option compensation.

It could be hypothesized that Republican CEO might make more use of incentives
than Democratic CEOs. However, this hypothesis is not supported in the results

reported below. With respect to each of our three measures of performance sen-
sitivity, we find no general association between the political preferences of the
CEO and the examined measure of performance sensitivity. However, we find a
strong relationship between CEO political preferences and the gender gap in the
performance sensitivity of executive pay, which we now discuss.

Table 8 repeats Table 7, but uses the cash ratio as the dependent variable. A higher
  31 Technically, we take the log of delta + $1 or the log of vega + $1 in order not to take the log of
0 in cases of no stock-option compensation.


                                                  33
value for this ratio indicates a higher share of total compensation that is paid in

cash rather than equity compensation. In Columns 1, 4, and 6 we find that female
executives earn a cash ratio that is 1.0-1.2% higher than their male counterparts,
with the difference statistically significant at the 1% level.32

In Column 2, using the election cycle metric of political preferences, we find that

the cash ratio for women is about 0.8% higher than their male counterparts un-
der CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to Democrats, though this
difference is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between
FracRep and ExecFemale is 0.007, suggesting that the gender gap in the cash ratio

under CEOs who contribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is 0.47 (0.5)
[0.7] percentage point higher than they would under CEOs who contribute only
to Democrats. While this estimate is not statistically significant, the magnitude of
these estimates suggests that a large amount of the gender differences in the cash
ratio in Column 1 can be accounted for by CEO political preferences.

In Column 3, using the four-year moving average metric of political preferences,
we find that the cash ratio for female executives is virtually indistinguishable
from that of male executives under CEOs whose entire contributions goes to

Democrats. The estimate on the interaction between FracRep and ExecFemale
is 0.015, suggesting that the gender gap in the cash ratio under CEOs who con-
tribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is 1 (1.1) [1.5] percentage point
higher than it would be under CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to
Democrats, with this estimate being statistically significant at the 10% level.

The results using the last four year metric of political preferences, Column (5) are
virtually the same both in magnitude and significance as in Column (4).

In Column 7, using the sample average metric of political preferences, we find

that the cash ratio for female executives is actually somewhat lower than that of
  32 As   explained above, the difference between these specifications is just the sample.


                                                  34
male executives under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, though

this difference is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction be-
tween FracRep and ExecFemale is 0.024, suggesting that the gender gap in the
cash ratio under CEOs who contribute at least 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans
is 1.6 (1.8) [2.4] percentage point higher than they would be under CEOs whose

entire contributions go to Democrats, with this estimate being statistically signif-
icant at the 1% level. Taken together, these results suggest that we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the cash ratio is the same between male and female executives
under CEOs who contribute all of their contributions to Democrats, and that gen-
der differences in the cash ratio can potentially be entirely accounted for by the

political preferences of a firm's CEO.33

Table 9 repeats Table 7, but switches the dependent variable to be the log of delta
and, as discussed above, adds as a control the sum of the executive's salary and
bonus. A higher value of log delta indicates that the executive's stock options are

more sensitive to the company's stock price, indicating a higher level of perfor-
mance incentives. In Columns 1, 4, and 6 we find that female executives earn a
delta that is about 26-30% lower than their male counterparts, with the difference
being statistically significant at the 1% level.

In Column 2, using the election cycle metric of political preferences, we find that
the delta for female executives is about 16% lower than their male counterparts
under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, with this difference
being statistically significant at the 15% level. The estimate on the interaction

between FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.282, suggesting that the gender gap in
delta is about 17 (19) [25] percentage points larger under CEOs who contribute
67% (75%) [100%] to Republican than under CEOs whose entire contributions go
to Democrats, with this difference being statistically significant at the 10% level.
  33 Additionally, we find no differences in the cash ratio under female CEOs either for either male

or female executives in any of the specifications discussed here.



                                                35
These estimates suggest that the majority of the gender gap in delta in Column 1

can be accounted for by a CEOs political preferences.

In Column 3, using the four-year moving average metric of political preferences,
we find that delta for female executives is about 12% lower than that of male
executives under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, but that this

difference is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between
FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.371, suggesting that the gender gap in delta is 22
(24) [31] percentage points larger under CEOs who contribute 67% (75%) [100%]
to Republicans than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats,

with this estimate being statistically being significant at the 5% level.

In Column 5, using the last four years metric of political preferences, we find
that delta for female executives is 13% lower than that of male executives un-
der CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, but that this difference

is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between FracRep
and ExecFemale is -0.349, suggesting that the gender gap in delta is 21 (23) [29.5]
percentage points larger under CEOs who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Re-
publicans than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, with

this estimate being statistically significant at the 5% level.

In Column 7, using the sample average metric of political preferences, we find
that delta for female executives is virtually the same as that for male executives
under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, and the estimated dif-

ferences are not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between
FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.454, suggesting that the gender gap in delta un-
der CEOs who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is 24 (28) [36] percent
points than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, with this
estimate being statistically significant at the 1% level.

Taken together, these results suggest that we cannot reject the hypothesis that

                                          36
delta is the same between male and female executives under CEOs whose entire

contributions goes to Democrats, and that gender differences in delta can poten-
tially be entirely accounted for by the political preferences of a firm's CEO.34

Table 10 also repeats Table 7, but switches the dependent variable to be the log of
vega. A higher value of log vega indicates that the executive's stock options are

more sensitive to the company's stock price volatility, indicating a higher level of
performance incentives (specifically, for risk taking). In Columns 1, 4, and 6 we
find that female executives earn a vega that is about 26-28% lower than their male
counterparts, with the difference statistically significant at the 1% level.

In Column 2, using the election cycle metric of political preferences, we find that
the vega for female executives is about 19% lower than that of their male counter-
parts under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, with this estimate
being statistically significant at the 10% level. The estimate on the interaction be-

tween FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.177, suggesting that the gender gap in vega
under CEOs who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is about 11 (12)
[16] percentage points larger than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to
Democrats, but this estimate is not statistically significant.

In Column 3, using the four-year moving average metric of political preferences,
we find that vega for female executives is about 16.5% lower than that for male
executives under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, but this es-
timate is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between

FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.233, suggesting the gender gap in vega under CEOs
who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is 15 (16) [21] percentage points
larger than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, but, again,
this estimate is not statistically significant.
  34 Additionally, we find that having a female CEO is associated with executives receiving a delta

that is about 22-28% lower than they would under a male CEO, however these estimates are not
statistically significant. Female executives receive a delta that is about 60-85% higher than they
would under a male CEO, with the estimates significant at the 5% level.


                                               37
In Column 5, using the last four years metric of political preferences, we find

that vega for female executives is 15% lower than that for male executives un-
der CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, but, again, this estimate
is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between FracRep
and ExecFemale is -0.275, suggesting that the gender gap in vega under CEOs

who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is about 17 (19) [24] percentage
points larger than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, with
this estimate being statistically significant at the 15% level.

In Column 7, using the sample average metric of political preferences, we find

that vega for female executives are about 15% lower than male executives under
CEOs whose entire contributions go to Democrats, though this estimated dif-
ference is not statistically significant. The estimate on the interaction between
FracRep and ExecFemale is -0.206, suggesting that the gender gap in vega un-
der CEOs who contribute 67% (75%) [100%] to Republicans is about 13 (14)

[19] percentage points larger than under CEOs whose entire contributions go to
Democrats, though this estimate is not statistically significant. Taken together,
these results suggest that much of the gender gap in vega can be accounted for
by the political preferences of CEOs.35

We conclude that companies run by extreme Democratic CEOs have much
smaller, and potentially nonexistent, gender pay gaps among top executives.
Other companies, by contrast, have significant pay gaps. Interestingly, this pat-
tern characterizes not only total compensation but also the makeup of the com-

pensation package: significant gender gaps are apparent in the cash ratio, delta,
and vega of compensation under CEOs with stronger Republican preferences.
Thus, not only do female executives under such CEOs receive lower total com-
  35 We find that having a female CEO is associated with executives receiving a vega that about 69-

75% lower than they would under a male CEO, with the estimates significant at the 5-10% level,
and that female executives receive a vega that is about 77-117% higher than they would under a
male CEO, with the estimates significant at the 1-5% level, depending on the specification.



                                               38
pensation than their male counterparts; their compensation also has a much

smaller equity component. The existing literature has argued that lower delta
and vega for female executives indicate higher female risk aversion (Carter et al.,
2017); it is hard to reconcile this explanation with the fact that these differences
are greatly mitigated when taking into account the political preferences of a com-

pany's CEO.


6 Conclusion

This paper provides the first empirical evidence about the association between
CEOs' political preferences and gender-related choices regarding the representa-
tion of women in the executive suite and the level and structure of their compen-
sation. The evidence is consistent with our hypothesis that CEOs whose prefer-

ences are more aligned with Democrats are associated with the presence of more
women in the executive suite and with a reduced gender gap in compensation
of non-CEO executives. To better understand the direction of the association, we
use an event-study analysis; the event is a change in a company's CEO. We show

that when a Republican CEO is replaced with a Democrat rather than another
Republican, the fraction of women in the executive suite increases.

Our study has significant implications for future work. Subsequent explorations
of gender-related choices should take CEOs' political preferences into account

in carrying out their analysis. In addition, future work may seek to investigate
the relative roles of the various mechanisms we have discussed in producing the
associations we have identified.




                                        39
References
 [1] Albanesi, Stefania, Claudia Olivetti, and Maria Jose Prados, 2015, Gender
     and dynamic agency: Theory and evidence on the compensation of top ex-
     ecutives, in Solomon W. Polachek, Konstantinos Tatsiramos, and Klaus F.
     Zimmermann, eds., Gender in the Labor Market, volume 42 of Research in La-
     bor Economics, 1­59 (Emerald Publishing Ltd).

 [2] Babenko, Ilona, Viktar Fedaseyeu, and Song Zhang, 2019, Do CEOs Affect
     Employees' Political Choices?, The Review of Financial Studies 33, 1781­1817.

 [3] Bayat, Ali, and Marc Goergen, 2020, Ceo political ideology, shareholder pri-
     macy and dividend policy, ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance .

 [4] Bell, Linda A., 2005, Women-led firms and the gender gap in top executive
     jobs, IZA DP No. 1689.

 [5] Benmelech, Efraim, and Carola Frydman, 2015, Military ceos, Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics 117, 43­59.

 [6] Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F. Hallock, 2001, The gender gap in top cor-
     porate jobs, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55, 3­21.

 [7] Bonica, Adam, 2016, Avenues of influence: on the political expenditures of
     corporations and their directors and executives, Business and Politics 18, 367­
     394.

 [8] Carnahan, Seth, and Brad N. Greenwood, 2018, Managers' political beliefs
     and gender inequality among subordinates: Does his ideology matter more
     than hers?, Administrative Science Quarterly 63, 287­322.

 [9] Carter, Mary Ellen, Francesca Franco, and Mireia Gine, 2017, Executive gen-
     der pay gaps: The roles of female risk aversion and board representation,
     Contemporary Accounting Research 34, 1232­1264.

[10] Chin, M. K., and Matthew Semadeni, 2017, Ceo political ideologies and pay
     egalitarianism within top management teams, Strategic Management Journal
     38, 1608­1625.

[11] Cohen, Alma, Moshe Hazan, Roberto Tallarita, and David Weiss, 2019, The
     politics of ceos, Journal of Legal Analysis 11, 1­45.

[12] Cohen, Alma, and Crystal S. Yang, 2019, Judicial Politics and Sentencing
     Decisions, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11, 160­191.

[13] Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2006, Managerial
     incentives and risk-taking, Journal of Financial Economics 79, 431­468.

[14] Cooper, Michael, Huseyin Gulen, and Alexei Ovtchinnikov, 2010, Corporate
     political contributions and stock returns, Journal of Finance 65, 687­724.


                                        40
[15] Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay, 2002, Estimating the value of employee
     stock option portfolios and their sensitivities to price and volatility, Journal
     of Accounting Research 40, 613­630.

[16] Cronqvist, Henrik, and Frank Yu, 2017, Shaped by their daughters: Execu-
     tives, female socialization, and corporate social responsibility, Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics 126, 543­562.

[17] Dahl, Michael S., Cristian L. Dezso, and David Gaddis Ross, 2011, Like
     daughter, like father: How women's wages change when ceos have daugh-
     ters, Available at SSRN 1774434.

[18] Dasgupta, Ari, Lan Ha, Spurthi Jonnalagadda, Steven Schmeiser, and Han-
     nah Youngerman, 2018, The daughter effect: do ceos with daughters hire
     more women to their board?, Applied Economics Letters 25, 891­894.

[19] Di Giuli, Alberta, and Leonard Kostovetsky, 2014, Are red or blue companies
     more likely to go green? politics and corporate social responsibility, Journal
     of Financial Economics 111, 158­180.

[20] Duchin, Ran, Mikhail Simutin, and Denis Sosyura, 2020, The Origins and
     Real Effects of the Gender Gap: Evidence from CEOs' Formative Years, The
     Review of Financial Studies 34, 700­762.

[21] Elkinawy, Susan, and Mark Stater, 2011, Gender differences in executive
     compensation: Variation with board gender composition and time, Journal
     of Economics and Business 63, 23­45.

[22] Elnahas, Ahmed M., and Dongnyoung Kim, 2017, Ceo political ideology and
     mergers and acquisitions decisions, Journal of Corporate Finance 45, 162­175.

[23] Francis, Bill B., Iftekhar Hasan, Xian Sun, and Qiang Wu, 2016, Ceo political
     preference and corporate tax sheltering, Journal of Corporate Finance 38, 37­
     53.

[24] Fremeth, Adam, Brian Kelleher Richter, and Brandon Schaufele, 2013, Cam-
     paign contributions over ceos' careers, American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics 5, 170­88.

[25] Gayle, George-Levi, Limor Golan, and Robert A. Miller, 2012, Gender differ-
     ences in executive compensation and job mobility, Journal of Labor Economics
     30, 829­871.

[26] Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2013, Managerial
     attitudes and corporate actions, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 103­121.

[27] Hurley, William P., 1975, Who is an "officer" for the purposes of the secu-
     rities exchange act of 1934- colby v. klune revisited, Fordham Law Review 44,
     489­510.



                                         41
[28] Hutton, Irena, Danling Jiang, and Alok Kumar, 2014, Corporate policies of
     republican managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49, 1279­
     1310.

[29] Hutton, Irena, Danling Jiang, and Alok Kumar, 2015, Political values, cul-
     ture, and corporate litigation, Management Science 61, 2905­2925.

[30] Larcker, David F., and Brian Tayan, 2020, Diversity in the c-suite. the dis-
     mal state of diversity among fortune 100 senior executives, Rock Center for
     Corporate Governance, Stanford Closer Look Series- CGRP82.

[31] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffery Tate, 2009, Superstar ceos, Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics 124, 1593­1638.

[32] Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoffery Tate, and Jon Yan, 2011, Overconfidence and
     early-life experiences: The effect of managerial traits on corporate financial
     policies, Journal of Finance 66, 1687­1733.

[33] Matsa, David A., and Amalia R. Miller, 2011, Chipping away at the glass
     ceiling: Gender spillovers in corporate leadership, American Economic Re-
     view: Papers and Proceedings 101, 635­639.

[34] Munoz-Bullon, Fernando, 2010, Gender-compensation differences among
     high-level executives in the united states, Industrial Relations 49, 346­370.

[35] Newton, David, and Mikhail Simutin, 2015, Of age, sex, and money: In-
     sights from corporate officer compensation on the wage inequality between
     genders, Management Science 61, 2355­2375.

[36] Nguyen, Duc Duy, Jens Hagendorff, and Arman Eshraghi, 2017, Does a
     CEO's Cultural Heritage Affect Performance under Competitive Pressure?,
     The Review of Financial Studies 31, 97­141.

[37] Pan, Yihui, Tracey Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2016, Ceo invest-
     ment cycles, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 2955­2999.

[38] Quintana-Garcia, Cristina, and Marta M. Elvira, 2017, The effect of the ex-
     ternal labor market on the gender pay gap among executives, Industrial and
     Labor Relations Review 70, 132­159.

[39] Unsal, Omer, Kabir M. Hassan, and Duygu Zirek, 2016, Corporate lobbying,
     ceo political ideology and firm performance, Journal of Corporate Finance 38,
     126­149.

[40] Wang, X., Cencen Gao, and Mingming M. Feng, 2019, Ceos raising daughters
     and female executives, Asia-pacific Journal of Accounting and Economics 1­19.

[41] Xuan, Yuhai, 2009, Empire-Building or Bridge-Building? Evidence from
     New CEOs' Internal Capital Allocation Decisions, The Review of Financial
     Studies 22, 4919­4948.


                                        42
Appendices
A Identifying the Political Contributions of CEOs

In this appendix, we detail how we identify the political contributions that CEOs
make. This involves two steps. The first step is to map the information we have
on each CEO, such as their name, company they work for, and their address,
onto the FEC dataset to identify what contributions a CEO made. We detail this
in Section A.1. The second is to identify whether a given contribution counts as
being towards Democrats or Republicans, which we detail in Section A.2. Much
of the information here is very similar to that described in a companion paper
Cohen et al. (11).

A.1 Matching CEOs to Contributions

Information on CEO contributions comes from the Federal Election Commission
(FEC). The FEC is a regulatory agency, created by the 1974 Amendments to the
Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-443,
88 Stat. 1263 (1974)). All candidates for federal office, and committees affiliated
with them, must register with the FEC and report contributions received from all
donors that exceeds (individually or combined) $200. Similarly, party commit-
tees and political committees not affiliated with any particular candidate must
also periodically report donations (52 U.S.C. Section 30104(b)(3)(A)). Thus, the
database that the FEC publishes includes all nontrivial donations made to candi-
dates or to active political committees, amounting to tens of millions of dollars
each year. Each FEC report has to indicate names of the donor and recipient, and
the donor's home address, employer, and job title. However, in many reports the
information about the donor's home address, employer, and job title is missing
or incomplete.

We match the FEC database with our CEO database described in Section 3. The
process is not straightforward. There may be more than one donor with the same
name as a CEO. A CEO might use his/her nickname in one dataset, and not the
other. They might sometimes use a nickname and sometimes their full name,
with or without a middle name.36
  36 We use two datasets to match names to nicknames. The first is the name to nickname dataset,
accessible at GitHub, under "name to nick", and the second is the reverse mapping, accessible at
GitHub, under "nick to name".



                                              43
Using ExecuComp, we identify the names of every CEO of companies ever listed
in the S&P 1500 between 2000 and 2018, along with the name of the company and
zip code of the company headquarters.37 We use a Python library "whoswho" to
do a preliminary match with all FEC contributions where the name of the con-
tributor is the same as the name of the CEO.38 From this preliminary match, we
create three sets of matches.

The first set selects all the contributions in which either the "employer" or "oc-
cupation" fields match precisely the name of the company for which the CEO
worked. This involves creating a database of consistent company names for
matching purposes.39 The second set checks if the occupation entry is consis-
tent with the contributor being an executive.40 If it is, and either there is a lenient
company-name match or the zipcode of the contributor is within 80 kilometers
of the company headquarters, we accept the match.41 The third match is similar
to the second match, but instead of requiring that the contributor's occupation
is consistent with being an executive, a match on the middle name between the
executive and contributor is sufficient.

We then expand all three of these sets of matches to include any other contribu-
tions that come from someone with the same name and zip code as exists in these
sets of matches. Thus, our set of contributions for a given CEO includes all the
contributions found in either set, after expanding to include other contributions
with the same name and zip code. Of the 7,469 CEOs in our dataset, we are able
to match 5,597 executives.
  37 We  use data on contributions from 1996 onwards, as some of our measures, such as the last
four years measure, require information from before a CEO-year observation.
   38 As part of this process, we clean both datasets from titles such as "Mr" and "Mrs", or "esq"

and "MBA", containing information that we do not use in our matching algorithm. We include
relevant information such as "jr" or "sr", which we use to differentiate people with seemingly
identical names (such as fathers and sons). Additionally, this algorithm removes prefixes such as
"van" and "de" that could obfuscate our matching process. To do so, we employ the nameparser
package, which is part of the whoswho library.
   39 To do so, we must create a consistently named set of unique company names to merge be-

tween the datasets. To do so, we clean company names of acronyms such as "llc", "ltd", and "co",
using a Python package called "cleanco". We also remove stop words such as "or", "the", and
"of" using the Python package "nltk". Additionally, we expand common shortcut to allow for
accurate matching, such as transforming "intl" to "international" and "rlty" to "realty".
   40 Specifically, the occupation must include either "board" or "chair" (or chair-

man/chairwoman) or "chief" or "dir." (or director), "founder", "pres" (or president), "trustee",
"CEO", "VP".
   41 Here, we define lenient to be cases where a name is contained in another name. For instance,

if the company in the FEC is "New York Bank", and the company listed in ExecuComp is "New
York Bank Mellon".




                                               44
A.2 Identifying the Party of a Contribution

We now describe how we infer whether a contribution is made to Democrats or
Republicans. To do so, we ask whether a given contribution ultimately benefits
Republicans or Democrats. This analysis is not as straight forward as it may seem.
Technically, most contributions are made to committees. For many political com-
mittees, the FEC database contains information regarding the committee's party
affiliation, in which case we simply use the identity given by the FEC.42 Some
of these committees are the main campaign committees of specific candidates af-
filiated with a major party, are explicitly authorized by these candidates to raise
funds on their behalf, or at least are not expressly disavowed by the candidate
they support. In these cases, there is an official connection between a committee
and a candidate.

Other committees, although not explicitly or implicitly authorized by a candi-
date, are connected with a political party, either because they are part of the offi-
cial party structure (party committees) or because they are established by office-
holders belonging to a political party (so called leadership PACs). In all of these
cases, the FEC database contains information regarding the committee's party
affiliation. We consider, therefore, all donations made to authorized candidate
committees, party committees, and leadership PACs as made to candidates of the
affiliated party.

Other political committees, however, are not clearly linked to a party because
they are not affiliated in any of the above ways with a political party or a candi-
date of that party. In such cases, we analyze the FEC records regarding the expen-
ditures that these committees make.43 When a CEO donates a given amount to
such a committee, we allocate this amount between Republicans and Democrats
based on how the committee allocates its total spending between support for each
group. There are some committees that we do not manage to identify their pol-
itics based off of how they give money. For these committees, we identify their
politics based on which committees transfer to them. For instance, a committee
that receives large transfers from a Republican political committee is presumably
  42 Some  committees or candidates change political party affiliation over time. In such cases, we
identify a candidate as being associated with the party they are most often identified with by the
FEC.
  43 One consideration is how to treat "24a" expenditures. These are expenditures by political

committees against candidates, rather than in their favor. We assume that an expenditure against
a Democrat is an expenditure in favor of a Republican, and vice versa. Since we do not know
how to interpret an expenditure against an independent candidate, we treat these expenditures
as unknown.


                                                45
Republican. There are 31 committees that receive a total of about $70 million
in contributions from our executives that remain unidentified even after this pro-
cess. We manually identify these committees based off of their names and looking
for them on Google.44

In short, if a given contribution is identified by the FEC as going to a Demo-
crat (Republican), we assume that 100% of that contribution goes to Democrats
(Republicans). If the FEC does not identify the committee's political affiliation,
we explore the expenditures made by that committee, infer a percent that the
committee gives to each party, and divide the contribution accordingly, ignoring
contributions to unknown recipients. For example, assume a CEO gave $1,000 to
the Example PAC. The Example PAC is not identified by the FEC as belonging
to any party. However, by analyzing Example PAC's expenditure data, we in-
fer that Example PAC gives 30% of its money to Republicans, 10% to Democrats,
10% to Independent candidates, and 50% is unknown. We treat this $1,000 con-
tribution as being a $600 contribution to Republicans and a $200 contribution to
Democrats.

Of the 54,911 committees reported in the FEC dataset between 1996-2020, we
identify the political affiliations of 27,124 via the FEC. A further 12,338 we identify
off of the expenditures the committees made. A further 557 committees we iden-
tify from the political affiliation of committees that donate to them. An addition-
ally 31 we identify manually, as discussed above. Finally, 14,861 are unidentified.
However, note that not all of these committees actually received contributions
from CEOs in our sample.

Of the $996,357,180 in contributions from CEOs we identify, $700,877,185 go to
Republicans, $279,560,419 to Democrats, and $11,926,073 to Independents. This
leaves $3,993,943, or about 0.4% of CEO political contributions unidentified. In
terms of how we identify the money, $406,685,437 is identified by the political
affiliation of the receiving committee designated by the FEC. $514,725,285 of the
contributions we identify based off of the committee's activity. $356,032 is iden-
tified based on the political affiliation of the contributing committee. $70,596,483
is to the 31 manually identified committees discussed above.
  44 For
       instance, "DNC-NON-FEDERAL MIXED" is clearly a Democratic committee, while
"RNC REPUBLICAN NATIONAL STATE ELECTIONS COMMITTEE" is clearly a Republican
committee. It is unclear why their party affiliation is left blank by the FEC.




                                          46
B Event Study, Replacing Democratic CEOs

In this appendix, we perform the event study described in Section 4.2.1, as well
as the breakdown of results described in Section 4.2.2, on the sample of firms
replacing a Democratic CEO with either an incoming Democrat or Republican.
As a reminder to the reader, we relegate this analysis to an appendix due to small
sample sizes.

Table A1 repeats Table 6 on this sample. In all specifications, the coefficients on
tk are generally economically and statistically insignificant, indicating no trends
in female executive employment around the time of a change in CEO, for this
sample of companies. In Columns 1 and 2 Switch is virtually zero in magnitude
and statistically indistinguishable from zero, while in Columns 3-6 this variable is
positive and statistically significant at the 15% in Columns 3, 5% level in Column
4, not significant in Column 5, and significant at the 10% level in Column 6. The
estimates on the interaction between Switch and tk prior to the change in CEO
indicate no difference in trend in the fraction of the executive suite that is female
between companies whose Democratic CEOs are replaced with Democrats and
with Republicans in all specifications. Similarly, after the switch in CEO, there
is no consistent or statistically significant evidence that the fraction of women in
the executive suite changes after replacing a Democrat with a Republican CEO.

Figures A1, A2, and A3 repeat Figures 3, 4, and 5, respectively. We do not note
any consistent pattern in the data, and again remind the reader that there are very
small samples in these figures. They are included here for completeness only.




                                         47
                                          Figure 1: CEOs' Political Preferences, 2000-2018.




         .75
         .7
         .65
48




         .6
         .55




               2000                   2004                    2008                    2012                     2016
                                                                  Year

                                       Cycle           4 Yr. MA            Prev 4 Yr.             % Rep


     Notes: This figure plots the average fraction of CEO political donations that went to Republicans, by year, for each of our four
     measures. "Cycle" refers to the election cycle measure. "4 Yr. MA" represents the four-year moving average measure. "Prev
     4 Yr." represents the average of the four years prior to current year. "% Rep" represents the sample average measure. All
     variables as defined in the text.
                                 Figure 2: Fraction of Executives who are Female, 2000-2018.




         .14
         .12
         .1
49




         .08




                              0-20             20-40            40-60             60-80            80-100
                                                                % Rep

                                         Frac Women F4                            Frac Women ExC


     Notes: This figure plots the average fraction of women among executives in the Form 4 sample ("Frac Women F4") and in
     the ExecuComp sample ("Frac Women ExC") by the fraction of a CEO's contributions that were donated to Republicans, as
     measured by the sample average measure. The bands represent the 95% confidence interval for these estimates. The bins on
     the X-axis represent the range of CEO donation types grouped together. For instance, "0-20" groups together CEOs who gave
     0-20% of their political donations to Republicans.
                                    Figure 3: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 50% Threshold.
                                                     Replacing a Republican CEO


                                                   RR                                     RD
  Number Female Executives
                             1.8
                             1.6
                             1.4
                             1.2
                             1




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                   RR                                     RD
                             11
    Number Executives
                             10.5
                             10
                             9.5




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                   RR                                     RD
Frac Female Executives
                             .18
                             .16
                             .14
                             .12
                             .1




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                 Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
                 change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
                 of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
                 bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
                 change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "RR"
                 represents an outgoing Republican CEO replaced by anther Republican. "RD" represents
                 an outgoing from a Republican CEO replaced by a Democratic. The data are from the
                 Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.

                                                                    50
                                  Figure 4: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 67% Threshold.
                                                   Replacing a Republican CEO


                                                 RR                                     RD
Number Female Executives
                           2
                           1.8
                           1.6
                           1.4
                           1.2
                           1




                                  -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                 RR                                     RD
                           11
Number Executives
                           10.5
                           10
                           9.5
                           9
                           8.5




                                  -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                 RR                                     RD
  Frac Female Executives
                           .2
                           .18
                           .16
                           .14
                           .12
                           .1




                                  -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




        Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
        change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
        of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
        bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
        change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "RR"
        represents an outgoing Republican CEO replaced by anther Republican. "RD" represents
        an outgoing from a Republican CEO replaced by a Democratic. The data are from the
        Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.

                                                                  51
                                            Figure 5: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 75% Threshold.
                                                             Replacing a Republican CEO


                                                           RR                                     RD
          Number Female Executives
                                     2
                                     1.8
                                     1.6
                                     1.4
                                     1.2
                                     1




                                            -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                           RR                                     RD
                                     11.5
Number Executives
                                     11
                                     10.5
                                     10
                                     9.5




                                            -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




                                                           RR                                     RD
Frac Female Executives
                                     .2
                                     .15
                                     .1
                                     .05




                                            -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1      2   3




       Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
       change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
       of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
       bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
       change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "RR"
       represents an outgoing Republican CEO replaced by anther Republican. "RD" represents
       an outgoing from a Republican CEO replaced by a Democratic. The data are from the
       Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.

                                                                            52
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics: Firms, CEOs.
                       Means (Standard Deviations)
Variable                   Below 50%         Above 50%       All           NIS

                                         Panel A: CEO Characteristics


CEO Female                    0.04              0.02         0.03          0.04
                             (0.21)            (0.16)       (0.17)        (0.20)

CEO Age                      55.70             56.48        56.27         54.65
                             (7.86)            (7.00)       (7.25)        (7.25)

CEO Tenure                    8.31              7.34         7.61          5.19
                             (8.14)            (7.28)       (7.54)        (5.72)

CEO Chairman                  0.52              0.56         0.55          0.34
                             (0.50)            (0.50)       (0.50)        (0.47)

N                            6,891             18,628      25,519         8,551

                                Panel B: Executive (non-CEOs) Characteristics


Age(ExC)                     51.76             52.17        52.06         51.18
                             (7.41)            (7.08)       (7.17)        (7.47)

Insider                       0.91              0.92         0.92          0.82
                             (0.29)            (0.27)       (0.28)        (0.38)

Compensation                2587.06           2289.23      2370.07       1505.84
                            (4832.28)        (3697.35)    (4039.20)     (2586.86)

Salary & Bonus               700.87            602.44      629.16        453.28
                            (1128.29)         (714.55)     (848.19)      (826.73)

Ratio                         0.42              0.40         0.41          0.47
                             (0.26)            (0.24)       (0.25)        (0.26)

Delta                        177.83            214.29      204.41         82.21
                            (1472.27)        (5475.16)    (4736.97)      (742.36)

Vega                         41.56             41.13        41.25         18.54
                            (105.53)          (128.91)     (123.01)      (59.55)

N                            26,754            71,819      98,573        44,551




                              Continued on next page



                                        53
             Table 1 ­ Continued from previous page
                                    Below 50%          Above 50%           All           NIS
                                                      Panel C: Firm Characteristics


  # Female Executives (ExC)            0.580              0.421           0.464         0.492
                                      (0.790)            (0.669)         (0.707)       (0.759)

  # Executives (ExC)                   5.641              5.683           5.672         5.629
                                      (1.201)            (1.203)         (1.203)       (1.383)

  Frac Female (ExC)                    0.114              0.084           0.092         0.097
                                      (0.161)            (0.138)         (0.145)       (0.152)

  # Female Executives (F4)             1.237              1.065           1.112         0.899
                                      (1.341)            (1.238)         (1.269)       (1.145)

  # Executives (F4)                    9.163              9.493           9.404         8.156
                                      (4.214)            (4.440)         (4.383)       (3.606)

  Frac Female (F4)                     0.140              0.114           0.121         0.115
                                      (0.144)            (0.126)         (0.132)       (0.143)

  Log Assets                           7.974              8.165           8.114         6.879
                                      (1.876)            (1.694)         (1.747)       (1.620)

  Return on Assets                     0.027              0.039           0.035         0.006
                                      (0.147)            (0.192)         (0.181)       (0.669)

  Book to Market                       0.520              0.526           0.524         0.545
                                      (0.445)            (0.440)         (0.441)       (0.522)

  Cash                               1844.969           1312.606        1456.374       463.682
                                    (6237.085)          4498.337)      (5032.940)     (2127.477)

  Dividends                           152.814            203.865         190.042       70.296
                                     (518.246)          (620.084)       (594.658)     (384.047)

  Debt                               4179.213           3781.838        3889.015      1161.331
                                    (13550.633)        (10375.568)     (11321.063)    (5540.483)

  N                                    6,891              18,628         25,519         8,551

Notes: All variables as defined in text. The variables Salary & Bonus, delta, and vega are in
USD'000. The rows denoted N report the number of observations. ExC denotes the ExecuComp
sample, while F4 denotes the Form 4 sample. All age and compensation variables are from the
ExecuComp sample. "Below 50%" is the set of CEOs who contributed less than half of their
political contributions to Republicans, while "Above 50%" is the set of CEOs who contributed
at least half of their political contributions to Republicans. "All" is the full set of CEOs in our
sample. "NIS" is the set of CEOs not in our sample as their political preferences could not be
ascertained.




                                                 54
    Table 2: Summary Statistics: Event Study CEO Characteristics
                  Means (Standard Deviations)

                  RR         RD           DD       DR       All     NIS

                                     Panel A. Cutoff 50%
Frac Female -1    0.11      0.12          0.17     0.13    0.12     0.11
                 (0.12)     (0.13)       (0.14)   (0.13)   (0.12)   (0.13)

CEO Female        0.04      0.06          0.10     0.02    0.04     0.05
                 (0.19)     (0.24)       (0.30)   (0.15)   (0.21)   (0.21)

CEO Age          53.39      53.31        52.26    53.89    53.32    52.77
                 (6.27)     (7.15)       (7.09)   (7.27)   (6.63)   (7.18)

CEO Chairman      0.33      0.28          0.31     0.27    0.31     0.20
                 (0.47)     (0.45)       (0.46)   (0.45)   (0.46)   (0.40)

Insider           0.89      0.84          0.84     0.93    0.89     0.77
                 (0.31)     (0.36)       (0.36)   (0.26)   (0.32)   (0.42)

N                 890        185          154      179     1,408    2,613

                                     Panel B. Cutoff 67%
Frac Female -1    0.10      0.11          0.15     0.14    0.11     0.12
                 (0.11)     (0.13)       (0.14)   (0.14)   (0.12)   (0.13)

CEO Female        0.03      0.03          0.07     0.02    0.03     0.05
                 (0.17)     (0.18)       (0.26)   (0.13)   (0.18)   (0.22)

CEO Age          53.30      52.81        50.99    54.07    53.10    52.93
                 (6.25)     (6.94)       (8.09)   (7.26)   (6.60)   (7.07)

CEO Chairman      0.34      0.28          0.30     0.30    0.33     0.22
                 (0.47)     (0.45)       (0.46)   (0.46)   (0.47)   (0.41)

Insider           0.90      0.76          0.81     0.98    0.89     0.79
                 (0.30)     (0.43)       (0.39)   (0.13)   (0.31)   (0.41)

N                 562        58            69      56       745     3,276
                                          Continued on next page



                                   55
  Table 2 ­ Continued from previous page

                       RR          RD           DD       DR       All     NIS

                                           Panel C. Cutoff 75%
  Frac Female -1       0.10       0.10          0.13    0.15     0.10     0.12
                      (0.11)      (0.13)       (0.13)   (0.15)   (0.12)   (0.13)

  CEO Female           0.02       0.06          0.04    0.03     0.03     0.05
                      (0.15)      (0.24)       (0.19)   (0.16)   (0.17)   (0.22)

  CEO Age             53.13       52.49        50.90    55.15    53.02    52.95
                      (6.43)      (7.19)       (8.70)   (7.21)   (6.83)   (7.01)

  CEO Chairman         0.34       0.34          0.29    0.30     0.33     0.23
                      (0.48)      (0.48)       (0.46)   (0.46)   (0.47)   (0.42)

  Insider              0.90       0.80          0.83    0.97     0.89     0.80
                      (0.30)      (0.41)       (0.38)   (0.16)   (0.31)   (0.40)

  N                    409         35            52      40       536     3,485
Notes: All variables are defined in the text, with Frac Female -1 being the frac-
tion of the executive suite, as measured by the Form 4 sample, who are women in
the period before a change in CEO. Column RR reports statistics on a Republican
replacement for an outgoing Republican CEO; Column RD reports statistics on a
Democratic replacement for a Republican CEO; Column DD reports statistics on
a Democratic replacement for a Republican CEO; Column DR reports statistics on
a Republican replacement for a Democratic CEO; Column "All" reports statistics
for all of the aforementioned cases together; Column "NIS" reports statistics for
cases not in our sample (in case either the incoming or outgoing CEO cannot be
identified as being either a Democrat or Republican). The row denoted N reports
numbers of observations. The political preference of a CEO is defined using the
sample mean measure. Panel A defines a CEO as being a member of a party if
they contributed at least 50% of their contributions to that party. Panels B and C
increases the cutoff to 67% and 75%, respectively.
                                              Table 3: Fraction of Women Executives
     Political Preference         Election Cycle          4 Yr. Moving Ave.                Prev 4 Yr.            Sample Ave.
     Sample                      F4          ExC           F4          ExC           F4             ExC         F4         ExC
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)                (6)     (7)         (8)
     Frac Republican           -0.009      -0.014        -0.009+     -0.014        -0.012         -0.016      -0.019      -0.023
                               (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)         (0.006)    (0.009)      (0.011)

     CEO Female                -0.020      -0.055+       -0.020       -0.054+      -0.019          -0.052+    -0.040       -0.066
                               (0.034)      (0.035)      (0.034)      (0.035)      (0.033)         (0.035)    (0.039)      (0.039)

     CEO Age                   -0.001       -0.003       -0.001       -0.003       -0.001          -0.003     -0.001       -0.004+
                               (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.003)

     CEO Age2                   0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000           0.000      0.000        0.000
                               (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)

     log CEO Tenure             0.001       -0.001        0.001       -0.001        0.001          -0.001      0.000       -0.001
                               (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)
57




     Chair                      0.003       -0.002        0.003       -0.002        0.003          -0.001      0.003       -0.001
                               (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.004)    (0.003)      (0.004)

     CEO Insider               0.013        0.014        0.013        0.013        0.011           0.012      0.011        0.013
                               (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)         (0.007)    (0.006)      (0.006)

     CEO Insider×Female        -0.043       -0.042       -0.044       -0.043       -0.044          -0.044     -0.021       -0.027
                               (0.032)      (0.034)      (0.032)      (0.033)      (0.032)         (0.033)    (0.037)      (0.038)

     log Assets                -0.004       -0.004       -0.004       -0.004       -0.004          -0.004     -0.004       -0.004
                               (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)
     N                         22,357       22,355       22,357       22,355       22,233          22,231     25,521       25,519
     Adj.   R2                 0.6548       0.6159       0.6548       0.6158       0.6557          0.6163     0.6480       0.6072
     Mean Dep. Variable        0.1220       0.0916       0.1220       0.0916       0.1220          0.0916     0.1220       0.0916

     Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. All
     specifications include firm and year fixed effects. "Election Cycle", "4 Yr. Moving Ave.", "L 4", and "Sample Ave." represent
     difference measures of CEO political preferences, as defined in the text.
                 Table 4: Number of Event Study Observations
                          Cutoff 50%              Cutoff 67%          Cutoff 75%
Period            All          NIS          All         NIS     All         NIS
2000-2004         400          600          238         762     179         821
2005-2009         383          815          198        1,000    143        1,055
2010-2014         370          637          186         821     128         877
2015-2018         255          561          123         693     86          730
Total            1,408         2,613        745        3,276    536        3,483

 Notes: Number of changes of CEOs by time periods and whether the event
 is (column "All") or not (column "NIS") in our sample.




        Table 5: Fraction of Women Executive, one Period Before Change
                          Cutoff 50%              Cutoff 67%         Cutoff 75%
 Period            All         NIS          All        NIS     All         NIS
 2000-2004         0.10        0.09     0.09           0.09    0.09        0.09
 2005-2009         0.12        0.10     0.10           0.11    0.09        0.11
 2010-2014         0.13        0.12     0.12           0.13    0.11        0.13
 2015-2018         0.14        0.14     0.13           0.15    0.12        0.15

 Notes: Fraction of women executives one period before a change of the
 CEO by time periods, whether the event is (column "All") or not (column
 "NIS") in our sample, and threshold for determining political preferences
 of the incoming and outgoing CEO.




                                       58
                 Table 6: Event Study ­ The Outgoing CEO is Republican
 Dep. Variable                                    Fraction of Women Executives
                                 Cutoff 50%                Cutoff 67%              Cutoff 75%
                               (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)           (6)
 SwitchR,D × (t = -3)         0.010       0.010         0.006      0.017       -0.006         0.012
                             (0.012)     (0.012)        (0.023)   (0.023)      (0.033)       (0.032)
 SwitchR,D × (t = -2)         0.010       0.005         0.017      0.006       -0.005        -0.002
                             (0.012)     (0.010)        (0.026)   (0.018)      (0.023)       (0.023)
 SwitchR,D × (t = -1)         0.001       -0.000        0.001      0.010        0.004         0.010
                             (0.008)     (0.008)        (0.016)   (0.016)      (0.022)       (0.022)
 SwitchR,D × (t = 1)         0.014        0.014         0.022     0.022        0.030         0.032
                             (0.007)     (0.007)        (0.012)   (0.012)      (0.017)       (0.017)
 SwitchR,D × (t = 2)         0.022       0.020          0.043     0.039        0.054         0.055
                             (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.019)   (0.019)      (0.026)       (0.027)
 SwitchR,D × (t = 3)         0.024        0.022         0.042+     0.035       0.067         0.066
                             (0.012)     (0.012)        (0.026)   (0.026)      (0.038)       (0.039)
 t = -3                       -0.004      -0.001        -0.006    -0.002       -0.007        -0.007
                             (0.004)     (0.005)        (0.005)   (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.008)
 t = -2                       -0.002      0.002         -0.003     0.002       -0.004        -0.006
                             (0.003)     (0.006)        (0.004)   (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.008)
 t = -1                       -0.001      0.005         -0.006     0.001       -0.007        -0.008
                             (0.003)     (0.005)        (0.004)   (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.008)
 t=1                         0.006       0.006          0.005+     0.005       0.006+         0.005
                             (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.003)   (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)
 t=2                          0.004       0.004         0.003      0.002        0.006         0.002
                             (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.004)   (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
 t=3                          0.004       0.003         0.005      0.003        0.005         0.001
                             (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.005)   (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.007)
 SwitchR,D                   0.036        0.034         -0.001    -0.015      -0.055        -0.053
                             (0.018)     (0.020)        (0.033)   (0.036)      (0.012)       (0.013)
 Firm Controls                 No          Yes           No         Yes          No            Yes
 N                            5,641       5,557         3,255      3,198        2,318         2,278
 Adj. R2                     0.5594       0.5694        0.5695    0.5876       0.5849        0.6001
 Mean Dep. Variable           0.122       0.122         0.115      0.115        0.110         0.110
Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at
the firm level. Firm Controls include the log of firm assets, indicators for whether the CEO is Female,
chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), and a quadratic in CEO age.
All specifications include firm fixed effects. The dependent variable is demeaned by year, as explained
in the text.

                                                   59
                                                 Table 7: Executive Log Compensation (non-CEO)
     Political Preference                                 Election Cycle      4 Yr. Mov. Ave.            Prev 4 Yr.              Sample Ave.
                                                (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
     Exec Female                             -0.089           -0.051               -0.039+         -0.087        -0.051      -0.088         -0.032
                                              (0.011)          (0.024)             (0.024)          (0.011)      (0.024)      (0.011)       (0.024)

     Frac Republican                                           0.003                0.001                         0.028                      0.025
                                                               (0.024)             (0.025)                       (0.023)                    (0.038)

     Frac Republican× Exec Female                             -0.063              -0.083                         -0.060                    -0.091
                                                               (0.031)             (0.032)                       (0.032)                    (0.032)
60




     CEO Female                               -0.003           -0.005              -0.007            0.008        0.007        -0.087       -0.084
                                              (0.148)          (0.148)             (0.148)          (0.148)      (0.148)      (0.153)       (0.154)

     Exec Female× CEO Female                  0.073+           0.066                0.064            0.071        0.065       0.072+         0.063
                                              (0.050)          (0.050)             (0.050)          (0.050)      (0.050)      (0.046)       (0.045)
     N                                        87,125           87,125              87,125            86,520       86,520       98,573       98,573
     Adj.   R2                                0.6139           0.6139              0.6140            0.6150       0.6151       0.6082       0.6083
     Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. All specifications
     include controls for whether the executive is an insider, title fixed effects (defined in the text), a quadratic in executive age, indicators for
     whether the CEO is female, chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), a quadratic in CEO age, the log of
     CEO tenure, the log of total firm assets, return on assets, book-to-market value, cash, dividends, and total debt. "Election Cycle", "4 Yr.
     Moving Ave.", "L 4", and "Sample Ave." represent difference measures of CEO political preferences, as defined in the text.
                                                        Table 8: Compensation Structure - Ratio
       Political Preference                                 Election Cycle      4 Yr. Mov. Ave.           Prev 4 Yr.            Sample Ave.
                                                  (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
       Exec Female                             0.012             0.008                0.003          0.012         0.003     0.010         -0.005
                                               (0.003)          (0.006)              (0.006)          (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.006)

       Frac Republican                                           0.000                0.000                       -0.009                   -0.012
                                                                (0.008)              (0.008)                      (0.008)                 (0.011)

       Frac Republican× Exec Female                              0.007               0.015                        0.014                   0.024
                                                                (0.008)              (0.008)                      (0.008)                 (0.008)
61




       CEO Female                               -0.027          -0.027               -0.027           -0.028      -0.027      -0.004       -0.005
                                               (0.047)          (0.047)              (0.047)          (0.047)     (0.048)     (0.035)     (0.036)

       Exec Female× CEO Female                  -0.006          -0.006               -0.005           -0.006      -0.005       0.001       0.003
                                               (0.011)          (0.011)              (0.011)          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.012)
       N                                        87,128          87,128               87,128           86,523      86,523      98,576       98,576
       Adj.   R2                                0.4775          0.4775               0.4775           0.4774      0.4775      0.4723       0.4724
     Notes:  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. All specifications include
     controls for whether the executive is an insider, title fixed effects (defined in the text), a quadratic in executive age, indicators for whether
     the CEO is female, chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), a quadratic in CEO age, the log of CEO
     tenure, the log of total firm assets, return on assets, book-to-market value, cash, dividends, and total debt. "Election Cycle", "4 Yr. Moving
     Ave.", "Prev 4 Yr.", and "Sample Ave." represent difference measures of CEO political preferences, as defined in the text.
                                                        Table 9: Compensation Structure - Delta
     Political Preference                                  Election Cycle     4 Yr. Mov. Ave.            Prev 4 Yr.              Sample Ave.
                                                (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
     Exec Female                             -0.350           -0.178+              -0.124          -0.351         -0.140     -0.299         -0.015
                                              (0.057)          (0.116)             (0.112)          (0.057)      (0.112)      (0.053)       (0.109)

     Frac Republican                                           -0.020              -0.022                         -0.059                     0.037
                                                               (0.105)             (0.107)                       (0.100)                    (0.135)

     Frac Republican× Exec Female                              -0.282             -0.371                         -0.349                    -0.454
                                                               (0.161)             (0.158)                       (0.158)                    (0.156)
62




     CEO Female                               -0.252           -0.268              -0.270            -0.273       -0.260       -0.329       -0.320
                                              (0.364)          (0.373)             (0.376)          (0.363)      (0.375)      (0.315)       (0.316)

     Exec Female× CEO Female                  0.616           0.579                0.572            0.618        0.576        0.545         0.491
                                              (0.264)          (0.262)             (0.262)          (0.263)      (0.261)      (0.233)       (0.231)
     N                                        93,085           93,085              93,085            92,436       92,436      105,418      105,418
     Adj.   R2                                0.2357           0.2357              0.2358            0.2359       0.2360       0.2321       0.2322
     Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. All specifications
     include controls for whether the executive is an insider, title fixed effects (defined in the text), a quadratic in executive age, indicators for
     whether the CEO is female, chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), a quadratic in CEO age, the log of
     CEO tenure, the log of total firm assets, return on assets, book-to-market value, cash, dividends, and total debt. "Election Cycle", "4 Yr.
     Moving Ave.", "Prev 4 Yr.", and "Sample Ave." represent difference measures of CEO political preferences, as defined in the text.
                                                       Table 10: Compensation Structure - Vega
      Political Preference                                 Election Cycle     4 Yr. Mov. Ave.            Prev 4 Yr.              Sample Ave.
                                                 (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
      Exec Female                            -0.322            -0.214               -0.180          -0.325        -0.158      -0.294        -0.165
                                              (0.063)          (0.126)             (0.126)           (0.064)      (0.126)      (0.059)      (0.126)

      Frac Republican                                          -0.095               -0.058                        -0.078                     0.047
                                                               (0.152)             (0.159)                        (0.148)                   (0.227)

      Frac Republican× Exec Female                             -0.177               -0.233                       -0.275+                    -0.206
                                                               (0.173)             (0.172)                        (0.174)                   (0.174)
63




      CEO Female                              -1.191           -1.217              -1.208            -1.183       -1.171      -1.383       -1.377
                                              (0.680)          (0.680)             (0.676)           (0.682)      (0.683)      (0.638)      (0.637)

      Exec Female× CEO Female                0.774            0.750                0.746            0.776        0.743         0.594        0.571
                                              (0.267)          (0.268)             (0.268)           (0.267)      (0.268)      (0.254)      (0.253)
      N                                       93,085           93,085               93,085           92,436       92,436       105,418     105,418
      Adj.   R2                               0.3884           0.3884               0.3884           0.3890       0.3890       0.3840       0.3840
     Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. All specifications
     include controls for whether the executive is an insider, title fixed effects (defined in the text), a quadratic in executive age, indicators for
     whether the CEO is female, chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), a quadratic in CEO age, the log of
     CEO tenure, the log of total firm assets, return on assets, book-to-market value, cash, dividends, and total debt. "Election Cycle", "4 Yr.
     Moving Ave.", "Prev 4 Yr.", and "Sample Ave." represent difference measures of CEO political preferences, as defined in the text.
                                   Figure A1: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 50% Threshold.
                                                    Replacing a Democratic CEO


                                                   RR                                     RD
 Number Female Executives
                            1.8
                            1.6
                            1.4
                            1.2
                            1




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                   RR                                     RD
                            11
Number Executives
                            10.5
                            10
                            9.5




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                   RR                                     RD
   Frac Female Executives
                            .18
                            .16
                            .14
                            .12
                            .1




                                    -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




           Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
           change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
           of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
           bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
           change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "DD"
           represents an outgoing Democratic CEO replaced by anther Democrat. "DR" represents
           an outgoing from a Democratic CEO replaced by a Republican. The data are from the
           Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.
                                         Figure A2: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 67% Threshold.
                                                          Replacing a Democratic CEO


                                                         RR                                     RD
Number Female Executives
                                  2
                                  1.8
                                  1.6
                                  1.4
                                  1.2
                                  1




                                          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                         RR                                     RD
                                  11
  Number Executives
                                  10.5
                                  10
                                  9.5
                                  9
                                  8.5




                                          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                         RR                                     RD
         Frac Female Executives
                                  .2
                                  .18
                                  .16
                                  .14
                                  .12
                                  .1




                                          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3


               Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
               change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
               of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
               bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
               change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "DD"
               represents an outgoing Democratic CEO replaced by anther Democrat. "DR" represents
               an outgoing from a Democratic CEO replaced by a Republican. The data are from the
               Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.



                                                                          65
                                  Figure A3: Event-Study: Interpreting the Results, 75% Threshold.
                                                   Replacing a Democratic CEO


                                                  RR                                     RD
Number Female Executives
                           2
                           1.8
                           1.6
                           1.4
                           1.2
                           1




                                   -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                  RR                                     RD
                           11.5
    Number Executives
                           11
                           10.5
                           10
                           9.5




                                   -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3




                                                  RR                                     RD
Frac Female Executives
                           .2
                           .15
                           .1
                           .05




                                   -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3          -3   -2   -1   0    1   2   3


                 Notes: The top panel shows the number of female executives relative to the timing of a
                 change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The middle panel shows the total number
                 of executives relative to the timing of a change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The
                 bottom panel shows the fraction of executives who are female relative to the timing of a
                 change in CEO, by type of change in CEO. The change in CEO happens at time 0. "DD"
                 represents an outgoing Democratic CEO replaced by anther Democrat. "DR" represents
                 an outgoing from a Democratic CEO replaced by a Republican. The data are from the
                 Form 4 sample. All variable definitions are as in the text.



                                                                   66
               Table A1: Event Study ­ The Outgoing CEO is Democrat
  Dep. Variable                                Fraction of Women Executives
                                  Cutoff 50%               Cutoff 67%             Cutoff 75%
                                (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)
  SwitchR,D × (t = -3)         -0.005     -0.001        0.001      0.012       0.009        0.013
                              (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.027)   (0.024)      (0.028)     (0.030)
  SwitchR,D × (t = -2)         -0.003      0.000        -0.009     0.002       0.018        0.022
                              (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.023)   (0.020)      (0.026)     (0.026)
  SwitchR,D × (t = -1)         -0.016     -0.009        -0.014    -0.005       0.002        0.005
                              (0.011)     (0.011)       (0.019)   (0.018)      (0.024)     (0.025)
  SwitchR,D × (t = 1)          -0.001     -0.003        0.003      0.003       -0.001       0.001
                              (0.010)     (0.011)       (0.014)   (0.014)      (0.016)     (0.016)
  SwitchR,D × (t = 2)          0.004       0.003        0.002      0.001       -0.003       -0.001
                              (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.021)   (0.021)      (0.026)     (0.026)
  SwitchR,D × (t = 3)          -0.012     -0.014        -0.027    -0.036+      -0.022       -0.025
                              (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.023)   (0.023)      (0.028)     (0.028)
  t = -3                       -0.002      0.005        -0.005    -0.024      -0.024+      -0.035
                              (0.013)     (0.014)       (0.018)   (0.020)      (0.016)     (0.028)
  t = -2                       0.001       0.005        -0.003    -0.026+      -0.017      -0.028
                              (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.015)   (0.017)      (0.013)     (0.024)
  t = -1                       0.012       0.013        0.007     -0.016       -0.003      -0.011
                              (0.008)     (0.011)       (0.011)   (0.017)      (0.011)     (0.022)
  t=1                          0.006       0.006        0.002     -0.001       0.015        0.012
                              (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.009)   (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.011)
  t=2                          0.002      -0.002        0.001     -0.007       0.016        0.012
                              (0.011)     (0.011)       (0.015)   (0.016)      (0.015)     (0.016)
  t=3                          0.011       0.006        0.014      0.005       0.023        0.019
                              (0.012)     (0.011)       (0.016)   (0.017)      (0.018)     (0.018)
  SwitchR,D                    -0.002     -0.015        0.055+    0.046        0.050       0.043
                              (0.023)     (0.024)       (0.036)   (0.020)      (0.038)     (0.024)
  Firm Controls                 No          Yes          No         Yes         398          392
  N                            1,690       1,679         584        578          No          Yes
  Adj. R2                     0.6403      0.6588        0.6912    0.7164       0.7179      0.7306
  Mean Dep. Variable           0.152       0.152        0.150      0.151       0.151        0.153
Notes: + p < 0.15,  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are
clustered at the firm level. Firm Controls include the log of firm assets, indicators for whether the
CEO is Female, chair of the board, an insider (also interacted with the CEO being female), and
a quadratic in CEO age. All specifications include firm fixed effects. The dependent variable is
demeaned by year, as explained in the text.

                                                   67
