                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ON THE GREEN INTEREST RATE.

                                      Nicholas Z. Muller

                                      Working Paper 28891
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28891


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




The ideas in this paper grew out of several discussions with the late Marvin Goodfriend.
Subsequent versions of the paper benefited from comments provided by participants at the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Climate Change Conference in November of 2019,
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the Environmental Protection Agency, and at
Carnegie Mellon University, especially Pooya Molavi. All remaining errors are the responsibility
of the author. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicholas Z. Muller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
On the Green Interest Rate.
Nicholas Z. Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 28891
June 2021
JEL No. E21,E43,E63,Q51,Q53,Q54,Q56,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper demonstrates how a central bank might operationalize an expanded role inclusive of
managing risks from environmental pollution. The analysis introduces the green interest rate (rg)
which depends on temporal changes in the pollution intensity of output. This policy instrument
reallocates consumption from periods when output is pollution intensive to when output is
cleaner. In economies on a cleaning-up path, rg exceeds r*. For those growing more polluted, rg
is less than r*. In the U.S. economy from 1957 to 2016, rg exceeded r* by 50 basis points.
Federal environmental policy reversed the orientation between rg and r*.


Nicholas Z. Muller
Department of Engineering, and Public Policy
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
4215 Tepper Quad
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com




Appendices are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28891
         I.      Introduction.

Central banks and financial regulators are increasingly focused on environmental risks to the

financial system and the macroeconomy (The New York Times, 2020a; NGFS, 2020; Federal

Reserve, 2020; White House, 2021). This paper demonstrates how a central bank could

operationalize management of environmental pollution and climate risk through monetary

policy. Specifically, the analysis proposes a green interest rate that transmits information on

pollution damages to borrowers and lenders. This policy instrument mitigates damage to the

economy by reallocating consumption from periods when output is more pollution intensive to

when output is cleaner. Therefore, the largest potential impact of targeting the green interest rate

occurs when pollution intensity changes rapidly: upon the introduction of binding environmental

policy, during periods of rapid technological innovation, and over the business cycle (Muller,

2019a). These periods align with risks identified by the Federal Reserve in its 2020 Financial

Stability Report (Federal Reserve, 2020, p. 58). This novel policy instrument also speaks directly

to concerns articulated by central banks in a recent survey, namely ensuring that a transition to a

low-carbon economy occurs in an orderly fashion (NGFS, 2020). Thus, the green interest rate

may be an important tool for central banks to manage environmental risks to the economy during

the transformation to a low-carbon economy.

The green interest rate (rg) is a reconceptualization of the natural interest rate (or r*) that

recognizes an expanded role for central banks inclusive of managing environmental risks. Two

concepts underpinning r* prompt the inclusion of pollution damage in rg: the notion of potential

output and the measurement of trend growth in output. Each is explored briefly here. Laubach

and Williams (2015) define the natural rate as "the real short-term interest rate consistent with

the economy operating at its full potential." Similarly, Goodfriend (2016) states that "the natural



                                                   2
interest rate is the interest rate that makes desired aggregate lifetime consumption plans conform

to present and expected future potential output..." This paper contends that "potential", or "full

potential", income is fundamentally mismeasured without consideration of environmental

pollution damage. This argument stems from a literature dating back to the seminal work of

Nordhaus and Tobin (1973) documenting that the National Income and Product Accounts

(NIPAs) are incomplete (NAS NRC, 1999; Bartelmus, 2009; Muller, Mendelsohn, and

Nordhaus, 2011; Mohan et al., 2020). Recent research suggests that this adjustment is currently

about five percent of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) for air pollution damages (Tschofen et

al., 2019). In China and India pollution intensity is substantially higher (Mohan et al., 2020).

Thus, the subtraction of pollution damage from output is not a trivial adjustment and inclusion of

this information in rg may appreciably shift central banks' policy rate target.

Second, a key driver of r* is trend growth in potential GDP (Laubach and Williams, 2015; Lubik

and Matthes, 2015; Kaplan, 2018). Building on the argument above, if output levels are

mismeasured, estimates of trend growth may be inaccurate as well. Indeed, prior research reports

differences between growth in GDP and in GDP less pollution damage of as much as 1.5 percent

annually since the 1950s in the U.S. economy (Muller, 2014; Muller, 2019b). This growth rate

differential varies considerably across countries (Mohan et al., 2020). Mismeasurement of

growth due to the omission of pollution damage may effect empirical estimates of r*. Specifying

rg corrects this bias by relying on growth in GDP less pollution damage.

To operationalize rg, this paper deducts pollution damage from GDP to measure net output or

environmentally adjusted value-added (EVA) 1. This metric is grounded in the environmental



1
 The presence of environmental regulation may give one pause as to whether such costs are
already in the accounts. Note, however, that what is subtracted are damages from remaining
emissions, net of environmental policy. The only case in which double counting would occur is if
                                                  3
accounting literature (Nordhaus and Tobin, 1973; Nordhaus, 2006; Abraham and Mackie, 2006;

Muller, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, 2011; Tschofen et al., 2019; Mohan et al., 2020) 2. The analysis

deducts two types of pollution damage from GDP: premature mortality risk from exposure to

fine particulate matter (or PM2.5, a local air pollutant) and the present value of long-term

damages from emissions of carbon dioxide (or CO2, a long-lived greenhouse gas) 3. The damages

are estimated from 1957 to 2016 in the U.S. economy.

This 60-year period spans the passage and implementation of landmark federal legislation to

control air pollution. (The Clean Air Act (CAA) was passed in 1970, and implemented in the

following years.) This empirical setting stands to inform macroeconomic policymakers

concerned about managing an orderly transition to a low-carbon economy. The CAA initiated a

transformation of the U.S. economy from a state of rising pollution levels to an economy

cleaning up. This significantly altered production processes in power generation, heavy

manufacturing, and the light duty vehicle fleet. These industries are also likely to incur (or are

already experiencing) disruptive technological change as the economy decarbonizes. The

ramifications for pollution damage and rg observed around the CAA's passage may shed light on

how using rg to set policy targets will affect environmental risks and stability as the economy

decarbonizes.



emissions are taxed according to their marginal damages (or if firms, subject to a system of
tradable permits, had to purchase all allowances in an auction format). U.S. environmental
regulations take the form of standards as well as a collection of small-scale or regional cap-and-
trade programs that, for the most part, grant allowances for free.
2
  In contrast to prior analyses of environmentally-adjusted accounts that focus on sectoral
decompositions (Muller, Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus, 2011; Tschofen et al., 2019), growth
(Muller, 2014; 2019b), or discounting (Muller, 2019a), the present paper focuses on a
recalibration of the natural interest rate to include pollution damage.
3
  These pollutants contribute the largest share of measurable damages from pollution across
media (USEPA, 1999; 2011; Muller, Mendelsohn, and Nordhaus, 2011; Keiser, Kling, and
Shapiro, 2019).
                                                  4
        a. Preview of Results.

Pollution is introduced into a New Keynesian model of the economy on the supply side by

specifying the pollution intensity of technology employed with labor to produce output. On the

demand side, households face a neoclassical intertemporal consumption-savings problem. The

optimal consumption path is characterized by the Euler equation. Solving for the interest rate that

aligns consumption with full potential output yields r*. Doing so with pollution damage deducted

from output yields rg. This exercise reveals that rg depends on the intertemporal changes in

pollution intensity. When pollution intensity falls, rg rises relative to r*. Conversely, if pollution

intensity rises, rg falls in comparison to r*. The intuition for this orientation is the following. In

economies becoming cleaner or less pollution intensive, current prospects for future consumption

brighten. Thus, delaying present consumption, as incentivized by a higher rg, so that

consumption occurs when less value is lost to environmental pollution, damage enhances

welfare. In an economy degrading its environment, expectations for future consumption

prospects diminish. Consumption in the future suffers greater losses due to pollution damage.

Under such conditions, rg is less than r*. This shifts consumption to the present and attenuates the

effective penalty from pollution damage.

Empirically, the paper estimates air pollution and CO2 damages and deducts these costs from

GDP to estimate environmentally adjusted value added, or EVA, from 1957 to 2016 in the U.S.

economy. Damages fell at an annual rate of 0.35 percent over this 60-year period. EVA growth

outpaced GDP growth by an average of about 50 basis points. The paper empirically compares rg

to estimates of r* from the literature (Laubach and Williams, 2015). On average, rg exceeded r*

by 50 basis points. However, the orientation between rg and r* changed around 1970 when the

CAA was passed. From 1957 to 1970, pollution intensity increased rapidly and rg was less than



                                                   5
r* by about 150 basis points. During the 1970s, pollution intensity fell and rg exceeded r*, by 150

basis points. After the 1970s, rg consistently exceeded r* though the difference attenuated to just

15 basis points after 2010. The passage and enactment of the CAA initiated a transition in the

U.S. economy to a lower level of pollution damage intensity. The position of rg relative to r*

reflects this transition.

The business cycle is also an important determinant of the position of rg relative to r*; during

recessions, the rg exceeds r* by about two-times more than during expansions because of the pro-

cyclical nature of pollution damage. This effect is largest prior to the enactment of the CAA.

Finally, a series of simulations demonstrates the attenuation of pollution damage from the

reallocation of consumption induced by rg. The effects are largest prior to the enactment of the

CAA, and during the energy crisis, the recessions of the early 1980s, and the Great Recession.

These exercises show how the central bank targeting rg would transmit information on changes in

pollution damages to borrowers and lenders, and how the resulting reallocation of consumption

to low damage intensity periods reduces total damage.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II. introduces the conceptual model

and derives the interest rates, the effects of rg on damages and net output, and the interaction

between conventional environmental policy and rg. Section III. presents the data and methods.

Section IV. covers results and V. concludes.



         II.     Model.

The theoretical set up is a standard New Keynesian model (Goodfriend, 2004; 2016; Gali, 2008).

The model introduces pollution intensity to the production technology in order to define potential

output as net of pollution damage. The model then solves for r* and rg by equating intertemporal


                                                  6
consumption to potential output without and then with pollution damage. The analysis then

explores the effect of rg on damages and consumption net of pollution, the transmission of rg

through economy, and the interaction between environmental policy and rg.

                a. Households.

Assume an economy is comprised of identical consumers that seek to maximize lifetime utility
                                                                           1
derived from consumption in a two period model: (1 , 2 ) = (1 ) + 1+ (2 ), where (ct) is

consumption of market-produced goods in period (t), and the pure rate of time preference is

                                                 1- -1
given by (). More specifically, let ( ) =        1-
                                                      , denote utility from consumption in period

                                                               1
(t) 4. The intertemporal budget constraint is given by (1 ) + 1+ (2 ) = 1 , where (r) denotes the

real interest rate, and W1 is period (1) wealth defined as the present value of current and future

income. Solving the budget constraint for (2 ), substituting into the utility function, taking the

partial derivative with respect to (1 ) and rearranging yields the familiar Euler equation, which is

shown in (1):

2     1+
     = 1+                                                                            (1)
1 



The present value of lifetime utility is maximized when the marginal utility from consumption,

in present value terms, is equated across time periods and consumers utilize their entire budget.

As in Goodfriend (2004; 2016) the equilibrium outcome features the representative household

being neither a net borrower nor a net saver.




4
 The appendix explores a constant elasticity of substitution utility function defined over
environmental quality and market goods.
                                                  7
The appendix derives households' labor supply function, which assumes that utility derived from
                                                    
leisure is logarithmic. This is shown in (2), where  = hours worked in period (t), and  = the

real wage which households take as exogenous.

           
 = 1 -                                                                               (2)
              



                 b. Firms and Output.

The supply side of the economy is characterized by J (many) firms that make differentiated

products. Output (Yt) is comprised solely of consumption goods produced by the J firms with

technology (at) and labor (nt) through a production function with diminishing returns to labor.

 =  ( )1-                                                                            (3)


where: 0    1.

                                                                                     
Firms' marginal cost is the wage over the marginal productivity of labor:  =            =
                                                                                      
                                                                                       

 
      .   Because of product differentiation, firms can maintain a price in excess of marginal
 (1- )


                                                                     
cost. The mark-up over marginal cost in period (t) is denoted  =      > 1. Combining
                                                                      

                                        
(MCt) together with the markup,  =  , and rearranging provides an expression for the real
                                           


                                                          (1- )
wage in terms of productivity and the markup:        =        . Equilibrium employment is
                                                           


determined by assuming that the market for goods clears (Yt = ct) and substituting (3) and the

                                                                                           1
real wage into households' labor supply function (2), which yields  = 1 -  = 1+                 . As
                                                                                            -


Goodfriend (2004) pointed out, productivity does not affect equilibrium employment.




                                                 8
Productivity affects both consumption and wages proportionally. Thus, period (t) market-

clearing output is given by (4):

        
 = 1+ -                                                                              (4)
         



Output varies in direct proportion to productivity and inversely with the markup.

               c. Pollution in production.

This section introduces pollution intensity to the production technology. The motivation for this

exercise is to recast potential output net of pollution damage for the derivation of rg. By

assumption, all firms exhibit identical degrees of pollution intensity. When adjusted for pollution

damage, the production function is:


 =  (1 -  -   ) (1-) .                                                               (5)


Expression (5) includes three new terms to capture the dynamics between pollution from

production, attempts to mitigate pollution through investment in abatement, and the

responsiveness of damage to abatement. In period (t),  depicts the fraction of income allocated

to pollution control, investments in abatement of environmental pollutants such as CO2 or

particulate matter. Next, let  denote the pollution intensity of output, say CO2 damage per unit

GDP, prior to abatement. So this parameter captures the differences between a coal-powered

economy, a petroleum powered economy, and an economy based on renewables.  shows the

responsiveness of environmental pollution damage to abatement investment  . Large values of

( ) attenuate output. In contrast, greater values of abatement expenditure ( ) and ( ) increase

                                                                                  ( -  )
( ) by reducing damage. The specification of damage is multiplicative:  =
                                                                                   1+ -

                                                                                   1-( -  )
characterizes period (t) monetary pollution damage. This implies that  =                      
                                                                                     1+ -

                                                  9
depicts period (t) net output, the production of consumption goods, less environmental pollution

damage.

                  d. Interest Rates.

This sub-section derives the real 5 interest rate that equates consumption to full potential output.

When aggregate demand aligns with potential output, where output consists of goods and

services traded in markets, the market clearing interest rate is r* (Goodfriend, 2016). When

potential output is defined as net of pollution damage, the market clearing interest rate is rg. This

rate compels borrowers and lenders to consider the relative pollution intensity of output in the

present and the future. As shown in subsection e. below, rg raises social welfare by increasing

total net consumption. By targeting rg in setting its short-term policy rate, the role of the central

bank expands from sustaining full employment and price stability to managing environmental

pollution risk.

                                                               
To begin, periods (1) and (2) potential output 1+ 1- , 1+ 2- are substituted into (1) for
                                                       1        2


(c1) and (c2). Then, the Euler equation is solved for (r). This yields r* as shown in (6) for the case

of logarithmic utility.

                    1+ - 1-
  = 2 (1 + ) 1+1 -              -1                                                     (6)
       1               2



The natural rate of interest is increasing in productivity growth and in households' rate of time

preference and it is attenuated by growth in firms' markup.




5
 Recall from section b. that the labor supply decision by households depends on the real wage.
Because the price level is factored into the model, the interest rates derived here are real rates.
                                                  10
Next, pollution-adjusted potential output in periods (1) and (2),

    1 1-(1 -1 1 )    2 1-(2 -2 2 )
       1+1 -
                    ,         1+2 -
                                        , is substituted into (1) and solved for (r) yielding (7):


                                   1- 1-( -  )
   2                1+  -                2 2 2
 =  (1 + ) 1+  -
             1
                                     1-(            -1                                    (7)
        1                2               1 -1 1 )



Expression (7) is rg. The key difference between (6) and (7) is that rg depends on the change in

                                                    1-( -  )
pollution intensity across the two periods: 1-(2 -22 ). Through this term, rg transmits
                                                       1   1 1


information on changing pollution conditions in the economy to borrowers and lenders. If

pollution intensity is constant, rg = r*.

Expression (8) characterizes the ratio of (6) to (7), assuming the markups are equivalent with and

without pollution damage 6.

         +1      1-( -  )
 =             = 1-(2 -2 2 )                                                              (8)
          +1         1       1 1



                                                           1-( -  )
An economy on a "cleaning-up" trajectory features 1-(2 -2 2 ) > 1. Under these conditions,
                                                                 1   1 1


rg will exceed r*. The reduction in future damages boosts consumption prospects in the future

because proportionately less output is lost to pollution damage than in the present. With falling

damages, the higher rg induces more current savings and more consumption in the future.

                 1-( -  )
Conversely, 1-(2 -2 2 ) < 1 holds in an economy with rising pollution intensity. In this case,
                     1       1 1


r* exceeds rg. Rising damage limits net consumption opportunities in the future. Greater losses to




6
 Note that this does not imply the markups are fixed over time. Rather, including damage does
not alter the markup in any given period. This assumption holds in a real business cycle context
in which firms can flexibly permute prices to maintain their profit maximizing markup.
                                                      11
future net consumption are reflected in a lower rg. This draws consumption from the future into

the present when the drag due to pollution damage is lower.

Figure 1 depicts consumers' intertemporal choice problem. Both panels compare optimal

consumption decisions when households face (r*) and (rg). The two solid downward sloping

lines are the representative household's budget constraints. The outer constraint embodies

consumption possibilities without consideration of pollution damage. The inner constraint

deducts environmental pollution damage; it represents consumption possibilities if the economy

were subject to Pigouvian taxation that efficiently subtracts pollution damage from output. The

                                   1+                                                       1+
slope of the outer constraint is -  1+ , whereas the slope of the inner constraint is -  1+ . In

this configuration, 1 (1 - 1 1 ) > 2 (2 - 2 2 ). Damages are falling.


The left-hand panel compares household intertemporal choice in an economy without

environmental policy with an interest rate of r* to choices in an economy that is subject to

binding environmental policy with an interest rate of rg. Without binding environmental policy

and with r*, households have no incentive to consider pollution damage. They optimize by

                                                         1+ 
equating their marginal rate of substitution (MRS) to          . This is shown at point A and it is
                                                         1+


denoted (c1(r*), c2(r*)). With environmental policy, and facing rg, households optimize by
                            1+
harmonizing their MRS to  1+ . This is shown at point B, which is denoted (c1(rg), c2(rg)).


The reliance on rg coupled with binding environmental policy affects consumption behavior

through two channels. First, the change from point A to point C reflects a substitution effect,

based on the new intertemporal terms of trade embodied in rg. This is found at the point of

tangency between the initial indifference curve and the compensated budget constraint with the



                                                12
            1+
slope of -  1+ , shown by the dashed line. The remaining change in consumption, from C to

B, is an income effect. It stems from the reduction in potential income from internalization of

pollution damage.

The right-hand panel of figure 1 presents the representative household's intertemporal choice in

an economy without binding environmental regulation. Here, point A is still the representative

household's optimal bundle when facing r*. When consumers face rg, the feasible consumption

set changes as do the intertemporal terms of trade, as depicted by the dashed line. Since

households are neither borrowers nor lenders in equilibrium, the new budget constraint passes

through point A. By changing the intertemporal terms of trade, rg encourages consumers to
                      1+
equate their MRS to  1+ , at point D. The tangency at D represents a welfare improving

reallocation of consumption from period 1 to period 2. That is, the new consumption locus lies

on an indifference curve associated with higher total utility than A. This buttresses the

conclusions from above; when damages fall over time, utility maximizing households facing rg

increase their savings and consume more in the future when damages are lower 7.

The right-hand panel of figure 1 embodies extant limitations to a central bank's policy portfolio.

Setting short run policy rates is well within a central bank's authority, whether based on rg or r*.

Implementing binding environmental policy to limit consumption and damage is not; policy

interventions of this sort are more often the purview of an environmental regulator. A central

bank cannot induce consumers to relocate from A to B in the left-hand panel of figure 1. That

would require both rg and binding environmental policy. However, with the standard toolkit of


7
 The direction of the reallocation from A to D occurs because damages are falling in this
example. Had figure 1 featured rising damage, consumption would move from period 2 to period
1.
                                                 13
setting short-term policy rates, macroeconomic policymakers can affect intertemporal

consumption decisions of the sort embodied in the shift from A to D.

               e. Damages and Net Consumption.

Figure A.1 in the appendix facilitates an analysis of how rg affects damages and net

consumption. The figure adopts the notation from figure 1 in terms of defining points A and D.

The left-hand panel of figure A.1, the focus of the discussion here, corresponds directly to figure

                                                           
1 in that damages are falling. Let 1 = ,1 - 1 and 2 = ,2 - 2 , denote the change in the

representative household's consumption (due to facing rg rather than r*) in periods 1 and 2,

respectively. In the left-hand panel, damage intensity is falling so 2 > 0 and 1 < 0. In

                                                                                    2
moving from A to D, consumption is reallocated according to the following rate:          =
                                                                                    1

   1+
-  1+ . This is just the slope of the new budget constraint, shown as I in figure A.1.


                                                     2 (2 -2 2 )
The intertemporal rate of exchange in damages is:               .   This is the slope of II. Because
                                                     1 (1 -1 1 )


damage intensity is falling (1 - 1 1 ) > (2 - 2 2 ). The slope of II. is less than (closer to

zero than) the rate of change in consumption, or the slope of I. Thus, for every unit of

consumption moved from the present to the future, avoided damages from less present

consumption exceeds additional damage from more future consumption in absolute value.

Because the rate of change in consumption of market goods exceeds the rate of change in

damage, the rate of change in net consumption (net of pollution damage) exceeds that of gross

consumption. Specifically, the intertemporal rate of exchange in net consumption is the slope of




                                                14
                         2    1-( -  )
III, which is equal to       1-(2 -2 2 ). This is greater than (farther from zero than) the slope of
                         1         1   1 1


        2
I, or       .
        1



The incentives embedded in rg result in a welfare improving adjustment of the representative

household's intertemporal consumption path. This is evident in figure 1 in that D lies on a

"higher" indifference curve than A. The argument in this section provides an alternative

perspective on the representative household's response to rg that confirms this result. The
                                                                                            1+
reallocation of household consumption from the present to the future at the rate of -  1+ 

results in an increase in total net consumption because the intertemporal rate of exchange in

damages is less than that of market consumption. Crucially, if net consumption is what dictates

social welfare, then society is made better off when households face rg.

The right hand panel of figure A.1 reflects an economy growing more pollution intensive. Note,

first, that the slope of I. is less (in absolute value) than I. in the left hand panel. Since damage is

                                             1+         1+ 
rising, rg < r*, and the absolute value of  1+  <  1+ . Thus, D implies more current and less

future consumption. In this context of rising damage, II. is steeper than I. Damage falls from less

future consumption by more than it rises when current consumption increases. In addition, III. is

less steep than I. because present net consumption rises more than future net consumption falls.

Hence, D lies on a "higher" indifference curve and welfare increases.

                f. Interactions Between Investment in Pollution Control and rg.

The thrust of this subsection is not to suggest that environmental policy should be designed

according to how it alters rg. Rather, the goal here is to discuss how environmental policy affects

rg because this, in turn, may permute monetary policy targeting rg. That is, if central banks adopt

                                                   15
an rg-based target, policy makers could anticipate how rg would change in a setting with dynamic

environmental policy.

Pollution control, or abatement, conducted in period (t) reduces damage through the (  ) term,

where ( ) denotes the fraction of output allocated to abatement and ( ) represents the

sensitivity, or responsiveness, of the environment to abatement. Because the (  ) term enters

(7), abatement affects rg. Inspection of (7) reveals that how investment in pollution control

affects rg depends on when the investment occurs. The basic intuition is the following. More

pollution removal today raises the growth rate of damages, ceteris paribus. This lowers rg. More

abatement in the future, holding other factors fixed, lowers the growth rate of damages. This

raises rg. To more precisely characterize the effect of pollution control on rg, expressions (9a) and

(9b) calculate the partial effect of (1 ) and (2 ) on rg.

                                  1- 1-( -  )
                        1+  -           2 2 2
    = -1 2 (1 + ) 1+1
                     -                               2                                         (9a)
1             1              2         1-(1 -1 1 )


                                 1-
                      1+  -                1
    = 2 2 (1 + ) 1+1
                    -                 1-(1 -1 1 )
                                                                                               (9b)
2         1              2



Hence, (9a) is negative while (9b) is positive, supporting the intuition above. Increasingly

stringent environmental policy will raise rg, because policies that prescribe higher levels of

abatement in the future boost growth in net output by reducing damage over time 8. This case is

also instructive for economies that have not yet instituted binding environmental policies, but

will do so in the future. Such a situation is broadly relevant. Some large developing economies

(such as India) currently lack binding pollution control policies. Were such nations to enact such


8
  Looking back at environmental policy in the U.S., the CAA featured limits to ambient pollution
that have gradually become more stringent since 1970. Thus, one of the landmark pieces of
environmental legislation exemplifies this pattern of increasingly binding regulation.
                                                    16
rules in the future, rg would rise. Developed economies like the U.S. lack comprehensive,

binding climate change policy. Upon implementation of such policies, rg would increase.

Conversely, a policy that sets an ambitious near term abatement target that then relaxes over time

will result lower rg. The idea is that if policies allow pollution intensity to rise, rg will decline. A

lower rg also occurs when governments allow existing rules to lapse, or terminate policies, as

was the case in the U.S. between 2017 and 2020 (New York Times, 2020b).

This section underscores that central banks considering an rg target must be mindful of extant

environmental policy and expectations over future environmental policy. Since such regulations

appreciably affect pollution intensity, they will modify rg. Upon the introduction of rules or

regulations intended to induce significant decarbonization, the interplay between pollution

intensity and rg may be a critical consideration for central banks in managing this risk.

        III.    Data and Methods.

The empirical analysis conducted in this paper relies on several sources of data. Section III.a

focuses on the environmental data while III.b discusses sources for the macroeconomic data.

        a. Environmental pollution data.

The local air pollution series covers annual average fine particulate matter (PM2.5) estimates

reported in Muller (2019a). These data correspond to a combination of satellite observations and

modeled data from 1980 ­ 2016 provided by Meng et al., (2019), see figure A.2 in the appendix.

For the earlier data, the analysis relies on imputed PM2.5 from total suspended particulate matter

(TSP) data gathered from the early air pollution monitoring networks. The TSP data are provided

by Clay et al., (2016). The imputation, discussed at length in Muller (2019a), regresses observed

PM2.5 in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (USEPA) AQS monitor network from

                                                   17
1999 to 2016 on matching (spatially and temporally) TSP data. Predictions of PM2.5 are made

from 1979 back to 1957 and this series is spliced with the 1980-2016 satellite series to produce a

continuous PM2.5 series from 1957 to 2016 (see figure A.3).

Conversion of ambient PM2.5 estimates into monetary damage relies on an approach that is

standard in policy analyses (USEPA, 1999; 2010) and in the academic literature (Levy, Baxter,

Schwartz, 2009; Muller, Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, 2011; Muller, 2014; Tschofen et al., 2019). The

damages are limited to premature mortality risk from exposure to PM2.5 both because of historic

data constraints and because prior research in this area has repeatedly demonstrated that this

category of damage accounts for the majority of all air pollution damage (USEPA, 1999; 2010).

Calculation of mortality damage requires vital statistics going back to 1957. The methods and

data are discussed in Muller (2019a). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

provide population and mortality rate data used in this analysis. These data are reported by age

group. This is an essential component of the empirical analysis because baseline mortality rates

vary considerably over the life cycle and the functions that link exposure to mortality risk are

multiplicative in nature (Krewski et al., 2009).

Using population by age cohort (a), and time (t), denoted (Popa,t), and baseline (reported)

mortality rates, by (a) and (t), denoted (Ma,t), (CDC, various) premature mortality due to PM2.5

exposure is computed as shown in (10).


,, = ,, ,, 1 - 1                                                                    (10)
                 , 




                                                   18
The () term, which controls the marginal effect on mortality risk from PM2.5 exposure, is

reported in the epidemiological literature (Krewski et al., 2009). Aggregating over age groups

and locations yields an estimate of national premature mortality.

In the air pollution context, mortality risk is commonly monetized using the Value of Statistical

Life (VSL) approach. The VSL is the marginal rate of substitution between money (income) and

mortality risk (Hammit and Robinson, 2011). This tack is used by the USEPA in its benefit-cost

analyses of the CAA (USEPA, 1999; 2010) and by numerous academic researchers (Levy,

Baxter, Schwartz, 2009; Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009; Fann et al., 2009; Muller, 2014; 2019a;

2019b; Tschofen et al., 2019). It is typical to apply the VSL to all populations within a given time

period uniformly, regardless of income. Thus, monetary damages (D) in period (t) are calculated

by simply multiplying premature mortalities times the VSL, shown as (Vt), in (11).


 =    
   =1 =1 ,,                                                                 (11)


A crucial concern in the relatively long-run context of the present paper is that the VSL (Vt)

varies by year according to the reported per capita income. To construct the VSL series over the

60-year span of the present study depends on estimates of the VSL-income elasticity reported in

the literature (Kleckner and Neumann, 1999; Costa, Kahn, 2004; Hammitt, Robinson, 2011). The

present analysis employs the VSLs by decade reported in Costa and Kahn (2004) from 1957 to

1980. For the 1980 to 2016 period, the paper begins with the USEPA's recommended VSL of

$7.4 million ($2006). This VSL is adjusted according to changes in real income using the

USEPA's income elasticity of 0.4 (Kleckner and Neumann, 1999). This series was used in

Muller (2019a). Figure A.4 in the appendix shows how the VSL changes from 1957 to 2016.




                                                19
Emissions of greenhouse gases (expressed as CO2 equivalents) are provided by the U.S.

Department of Energy (DOE, 2011; 2019). These are economy-wide emission estimates.

Monetization of the CO2 emissions employs the social cost of carbon (SCC) metric. This is the

present value of damages from one U.S. short ton of CO2 emissions. This study uses the updated

SCC from the U.S. Federal Inter-Agency Working Group report from 2016 (USFWG, 2016). The

annual real rate of change in the SCC reported in USFWG (2016) is used to estimate the SCC back

to 1957. Both the emissions and the SCC estimates are depicted in figure A.5.

It is of interest to characterize how pollution damages change if households face rg rather than r*.

The difference in damage in period 1, between consumption levels with r*, denoted (c1(r*)), and

consumption levels with rg, c1(rg)) is:

           ( -  )           1-      1-
     1 1  1 1
1 = 1-        
       ( -  ) 1+  -
                                         (1 - 1 1 ) - (2 - 2 2 )                                     (12)
               2   2 2        1



The difference in damage in period 2 is shown in (13):

           (2 -2 2 )    1-  1-
     1
2 = (                          (1              - 1 1 ) - (2 - 2 2 )                                  (13)
           1 -1 1 )-1 1+2 -



For any given period (t) in the data, the sum of (12) and (13) is computed. The two year sum of

the change in damages is reported because rg induces an intertemporal reallocation, with

consumption and damage either rising or falling in each period. Thus, it is the total change in

damage that matters for social welfare.

In light of the standard view that monetary policy actions affecting short term rates also affect

medium and longer term rates, the analysis also computes (12) and (13) over longer maturities 9.


9
  Roley and Sellon (1995) report mixed results of the relationship between short term policy actions and 30-year
rates. The medium term maturities (three and five years) that are the focus here are significantly affected by short
term policy actions (Roley and Sellon, 1995).

                                                          20
Specifically, the change in consumption over three and five year maturities are computed and

reported.




       b. Macroeconomic data.

In order to calculate the interest rate specifications derived in section II., several macroeconomic

datasets are required. National GDP is provided by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis

(USBEA, 2019). Conversion from nominal to real values relies on the USBEA's GDP deflator.

Pollution intensity is defined as empirically estimated GED over GDP. Net potential output (or

EVA) is computed by deducting the gross external damage (GED) from air pollution and CO2

from real GDP, by year, from 1957 to 2016. All macroeconomic aggregates (GDP, GED, and

EVA) are expressed in real, per capita terms.

        IV.     Results.

The results section begins with a brief description of summary statistics and stylized facts. There

are four patterns in the summary statistics that are most relevant to the subsequent analysis of

interest rates. First, the U.S. economy exhibited falling damages, combined, from air pollution

and CO2, between 1957 and 2016. Regarding the analytical results derived above, this implies

that, in general, rg will exceed r*. Second, the passage of the CAA reversed the trend in damage

from rising prior to 1970 to falling thereafter. This trend break due to regulation reversed the

orientation between rg and r*. Third, the CAA only affected emissions of local air pollution.

Damages from CO2 continued to rise after 1970 while damages from regulated pollutants fell.

The importance of public policy in dictating the trajectory of damage speaks to the effects of

                                                 21
future climate policy on rg relative to r*. And, fourth, as reported in prior research, the combined

damages are large relative to per capita income (Muller, 2019a; Tschofen et al., 2019).

Figure 2 depicts the real GDP, EVA, and GED series from 1957 to 2016. Table 1 reports that

real, per capita GDP increased from just under $20,000 in the late 1950s to nearly $60,000 in

2016. This is an increase of about 2 percent per year (see table 2). Despite this growth in national

income, table 1 shows that per capita GED fell by about 30 percent over this time from an

average of $6,800 in the 1960s down to just under $4,900 after 2010. Combined GED decreased

by 0.35 percent, annually (see table 2). EVA growth outpaced GDP growth by about 50 basis

points. Real EVA growth in excess of GDP stems from falling pollution intensity. Table 1

reveals that, in the 1960s, GED amounted to about one-third of per capita income. After 2010,

this damage burden dropped to under 10 percent. In light of analytical results in section II., such

conditions suggest that rg exceeded r* in the U.S. economy over this period. The statistical

comparisons rg and r* are presented below.

Though generally pollution intensity of the U.S. economy declined from 1957 to 2016, this

reduction was non-monotonic (Muller, 2019a). These decadal results are shown in tables 1 and 2.

From 1957 to 1970, the GED grew at just under 4 percent, annually, while real GDP expanded at

about 2.5 percent per year. Increasing damage intensity in this pre-regulatory period suppressed

EVA growth. Specifically, EVA growth averaged about 1.9 percent, annually, or roughly 60

basis points slower than real GDP. After 1970 and the passage of the CAA, GED began to fall.

During the decade of the 1970s, combined GED shrank by about 1 percent per year. GDP

growth, while slower than during the 1960s, was on average positive, at 2 percent. With falling

pollution intensity, EVA growth exceeded GDP growth. The EVA ­ GDP growth gap was at its




                                                 22
widest margins during the 1970s (150 basis points). The difference in growth rates generally

attenuated until the 2010s.

The reversal in the direction of change in pollution intensity, and the orientation of EVA and

GDP growth has intuitive ramifications for the relative magnitudes of rg and r*. Namely, in the

period of rising pollution intensity, section II. suggests that r* exceeded rg. And, after 1970,

when pollution intensity began to fall, section II. suggests the orientation of these two rates

reversed. The statistical comparison of rg and r* before and after 1970 is reported and discussed

below.

Tables 1, 2, and figure 3 decompose the GED into air pollution and CO2 damages. The left-hand

panel of figure 3 shows the indexed levels of GDP and GED. The right-hand panel shows growth

rates. Over the entire sample, CO2 damages increased at roughly 2 percent annually whereas air

pollution damage declined by 0.5 percent. Targeted regulation of local air pollution played a

critical role in determining the relative rates of damage growth. Air pollution GED started to fall

in the 1970s, after the passage of the CAA. The annual growth rate of air pollution GED before

1970 was 3.9 percent. In the 1970s it was -1.1 percent. In contrast, CO2 damage growth was

effectively unchanged from the 1960s (3.4 percent) to the 1970s (3.0 percent). Crucially, while

the CAA specifically targets local air pollutants, it does not regulate CO2. Because of this, CO2

growth rates closely match GDP, as shown in figure 3.

The differential growth rates of CO2 and air pollution damage translate into considerable changes

in damage shares. Prior to 1970, air pollution damage averaged 96 percent of the GED. In the

final decade of the analysis, CO2 damage comprised 13 percent of GED. The pattern of falling

air pollution damage and rising climate damage has implications for rg. Extant constraints in the

CAA are likely to keep air pollution damages low and on a downward trajectory. Continued

                                                 23
regulatory omission of CO2 will result in an ever-larger share of the GED stemming from this

pollutant. If, as a result of rising CO2 damage, GED eventually increases, the orientation between

r* and rg would reverse.




       a. Interest rates.

Table 3 reports three different sets of interest rates: the real federal funds rate (FRED, 2019b),

estimates of r* (Laubach and Williams, 2015), and rg. Over the entire sample, the real federal

funds rate (RFFR) averaged about 1.4 percent. As is well known, the RFFR fluctuated over this

60-year period. In the 1960s, the RFFR averaged less than two percent. High inflation reduced

the RFFR to near zero in the 1970s. In the 1980s, the RFFR averaged about four percent. From

the 1990s through 2016, the RFFR fell from an average of about two percent to negative 1.5

percent after 2010.

The second row of table 3 reports Laubach and Williams' (2015) updated estimates of r*. The

sample average is about three percent, or about 160 basis points higher than the RFFR. As is well

known, the r* estimate exhibits a strong downward trend from over five percent during the 1960s

to effectively zero after 2010.

The bottom two rows of table 3 report rg and the rg - r* differential. rg is calculated by

differencing (6) from (7), as shown in (14) and then adding the empirical estimate of (14) back to

r* as reported by Laubach and Williams (2015).

                                     1- (
                           1+-1 -        -1 --1 -1 )-( -  )
, -  = (1 + )                 1+ -            1-(-1 --1 -1 )
                                                                                      (14)
                      -1




                                                  24
                                                                              1-
                                                                   1+-1 -
For the purposes of the provisional calculations reported here,     1+ -           is set to unity, and

 is set to 0.01.

With this approach, table 3 reports that, on average, rg exceeded r* by 50 basis points (p < 0.01).

The reason for this difference is the large and significant reduction in the pollution intensity of

output discussed above. Recall from section II. that an economy on a cleaning up trajectory

justifies a higher green interest rate because falling damage intensity implies greater net

consumption prospects in the future. In a broad sense, the data for the U.S. economy over the last

60 years exemplify such conditions and the result is rg exceeding r* by about 50 basis points.

However, as shown above, GED did not change monotonically.

Commensurate with the pattern of rising and then falling damage intensity reported above, figure

4 shows the reorientation of rg and r* before and after the passage of the CAA. (The vertical line

demarcates passage of the CAA.) Table 3 reports that prior to 1970, rg fell short of r* by 150

basis points (p < 0.05). This difference manifests because per capita GED increased more rapidly

than GDP during this time. Pollution intensity increased because neither air pollution nor CO2

were regulated comprehensively at the federal level. Expressions (8) and (14) show

mathematically that when pollution intensity rises, rg is less than r*. Intuitively, with rising

damage intensity, future potential income, net of damage, is attenuated. Under these conditions

rg falls relative to r* which encourages more consumption in the present when the effective

penalty from pollution damage is lower.

Following enactment of the CAA in the early 1970s, rg exceeded r*. The difference between the

two rates was largest in absolute terms during the 1970s (150 basis points, p < 0.01). This rate

spread steadily attenuated to just 15 basis points in the 2010s. With falling damage intensity,


                                                  25
future net potential income was augmented. The higher rg induces more future consumption

when the loss from pollution damage is lower.

Figure A.7 in the appendix shows both the relative (year-over-year) changes in pollution

                   (-1 --1 -1 )-( -  )
intensity and the     1-(-1 --1 -1 )
                                              term from (14). Prior to 1970 damage intensity

increased. The rate of change fell from a 6 percent annual increase at the end of the 1950s down

to zero in 1970. From the middle 1970s damage intensity declined by about 3 percent per year

                                                             (-1 --1 -1 )-( -  )
until fluctuating but remaining negative in the 2000s. The       1-(-1 --1 -1 )
                                                                                         term

varies inversely with intertemporal changes in pollution intensity. This term is the key driver in

the empirical difference between rg and r*, as shown in (14), and it increased from the late 1950s

until the early 1970s. Just like annual changes in pollution intensity, the sign changed in 1970

upon passage of the CAA. This term gradually attenuated, remaining positive, from the middle

1970s to 2016. As this term approached zero toward the end of the sample period, it diminished

the difference between rg and r*.

       b. Interest Rates and the Business Cycle.

Table 4 compares the interest rates at different stages of the business cycle. Column (1) simply

reports the averages across all 60 years for ease of comparison. Column (2) reports averages

during NBER recession years. During contractions, rg averaged 4.4 percent, a difference from r*

of 0.86 (p < 0.05). During expansionary periods, the spread between rg and r* fell to 0.38 percent

(p < 0.05). In general, one would expect larger increases in GED during expansions. This would

suppress rg relative to r*. The smaller rg to r* spread embodies this effect. Table 4 also separately

compares the rates during expansions and contractionary periods before and after 1970. The



                                                 26
sensitivity of the difference between rg and r* to the business cycle is considerably greater before

1970 and the passage of the Clean Air Act.

Table A.1 in the appendix demonstrates the procyclical nature of the GED. In column (2), real

GED fell by over 3 percent during recessions. Column (3) shows that GED increased by 0.5

percent during expansions. The cyclical nature of GED changed fundamentally with the passage

of the CAA. Prior to 1970, and absent federal air pollution regulation, GED fell slightly in

recessionary periods, while during expansions, GED grew by more than 6 percent annually. The

rapid growth of GED during expansions prior to 1970 drives rg below r* by 180 basis points (p <

0.05), as shown in column (5) of table 4. In contrast, after 1970, GED fell in both recession and

non-recession periods (see table A.1. Thus, the difference between the rg and r*, prior to the

onset of federal air pollution policy, hinges on the business cycle. After the CAA, the rg ­ r*

spread is essentially constant over the business cycle.

That rg exceeds r* by a larger spread during recessionary periods than during expansions runs

counter to the typical conceptualization of interest rate or stabilization policy. Conventionally,

accommodative policy stimulates consumption, mitigating short run recessionary effects.

Inclusion of environmental damages in rg tempers this standard policy prescription. Crucially,

figures 2 and 3 show that pollution damages exhibit a strong pro-cyclical pattern, especially

prior to comprehensive regulation. When the economy becomes dirtier over time more

consumption should occur in the present because the penalty from pollution damages is greater

in the future. More accommodative policy stimulates more consumption in the present.

The converse argument holds when an economy is cleaning up. Figures 2 and 3 show large and

enduring reductions in pollution intensity during recessions. In such instances, delaying



                                                 27
consumption raises welfare because households consume more during the period when the

penalty from pollution damage is lower. Tighter monetary policy induces just such a delay.

       c. The Change in Damage from rg.

Figure 5 displays the percentage change in damage due to consumers facing rg rather than r*. To

construct the figure, the sum of (12) and (13) over one, three, and five-year maturities is

calculated. The resulting sum is divided by the damage in period (t). So, for a one-year response

to rg in 1960, the change in damage in 1960 and 1961 is calculated and displayed as a percentage

of observed damages in 1960. For a change in consumption over three years, the reallocation of

damage between 1960 and 1963 is calculated. The figure shows that the impact of rg, in

percentage terms, is largest prior to the enactment of the CAA in 1970. Specifically, depending

on the time period over which consumption responds to rg, the reallocation of damage reaches as

much as 3 percent of damages in early and middle 1960s. At this time, during the 1960s, the

GED was rising more rapidly (4 percent) than GDP (2.5) percent. In this period of rapidly rising

pollution intensity, r* exceeded rg by about 150 basis points. Had optimizing households faced

this lower rate, figure 5 demonstrates that the result would have been a significant adjustment of

consumption toward the present when pollution intensity was lower than during the later 1960s.

With more consumption in the less pollution intensive present, damages fall by between 1 and 3

percent. Figure A.7 reinforces why this reallocation occurs. Pollution intensity was rising by as

much as 6 percent per year prior to the CAA. The lower rg encourages more consumption in the

significantly less polluted present. Figure 5 shows two additional periods when reallocated

damages amount to as much as 0.5 percent of total damages. The first such episode occurs just

prior to the recessions of the early 1980s, when both CO2 and air pollution damages fell rapidly

(see the right hand panel of figure 3 and figure A.7). At this time, rg exceeded r* by about 100

                                                 28
basis points. The higher rg would have delayed consumption until after the recessions when

pollution intensity was much lower. The second period when rg appreciably affected damages

was in the late 1980s, just prior to the enactment of the CAA amendments of 1990 and the

recession of 1991. During this period, local air pollution damages fell by as much as 5 percent

annually (see the right hand panel of figure 3). Again, rg was larger than r*, inducing a delay in

consumption to the less pollution-intensive future.

Figure 6 plots the cumulative benefits of households facing rg. The essential point of this figure

reinforces that from figure 5. It is during the pre-regulatory period, that is, prior to the enactment

of the CAA, when the benefits from rg accrue rapidly. After the passage of the CAA benefits

continue to accumulate, but at a much slower rate. Through the 1960s, benefits amount to

between $15 billion (one year maturity) up to as much as $175 billion (for the five year

maturity).

       d. Sensitivity Analysis.

Table 6 reports the results of a sensitivity analysis in which the difference between r* and rg is

recomputed using alternative assumptions on key parameters in the damage calculation. The first

row repeats the bottom row of table 3 for comparison purposes. The second row employs an

alternative functional relationship between exposure to PM2.5 and adult mortality rates (Lepeule

et al., 2012). The coefficient in the alternative study is roughly 2.5 times larger than the default

approach (Krewski et al., 2009). Accordingly, the average difference between rg and r* is

approximately 2.5 times larger than when using the default approach: 118 basis points (p < 0.05)

rather than 50 basis points in the default approach. This alternative assumption also results in

significantly larger spreads earlier in the sample. For example, prior to 1970, rg is less than r* by

more than 450 basis points (p < 0.05) while in the 1970s, rg exceeds r* by more than 450 basis

                                                  29
points. Note that the reversal of sign and the very similar absolute magnitude of the rg ­ r*

difference in the 1960s and 1970s is consistent with the default approach. Also robust to the

alternative PM2.5 mortality function is the considerable narrowing of the rg to r* spread between

1970 and 2016. By the end of the sample, rg exceeds r* by about 30 basis points (again, roughly

two times the default estimate).

The second alternative strategy employs a different VSL-income elasticity. Recall that the

default tack employs early estimates of the VSL from the literature (Costa and Kahn, 2004)

which imply a higher VSL-income elasticity combined with the USEPA's value of 0.4 after

1980. The sensitivity analysis uses a unit elastic VSL-income elasticity. As figure A.4 shows, the

unit-elastic VSL increases from 1957 to 1970 much more slowly than the default approach.

Then, after 1980, the unit-elastic VSL appreciates much more rapidly. The average difference

across all years is, like the default case, 52 basis points (p < 0.01). However, the GED growth

rates are quite different compared to the default approach, and this, in turn, affects the rg - r*

difference across decades. Prior to 1970, rg ­ r* is just 0.45 which is not statistically significant at

conventional levels. During the 1970s, rg ­ r* is 117 basis points (p < 0.01). Like the default

approach, the difference in rates attenuates significantly throughout the remaining decades,

though using the unit elastic VSL results in non-monotonic attenuation of rg ­ r*.

Finally, table 5 reports the rg ­ r* difference when employing a considerably higher SCC (the

marginal damage of CO2 emissions). This strategy has very little effect on the rg ­ r* spread. The

sample average difference is 51 basis points (p < 0.01). Prior to 1970, r* exceeds rg by about 150

basis points (p < 0.05) and this orientation reverses during the 1970s with a very similar absolute

magnitude. Then, the rg ­ r* difference diminishes to just 14 basis points (compared to 16 basis




                                                  30
points in the default scenario). The higher SCC has a limited effect on the rg ­ r* spread because

GHG damages throughout much of the sample comprise a small share of the total GED.

         V.      Conclusions.

Central banks and financial regulators now recognize the risks to the financial system and the

economy posed by environmental pollution and climate change (The New York Times, 2020a;

NGFS, 2020; Federal Reserve, 2020; White House, 2021). This paper proposes a novel policy

instrument that central banks could use to mitigate risks from environmental pollution damage.

The green interest rate, or rg, is a reconfiguration of the natural interest rate (r*). The difference

between rg and r* is the inclusion of pollution damage into an economy's potential output, in

both the present and the future. By building pollution damage into rg, borrowers and lenders are

compelled to consider intertemporal changes in pollution intensity of the goods they consume in

determining their optimal consumption plans. Implicit consideration of pollution damage is a

form of internalization of the pollution externality. Rather than affecting the relative prices of

pollution-rich and green goods, as a Pigouvian tax would, rg affects the intertemporal terms of

trade according to the pollution intensity of aggregate output. The paper demonstrates that

targeting rg raises social welfare, relative to a policy rate targeting r*, by reallocating

consumption to less pollution intensive periods.

This study models the case in which a central bank targets rg without concomitantly binding

environmental policy. This situation is explored in detail for two reasons. First, most pressing for

central banks is the onset of climate policy and the associated transition risks to a low carbon

economy. The Federal Reserve notes that these risks include devaluation of assets due to newly

binding policy constraints, as well as damage to assets from changing climate conditions



                                                   31
(Federal Reserve, 2020). Given the absence of coherent federal climate policy in the U.S., an

examination of rg without environmental policy seems most relevant to practitioners.

Second, the goal of this paper is to demonstrate how a central bank could apply rg autonomously;

that is, without coordinating with an environmental regulator charged with enactment of

traditional environmental policy (such as a Pigouvian tax). Political and social obstacles to

meaningful climate policy in the near term render this context most broadly relevant.

Because rg depends on the trajectory of pollution intensity of output, this policy instrument

reallocates consumption to periods characterized by less pollution intensive output. Specifically,

for economies on a cleaning up path, rg exceeds r* because the higher rate delays consumption to

the less pollution intensive future. In contrast, in economies becoming more polluted, rg is less

than r*. This incentivizes more current consumption in the less polluted present economy at the

expense of consumption in the more polluted future. The analysis also explores the interaction

between environmental policy design and rg. Policy that grows more stringent over time will

increase rg, ceteris paribus. In contrast, relaxation or removal of existing rules lowers rg.

The empirical portion of the paper estimates rg from 1957 to 2016 in the U.S. economy. These

calculations show that rg exceeds estimates of r* from the literature by about 50 basis points.

However, prior to the passage of the CAA in 1970, rg fell short of r* because pollution damages

were rising. After 1970, damages fell. This caused the orientation between r* and rg to switch,

with rg exceeding r* in the post-1970 context of falling damage. The empirical analysis also

reveals that the difference between rg and r* is sensitive to the business cycle; rg exceeds r* by

nearly two-times more during recessions than expansions. This divergence is especially stark

prior to the enactment of the CAA because, absent policy, pollution was strongly procyclical.



                                                  32
In a set of provisional calculations, the paper reports that targeting rg rather than r* would have

reduced damages by as much as 3 percent annually. These benefits were concentrated in the

years leading up to the passage of the CAA. Cumulative benefits prior to the enactment of the

CAA amounted to as much as $175 billion. Simply redefining the intertemporal terms of trade

and therefore reallocating consumption to low damage periods would yield large benefits.

These results, while only provisional, are strongly suggestive of the important role that rg may

play in managing the transition to a low-carbon economy. Today, in the absence of meaningful

federal climate policy, is analogous to the 1960s, prior to the deployment of the CAA. At that

time, strongly pro-cyclical air pollution damage was rising rapidly. Today, damages from CO2

emissions continue to rise, comprising an ever larger share of the total GED. During such

periods, the simulations conducted herein show that monetary policy can play an important role

in mitigating environmental pollution damage. However, this requires the central bank to target a

rate that recognizes the trajectory of pollution intensity. This paper demonstrates that the data

and modeling tools are available to support such an undertaking.

This analysis suggests future research on a number of fronts. While the focus on the present

paper lies on the U.S., applications to other economies comprise important extensions of the

concepts introduced herein. Recent work demonstrates that the pollution intensity of output

varies considerably across countries over the past few decades (Mohan et al., 2020). In

particular, China and India exhibit starkly different paths, with respect to pollution intensity, than

observed in the U.S. Given the sheer size of these economies, an exploration of the potential role

of monetary policy in managing environmental pollution risks may have global implications.

Next, the present paper adopts a simple, parsimonious two period model to elucidate the central

concepts underpinning rg. Future work could employ an overlapping generations model to

                                                 33
explore the ramifications of policies targeting rg for savings and consumption decisions across

agents' life cycles. Finally, the monetary policy position adopted by central banks affects

exchange rates and trade flows. Recent research demonstrates that trade affects the pollution

intensity of goods (Shapiro, 2020). Thus, if a central bank adopts rg this is likely to permute trade

flows and, in turn, pollution intensity. This nexus is an important subject for future inquiry.




                                                 34
References.

   1) Abraham, Katherine G., and Christopher Mackie. 2006. "A Framework for Nonmarket
      Accounting." In D.W. Jorgensen, J.S. Landefeld, and W.D. Nordhaus, eds. A New
      Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts. NBER Studies in Income and Wealth. Vol.
      66, The University of Chicago Press. Chicago, Il, USA.
   2) Bartelmus, Peter 2009. "The cost of natural capital consumption: Accounting for a
      sustainable world economy." Ecological Economics. 68: 1850 ­ 1857.
   3) Clay, K., Lewis, J., & Severnini, E. 2016. "Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mortality,
      Property Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with Mid-20th Century Air Pollution." (No.
      w22155). National Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA, USA.
   4) Costa, D.L., M.E. Kahn. 2004. "Changes in the Value of Life, 1940 ­ 1980." Journal of
      Risk and Uncertainty. 29(2): 159 ­ 180.
   5) Dockery, Douglas W., C. Arden Pope, Xiping Xu, John D. Spengler, James H. Ware,
      Martha E. Fay, Benjamin G. Ferris, Jr., and Frank E. Speizer. "An Association between
      Air Pollution and Mortality in Six U.S. Cities." New England Journal of Medicine.
      329:1753-1759.
   6) Elmendorf, Douglas, W. 1996. "The Effect of Interest-Rate Changes on Household Saving
      and Consumption: A Survey." Unpublished Working Paper.
   7) Fann, Neal, Charles M. Fulcher, Bryan J. Hubbell. 2009. "The influence of location, source
      and emission type in estimates of the human health benefits of reducing a ton of air
      pollution." Air Quality Atmosphere and Health. 2:169 ­ 176.
   8) Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), 2019a. Nonfarm Business Sector: Hours of All
      Persons, Index 2012=100, Quarterly, Seasonally Adjusted. HOANBS.
   9) Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), 2019b. Effective Federal Funds Rate, Percent,
      Monthly, Not Seasonally Adjusted. FEDFUNDS.
   10) Federal Reserve. 2020. "Financial Stability Report: November 2020." Board of
      Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Washington, D.C. USA.
   11) Gali, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
      the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., U.S.A.




                                                35
12) Goodfriend, Marvin. 2004. "Monetary Policy in the New Neoclassical Synthesis: A
   Primer." Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Economic Quarterly. Volume 90/3: 21- 45.
13) Goodfriend, Marvin. 2016. "The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the
   Zero Bound." Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future, A
   Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole,
   Wyo., August 25-27, 2016, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2016, pp. 127-160.
14) Hammitt, J.K., L.A. Robinson. 2011 "The Income Elasticity of the Value per Statistical
   Life: Transferring Estimates between High and Low Income Populations." Journal of
   Benefit-Cost Analysis. 2(1): 1 -27.
15) Hoel, M., T. Sterner. 2007. "Discounting and relative prices." Climatic Change. 84: 265-
    280.
16) Kaplan, R.S. 2018. "The Neutral Rate of Interest." Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
17) Keiser, D. A., C.L. Kling, J.S. Shapiro. 2019. "The Low but Uncertain Measured Benefits
   of U.S. Water Pollution Policy." Proceedings of the National Academies of Science.
   116 (12) 5262-5269.
18) Kleckner, N., and J. Neumann. 1999. Recommended Approach to Adjusting WTP
   Estimates to Reflect Changes in Real Income. Memorandum to Jim DeMocker, U.S.
   EPA/OPAR. June 3. Available at
   http://www.epa.gov/ttn/ecas/regdata/Benefits/background/klecknerandneumann1999.pdf.
19) Krewski D, Jerrett M, Burnett RT, Ma R, Hughes E, Shi, Y, et al. 2009. Extended follow-
   up and spatial analysis of the American Cancer Society study linking particulate air
   pollution and mortality. HEI Research Report, 140, Health Effects Institute, Boston, MA.
20) Laubach, T. and J.C. Williams, 2003. "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest." Review of
   Economics and Statistics. 85(4), November, 1063­1070.
21) Laubach, T. and J.C. Williams, 2015. "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux."
   Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2015-16.
22) Lave, Lester B., and Eugene Seskin. 1973. "An Analysis of the Association Between U.
   S. Mortality and Air Pollution." Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 68,
   No. 342. pp. 284-290.
23) Lepeule J, Laden F, Dockery D, Schwartz J. 2012. "Chronic Exposure to Fine Particles
   and Mortality: An Extended Follow-Up of the Harvard Six Cities Study from 1974 to
   2009." Environmental Health Perspectives. 120 (7):965-70.

                                           36
24) Levy, Jonathan I., Lisa K. Baxter, Joel Schwartz. 2009. "Uncertainty and Variability in
   Health-Related Damages from Coal-fired Power Plants in the United States." Risk
   Analysis. DOI: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.2009.01227.
25) Lubik, T.A., C. Matthes. 2015. "Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of
   Two Alternative Approaches." Richmond Fed Economic Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of
   Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA.
26) Meng, J.; Li, C.; Martin, R. V.; van Donkelaar, A.; Hystad, P.; Brauer, M. 2019. "Estimated
   Long-term (1981-2016) Concentrations of Ambient Fine Particulate Matter across North
   America from Chemical Transport Modeling, Satellite Remote Sensing and Ground-based
   Measurements." Environmental Science and Technology. DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.8b06875
27) Mohan, A., N.Z. Muller, A. Thyagarajan, R.V. Martin, M.S. Hammer, A. van Donkelaar.
   2020 "The Growth of Nations Revisited: Global Environmental Accounting from 1998 to
   2018." NBER WP #27398.
28) Muller, Nicholas Z., 2014. "Boosting GDP growth by accounting for the environment:
   Including air pollution and greenhouse gas damages increases estimated U.S. growth."
   Science. August 22nd, 2014, Vol. 345 no. 6199 pp. 873-874:
29) Muller, Nicholas Z., 2019a. "Long-Run Environmental Accounting in the United States
   Economy." National Bureau of Economic Research, WP #25910.
30) Muller, Nicholas Z., 2019b. "The Derivation of Discount Rates with an Augmented
   Measure of Income." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management:
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2019.02.007.
31) Muller Nicholas Z., Robert O. Mendelsohn, 2009. Efficient Pollution Regulation:
   Getting the Prices Right. American Economic Review. 99(5): 1714 ­ 1739.
32) Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert O. Mendelsohn, and William D. Nordhaus, 2011.
   Environmental Accounting for Pollution in the U.S. Economy. American Economic
   Review. 101(5): 1649 ­ 1675.
33) National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council. 1999. Nature's Numbers:
   expanding the U.S. national economic accounts to include the environment. W.D.
   Nordhaus and E.C. Kokkelenberg, eds. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
   USA.



                                            37
34) Network for Greening the Financial System (NFGS) 2020. "Survey on Monetary Policy
   Operations and Climate Change: Key Lessons and Further Analysis." Banque de France.
   https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/survey_on_monetary_policy_o
   perations_and_climate_change.pdf
35) New York Times. 2020a. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/15/business/economy/fed-
   climate-network.html?action=click&module=Latest&pgtype=Homepage
36) New York Times. 2020b. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/climate/trump-
   environment-rollbacks-list.html
37) Nordhaus, William D., J. Tobin. 1973. "Is Growth Obsolete?" in Economic Research:
   Retrospect and Prospect-Economic Growth, 50th Anniversary Colloquium V, New York:
   Columbia University Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.
38) Nordhaus, William D. 2006. "Principles of National Accounting for Non-Market
   Accounts." In D.W. Jorgensen, J.S. Landefeld, and W.D. Nordhaus, eds. A New
   Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts. NBER Studies in Income and Wealth. Vol.
   66, The University of Chicago Press. Chicago, Il, USA.
39) Roley, V.V., G.H. Sellon. 1995. "Monetary Policy Actions and Long Term Interest Rates."
   Economic Review. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. vol. 80, issue Q IV, pp. 73-89.
40) Tschofen, P., I.L. Azevedo, N.Z. Muller. 2019 "Fine Particulate Matter Damages and
   Value Added in the United States Economy," Proceedings of the National Academy of
   Science. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1905030116.
41) United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2019:
   http://www.bea.gov/iTable/index_nipa.cfm.
42) United States Department of Energy (USDOE), 2011.
   https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/pdf/sec11.pdf
43) United States Department of Energy (USDOE), 2019. Table 12.1 Carbon Dioxide
   Emissions From Energy Consumption by Source.
44) United States Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean
   Air Act: 1990--2010. EPA Report to Congress. EPA 410-R-99-001, Office of Air and
   Radiation, Office of Policy, Washington, D.C.




                                          38
45) United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2010. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean
   Air Act: 1990--2020. Final Report. Office of Air and Radiation, Office of Policy,
   Washington, D.C.
46) United States Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (USFWG). 2016.
   Technical Support Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for
   Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866.
   https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
   12/documents/sc_co2_tsd_august_2016.pdf
47) White House. 2021. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
   actions/2021/05/20/executive-order-on-climate-related-financial-risk/




                                          39
Figure 1: Comparison of Inter-temporal Consumption Choices with rg and r*.




                                          40
Figure 2: GDP, Pollution Damage, and EVA.
             6000040000
    Per Capita($2012)
  20000      0




                          1960   1980               2000         2020
                                        Year


Vertical lines demarcate NBER recessions.
Solid = GDP; Dash = EVA; Dash-dot = GED.
EVA = GDP ­ GED
Source: USBEA, 2019, Muller, 2019a, and author's calculations.




                                               41
Figure 3: GDP, Air Pollution and CO2 Damage.




Solid = Real GDP
Dash = Real CO2 GED
Dash-dot = Real air pollution GED
Vertical lines demarcate NBER recessions.




                                            42
Figure 4: Interest Rate Comparison.
             8
             6
             4
  Rate (%)
             2
             0
             -2




                  1960       1980                   2000                 2020
                                        Year


Solid = Real Federal Funds Rate; Dash = rg; Dash-dot = r*.
Source: Federal Funds (FRED, 2019); r* Laubach and Williams (2015); rg author's calculations.




                                               43
Figure 5: Change in Damage Due to rg.
            3
            2.5
  Damage Reduction (%)
  .5   1    1.5
            0
            -.5      2




                         1960   1980                 2000   2020
                                         Year


Solid: change in consumption occurs in consecutive years.
Dash: change in consumption occurs in three years.
Dash-dot: change in consumption occurs in five years.




                                                44
Figure 6: Total Benefits due to rg.
                     300           250
  Cumulative Benefits ($2012 Billions)
   50    100     150 0    200




                                         1960   1980               2000   2020
                                                       Year



Solid: change in consumption occurs in consecutive years.
Dash: change in consumption occurs in three years.
Dash-dot: change in consumption occurs in five years.




                                                              45
Tables.
Table 1: Output and Damage per Capita.
                   (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
              Total sample  1960s    1970s    1980s    1990s    2000s    2010s
 GDP           35456.87A 20379.25 26983.46 32830.41 40247.88 49315.88 52672.27
               (11844.9)   (2538.2) (1924.6) (2837.3) (2790.2) (2101.2) (1715.5)

 EVA           28661.08     13546.24 18053.70 25259.12 33873.43 43700.98 47813.06
               (12760.0)    (1064.1) (2300.0) (3084.0) (3000.7) (2279.2) (1803.8)

 Air           6795.79       6833.00    8929.76    7571.29   6374.45   5614.90   4859.21
 + Climate     (1467.4)      (1509.0)   (469.1)    (446.5)   (297.0)   (410.3)   (117.2)

 Air           6347.24       6588.28    8555.26    7155.21   5856.45   4994.69   4224.37
               (1545.5)      (1473.2)   (489.3)    (454.8)   (326.5)   (411.4)   (128.4)

 Climate        448.55       244.72     374.50     416.09    517.99    620.21    634.84
                (145.1)      (36.51)    (27.49)    (30.58)   (36.52)   (23.02)   (21.53)
 N                60           13         10         10        10        10         7


A = ($2012)
Standard deviations in parenthesis.




                                              46
Table 2: Growth Rates of Per Capita Output and Damage.
                      (1)        (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)
                 Total sample 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s
 GDP                1.90A       2.56    2.07    2.10    1.97    0.93    1.51
                   (2.105)B   (2.524) (2.421) (2.506) (1.550) (2.048) (0.575)

 EVA                  2.40        1.86    3.51    3.15    2.65    1.43    1.66
                    (2.372)     (2.395) (3.309) (2.732) (1.628) (1.968) (0.733)

 Air + Climate       -0.35        3.89   -0.95   -1.37   -1.49   -2.87   -0.08
                    (5.065)     (5.743) (3.467) (4.577) (2.832) (6.498) (3.426)

 Air                 -0.55        3.90   -1.12   -1.53   -1.78   -3.28   -0.30
                    (5.338)     (5.914) (3.485) (4.721) (3.040) (7.084) (3.709)

 Climate               1.98       3.36    3.03    1.25    1.92    0.48    1.36
                     (2.829)    (1.710) (3.293) (3.564) (1.256) (3.111) (3.011)
 N                      59         12      10      10      10      10       7
A = all values are average growth in (%)
B = Standard deviations in parenthesis.




                                            47
Table 3: Interest Rate Comparison.
                      (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)                (5)           (6)    (7)
                 Total sample 1960s    1970s 1980s                1990s         2000s 2010s
 Federal             1.36B     1.86     0.01    4.41               2.14          0.39   -1.46
 Funds RateA       (2.278)C   (0.595) (1.585) (1.954)            (1.205)       (1.583) (0.940)

 r*                   3.14        5.31     4.48    3.49            2.57          2.25    0.00
                    (1.691)      (0.653) (0.593) (0.376)         (0.478)       (0.799) (0.195)

 rg                   3.58        3.69     6.00    4.59            3.28          2.75    0.16
                    (2.115)      (2.108) (1.640) (1.214)         (0.770)       (0.963) (0.406)

 rg ­ r*           0.50***       -1.49** 1.52** 1.10** 0.70*** 0.50**      0.16
                   (1.486)       (1.764) (1.738) (1.321) (0.534) (0.699) (0.366)
 N                    56            9       10      10      10      10       7

A = real federal funds rate
B = mean coefficients
C = sd in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 for t-test of rate difference H0 = 0.




                                                   48
Table 4: Interest Rate Comparison and the Business Cycle.

             (1)         (2)       (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)
            Total     Recession Expansion        Recession     Expansion       Recession   Expansion
           sample                                Pre-1970       Pre-1970       Post-1970   Post-1970
 Fed.A       1.36B        1.44         1.33          1.81          1.87           1.38        1.22
 Funds     (2.278)C     (2.536)      (2.209)       (1.313)       (0.429)        (2.708)     (2.409)
 Rate
 r*          3.14         3.76         2.91          6.05          5.09           3.40        2.46
           (1.691)      (1.639)      (1.672)       (0.405)       (0.550)        (1.451)     (1.455)

 rg          3.58         4.44         3.29         6.45           3.30           4.28        3.28
           (2.115)      (2.217)      (2.024)         (.)         (1.932)        (2.227)     (2.071)

 rg ­ r*   0.50***      0.86**       0.38**         0.68         -1.80**        0.88**     0.82***
           (1.486)      (1.704)      (1.405)         (.)         (1.654)        (1.773)    (0.830)
 N            56           15           41            2             7              13         34

A = real federal funds rate
B = mean coefficients
C = sd in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 for t-test of rate difference H0 = 0.




                                                   49
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis: rg ­ r*.
              (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)      (7)
         Total sample 1960s          1970s     1980s   1990s   2000s 2010s
 Default  0.50***A    -1.49**       1.52**    1.10** 0.70*** 0.50**     0.16
           (1.486)B   (1.764)       (1.738)   (1.321) (0.534) (0.699) (0.366)

 PM2.5       1.18**       -4.89**   4.60**    2.79** 1.64*** 1.11**     0.34
 DR          (4.510)      (5.112)   (5.925)   (3.586) (1.266) (1.521) (0.770)

 VSL         0.52***        0.45  1.17*** 0.48         0.36**     0.47*    0.04
             (1.002)      (1.457) (0.880) (1.172)      (0.560)   (0.995) (0.592)

 SCC         0.51***      -1.55**   1.54**    1.15** 0.72*** 0.52**     0.14
             (1.548)      (1.801)   (1.872)   (1.365) (0.543) (0.728) (0.414)
 N              56           9         10        10      10      10       7

PM2.5 DR employs the alternative PM2.5 mortality dose-response function reported in Lepeule et
al., (2012).
VSL employs a consistent unit-elastic VSL-income elasticity.
SCC employs the 95% SCC reported in the U.S. Federal Inter-Agency Working Group report
(2016).
A = mean rg ­ r*
B = sd in parentheses
H0 = 0; HA  0: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                              50
