                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              JUDGING UNDER PUBLIC PRESSURE

                                              Alma Cohen
                                             Zvika Neeman
                                            Florian Auferoth

                                         Working Paper 28894
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28894


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2021




We thank Lucian Bebchuk, Nittai Bergman, Itay Saporta, Analia Schlosser, Dan Zeltzer, and participants
in the workshop at Tel-Aviv University for valuable comments and discussion. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alma Cohen, Zvika Neeman, and Florian Auferoth. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Judging Under Public Pressure
Alma Cohen, Zvika Neeman, and Florian Auferoth
NBER Working Paper No. 28894
June 2021
JEL No. K40,Z20
                                              ABSTRACT
Individuals who engage in "judging" ­ that is, rendering a determination in a dispute or contest between
two parties ­ might be influenced by public pressure to favor one of the parties. Many rules and arrangements
seek to insulate such individuals from public pressure or to address the effects of such pressure. We
study this subject empirically, investigating the circumstances in which public pressure is more and
less likely to affect judging.
Using detailed data from the Bundesliga, Germany's top soccer league, our analysis of how crowd
pressure affects the decisions of referees yields two key insights. First, we show that crowd pressure
biases referee's decisions in favor of the home team for those decisions that cannot be unam-biguously
identified as erroneous but not for those decisions that can. In particular, a referee exhibits a bias in
favor of the home team with respect to more subjective decisions such as the showing of yellow cards
(cautions), which is based on the referee's judgment, but not with respect to more objective de-cisions
such as validating goals and awarding penalty kicks, where live TV coverage often allows for objective
identification of errors.
Second, we show that the effect of crowd pressure on referee decisions depends on the extent to which
such pressure is viewed by the referee as understandable or reasonable (or even justified). Specifically,
a referee's bias in favor of the home team in yellow card issuance is strengthened after the referee
makes an objectively identifiable error against the home team and thus might view crowd heckling
as understandable. This effect is stronger when the referee's error is costlier to the home team because
the game is more important or the error is more consequential due to the closeness of the game at the
time of the error.
The introduction of VAR (Video Assistant Referee) technology in 2017 and the restrictions im-posed
due to Covid-19 pandemic, which caused games to be played without crowds for the second half of
the 2019­20 season, allow us to test our results under three different regimes (pre-VAR, VAR, and
VAR/no-crowd). Inspection of the results under these three different regimes serves to reinforce them.
As expected, VAR reduces the number of referee errors, but the pattern of no bias with respect to errors
is preserved. VAR has no effect on the number of yellow cards, or on the number of goals.
Once the crowd disappears, so does the home advantage in goals. Referee errors are unaffected, but
the home bias with respect to yellow cards disappears as well. This confirms the effect that the crowd
has on referees' more subjective decisions.

Alma Cohen                                            Florian Auferoth
Harvard Law School                                    Friedrich-Alexander-Universität, Erlangen-Nürnberg
1525 Massachusetts Avenue                             f.auferoth@googlemail.com
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu

Zvika Neeman The Eitan Berglas
School of Economics Tel Aviv
University
P.O.B. 39040 Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv,
69978 ISRAEL
zvika@post.tau.ac.il
                                                Abstract

       Individuals who engage in "judging" ­ that is, rendering a determination in a dispute or contest
between two parties ­ might be influenced by public pressure to favor one of the parties. Many
rules and arrangements seek to insulate such individuals from public pressure or to address the effects
of such pressure. We study this subject empirically, investigating the circumstances in which public
pressure is more and less likely to affect judging.
       Using detailed data from the Bundesliga, Germany's top soccer league, our analysis of how
crowd pressure affects the decisions of referees yields two key insights. First, we show that crowd
pressure biases referee's decisions in favor of the home team for those decisions that cannot be unam-
biguously identified as erroneous but not for those decisions that can. In particular, a referee exhibits a
bias in favor of the home team with respect to more subjective decisions such as the showing of yellow
cards (cautions), which is based on the referee's judgment, but not with respect to more objective de-
cisions such as validating goals and awarding penalty kicks, where live TV coverage often allows for
objective identification of errors.
       Second, we show that the effect of crowd pressure on referee decisions depends on the extent
to which such pressure is viewed by the referee as understandable or reasonable (or even justified).
Specifically, a referee's bias in favor of the home team in yellow card issuance is strengthened after
the referee makes an objectively identifiable error against the home team and thus might view crowd
heckling as understandable. This effect is stronger when the referee's error is costlier to the home team
because the game is more important or the error is more consequential due to the closeness of the game
at the time of the error.
       The introduction of VAR (Video Assistant Referee) technology in 2017 and the restrictions im-
posed due to Covid-19 pandemic, which caused games to be played without crowds for the second
half of the 2019­20 season, allow us to test our results under three different regimes (pre-VAR, VAR,
and VAR/no-crowd). Inspection of the results under these three different regimes serves to reinforce
them. As expected, VAR reduces the number of referee errors, but the pattern of no bias with respect
to errors is preserved. VAR has no effect on the number of yellow cards, or on the number of goals.
       Once the crowd disappears, so does the home advantage in goals. Referee errors are unaffected,
but the home bias with respect to yellow cards disappears as well. This confirms the effect that the
crowd has on referees' more subjective decisions.

JEL C ODES: K40, Z20
K EYWORDS: Judging, judicial decisions, public pressure, sub judice, make-up call.
1     Introduction
In many settings, an independent decision maker is required to make one or more
determinations in a dispute or contest between parties with competing interests with
respect to these determinations. We refer to any such determinations as "judging."
Defined as such, judging is very broad: it includes decisions by judges and jurors
in court cases, decisions by arbitrators in arbitration proceedings, determinations by
independent fact-finding commissions on issues that are publicly or politically con-
tested, and decisions by referees in sports events. Indeed, in his nomination hearings,
Chief Justice John Roberts famously compared the job of a Supreme Court justice to
that of a baseball referee; the analogy drawn between these two types of activities
reflects a view that both of them involve what we refer to as "judging."1
       Even when the individual who engages in judging is independent of the rele-
vant parties, her determinations may be subject to and affected by public pressure. In
the case of judges, this is especially relevant for elected state court judges who expect
to run for reelection,2 as well as for other judges who have career concerns and expect
the conformity of their decisions with those favored by the general public to affect
their career prospects. Even judges who are appointed for life and thus presumably
are free of such career concerns may be influenced by public demands in various di-
rect and indirect ways. As for jurors, there is a long-standing recognition and concern
that pretrial publicity, and the resulting public opinion about the "correct" outcome,
may have a significant effect on jurors' decisions.
       In recognition of the distorting effects of public pressure on judging, some rules
and arrangements have been devised in order to insulate judging decisions from pub-
lic pressures. In many common law jurisdictions, there have been long-standing lim-
itations on public commentary for cases that are sub judice (Latin for "under a judge,"
that is, under trial or otherwise under consideration by a judge or court). In the US, the
First Amendment guarantee of free speech has prevented tight restrictions on com-
ments regarding matters that are sub judice, but State Rules of Professional Conduct
governing attorneys often place restrictions on the out-of-court attorney statements

    1 OpeningStatement of Judge John Roberts before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Monday,
September 12, 2005.
   2 An earlier study by two of us (Cohen et al., 2018) shows how the prospect of elections affects

the decisions of federal judges. For a wider perspective on this issue, see Shepherd (2011) and the
references therein.
regarding ongoing cases.
      Furthermore, in jury cases, judges often seek to minimize as much as possible
the exposure of jurors to outside public pressure. It is common for judges to instruct
jurors not to read newspaper articles about the trial. In addition, the law enables
criminal defendants to move the trial venue to a different state when pretrial pub-
licity would make it difficult to find jurors that would not have been exposed to the
publicity and to the public pressures produced by it. And some criminal convictions
have been overturned due to the exposure of jurors to media coverage or to the atmo-
sphere of a "media circus." (See Phillipson, 2008, for an extensive discussion of these
issues.)
      In this paper, we investigate empirically whether and when public pressure af-
fects judging. We study the subject in a setting where it is possible to obtain rich and
detailed data that facilitates such an investigation. In particular, we use comprehen-
sive and detailed data from the Bundesliga, the premier soccer league in Germany.
We investigate whether and when crowd pressure influences the decisions of referees
and the extent to which those decisions are biased in favor of the home team, which
is favored by the (great) majority of the crowd.
      What distinguishes our approach are two things. First, we consider referees'
errors in addition to referees' decisions. This is important because correct decisions
do not imply a bias, even if they are made disproportionately more often in favor or
against one of the teams. Errors, on the other hand, do indicate bias if they are dis-
proportionately made in favor or against one of the teams. Second, we are fortunate
to be able to compare our results across three different regimes:

   ­ The first regime is our "pre-VAR regime." It covers the eight seasons prior to and
      including the 2016-17 season, before the introduction of VAR (Video Assistant
      Referee) technology.

   ­ The second regime covers the next two and a half seasons, up to March 2020.
      This second regime is identical to the first, except that referees had access to
      VAR technology.3 We refer to this regime as the "VAR regime."

   ­ The third regime covers the period from March 2020 until the middle of the 2020-

  3 VAR  technology was introduced into the second Bundesliga only in the 2019/20 season, and so
games played in the second Bundesliga during the 2017/18 and 2018/2019 seasons are included to-
gether with the pre-VAR regime.


                                               2
      21 season. This third regime is identical to the second regime in that referees
      had access to VAR technology, but due to the Covid-19 pandemic, all games
      included in this regime were played behind mostly closed doors, with small or
      no crowds.4 We refer to this regime as the "VAR/no-crowd regime."

As explained below, the comparison between these three different regimes allows us
to draw two main insights into the way that referees respond to public pressure and
to the effect of more precise refereeing technology.
       Our first main insight is that crowd pressure should be expected to influence
some referee decisions significantly more than others, and we find empirical evidence
that is consistent with our hypothesis. In particular, we conjecture that crowd pressure
has less influence on referees' decisions when errors are indisputable because in such
situations the countervailing force of referees' concern for their reputation is strong.
By contrast, we expect crowd pressure to have more influence on referee decisions
when errors are not indisputably observable, because such situations make it easier
for referees to rationalize and defend their decisions without incurring large costs to
their professional reputation.
       Our data enables us to test this conjecture because it includes two types of deci-
sions: (1) referees' decisions whether to validate goals and whether to award penalty
kicks (which are converted to goals with a high probability), and (2) referees' decisions
whether to sanction players with yellow cards (cautions). The correctness of referees'
decisions with respect to goals and penalty kicks is (relatively) indisputably observ-
able: live TV coverage provides an immediate replay of all player movements in the
seconds before the actions that are the subject of the referee decisions, often from sev-
eral different angles, and this generally enables an objective assessment of whether
the referee made a correct or erroneous call. As a result, information on whether the
referee did or did not make an error spreads quickly among all spectators of the game.
       By contrast, referee decisions on whether to issue a yellow card are (relatively)
more subjective. Such decisions typically involve a judgment call over which reason-
able people may disagree. As a result, a referee can more easily defend a decision
to issue (or refrain from issuing) a yellow card that benefits the home team without
incurring a significant reputational, if any.

   4 Startingin autumn 2020, fans were permitted into stadium for some games under certain restric-
tions that varied by region. For example, some stadiums imposed a partial ban on singing, and a limit
of approximately 20 % was imposed on occupancy.


                                                 3
     We provide evidence that consistent with our hypothesis that errors made in
referee decisions whether to validate goals or award penalty kicks do not exhibit a
bias in favor of either team. In particular, these decisions do not exhibit a bias in
favor of the home team. By contrast, we find evidence that decisions to issue yellow
cards are biased in favor of the home team. In particular, we find that referees issue
more yellow cards to the away team relative to the home team, and that this effect is
economically and statistically significant. Interestingly, we observe this effect under
both the pre-VAR and the VAR regimes, but not under the VAR/no-crowd regime.
That is, this bias in favor of the home team disappears in the absence of crowds.
     Our second key insight concerns the circumstances that enhance the magnitude
of the effect of crowd pressure on those decisions that are amenable to such pressure
(in our setting, the issuance of yellow cards). We hypothesize that when referees make
an error on an indisputable decision, they are more inclined to view subsequent crowd
pressure and heckling as understandable or reasonable, at least to some extent, and
try, possibly subconsciously, to make up for their error in some way. The fact that,
on average, 90% of the crowd in our sample is composed of fans of the home team
suggests that referees are more likely to make up for their errors against the home
team than for their errors against the away team.
     We find that referees do make up for their errors against the home team by is-
suing more yellow cards to the away team, but not when the game is played behind
closed doors. This pattern is asymmetric. Referees do not make up for their errors
against the away team by giving more yellow cards to the home team (or fewer yel-
low cards to the away team). This is consistent with the view that these decisions are
motivated, possibly subconsciously, by a desire to appease the crowd. Moreover, the
increase in bias in favor of the home team is magnified when the referees' erroneous
decision occurred (i) during a game that is more important, or (ii) at a point in time
in the game when the score is close and so the error is likely to be more consequen-
tial. However, we find that referees do not make up for their errors with respect to
the validation or invalidation of goals and the awarding of penalty kicks, by making
additional such errors.
     The introduction of VAR (Video Assistant Referee) technology in 2018 and the
restrictions imposed by the Covid-19 pandemic, which caused games to be played
without crowds for the second half of the 2019­20 season, reinforce our results. As
expected, the availability of VAR reduces the number of referee errors. VAR does not


                                          4
completely eliminate referee errors because a referee can still err if no consultation
takes place between the referee and the VAR technology when it should. We find
that VAR has no effect on the number of yellow cards issued. This is to be expected
because the rules for engaging the VAR do not allow for yellow cards to be checked
by it. The pattern of no bias with respect to referee errors is preserved under VAR.
      Notably, under the VAR regime, the compensation to the home team through
yellow cards to the away team after an error against the home team increases in size.
Presumably, this is due to the fact that the availability of VAR technology makes a
referee's errors more glaring (because not only did the referee make an incorrect call,
but the incorrect call could have been corrected). Thus, with VAR, referee errors are
likely both to elicit a stronger reaction from the crowd and to strengthen the referee's
subconscious desire to compensate the team he has wronged. Interestingly, with VAR,
referees also make up for errors against the away team by giving more yellow cards
to the home team, but the number of games played under the VAR regime is not large
enough to make this effect statistically significant. This is not surprising, because the
fact that referees' errors become more glaring as explained above, implies that the
crowd's reaction to these errors is likely to be stronger, and the referees may feel a
stronger compulsion to make up for their errors, for both teams.5
      Under the third regime (VAR/no-crowd), the data shows that once the crowd
disappears, so does the home advantage in goals.6 This suggests that the crowd has a
strong effect on the players. Referee errors are unaffected, but the referees' tendency
to make up for their errors against one team by giving more yellow cards to the other
team, which was manifested under the second regime with VAR, disappears as well.


Literature Review
Social influence, of which public pressure is a part, is a formidable force. Much of
the research in the field of sociology is devoted to the study of its determinants and
many manifestations. However, the study of social influence in the context of judging
is more limited.

   5 Thetendency to compensate the away team need not be manifested under the pre-VAR regime
because that regime errors are less glaring and so elicit a weaker response from the crowd, and a
correspondingly weaker personal motivation to compensate the away team.
  6 This has been observed in a number of recent papers, including Bryson et al. (2021), Endrich and

Gesche (2020), and Scoppa (2021).



                                                 5
      There is a substantial literature on the desirability of sub judice restrictions on
public commentary on pending court cases. In particular, there is a widely shared
concern that the ubiquity of media coverage makes fair trials impossible because of
the difficulty of preventing jurors from being influenced by media coverage (Phillip-
son, 2008; Marder, 2014). Relatedly, media coverage of the work of commissions of
inquiry in Canada has been called "concerning" by the head of several such commit-
tees (Gomery, 2006).
      However, the empirical literature on the effect of public pressure on judging
has been much more limited. Some work has investigated the subject empirically
by examining how sentencing decisions by state court judges are influenced by their
proximity to reelection (Huber and Gordon, 2004; Berdejó and Yuchtman, 2013; Cohen
et al., 2018). There is also experimental evidence and surveys that show that pretrial
publicity affects jurors (Steblay et al., 1999). We seek to contribute to this limited body
of empirical work on the subject.
      Due to the widely shared interest in sports and the availability of rich datasets
of sport events, there exists a large literature on the decisions of sports referees. For
a recent survey of this literature, see Dohmen and Sauermann (2016). This literature
has uncovered several types of biased referee decisions.
      There is ample evidence for bias in referee decisions about stoppage time. At
the end of the game, after the regular playing time of 90 minutes has passed, the
referee is allowed to make an allowance for "time lost." Garicano et al. (2005) have
shown that, in the Spanish Primera Division, the referee is likely to add more time
when the home team is behind, presumably to give it another opportunity to even
the score. Others have found similar effects in the Bundesliga (Germany), the Premier
League (England), Series A and B (Italy), Major League Soccer (USA), the Brazilian
Championship Series, and the Colombian Professional League.
      Boyko et al. (2007) and Page and Page (2010) find evidence for referee fixed ef-
fects on goal difference, that is the number of goals scored by the home team vs. by the
away team in the Premier League that are moderated by factors that relate to social
pressure.7 Dohmen (2008) and Sutter and Kocher (2004) evaluate expert judgements
and journalist reports on referee decisions to award goals and penalty kicks, and find
that both goals and penalty kicks awarded to the home team are significantly less
likely to be awarded correctly. Pettersson-Lidbom and Priks (2010) rely on the ex-

  7 However,   Johnston (2008) failed to replicate this result on a smaller sample.


                                                    6
clusion of spectators from games played in the Italian league in the 2006­7 season to
argue that referees who are exposed to crowd noise issue significantly fewer yellow
cards and fouls to the home team. Their finding has been confirmed in a laboratory
study by Nevill, Balmer, and Williams (2002). More recently, Bryson et al. (2021),
Endrich and Gesche (2020), and Scoppa (2021), have exploited the fact that because
of the Covid-19 pandemic, all major European leagues held all their games behind
closed doors to show that the home advantage in points, goals, shots, etc., as well as
in referees' sanctions, is significantly reduced when games are played behind closed
doors.
     Various studies (see, e.g., Dawson et al., 2007, and Buraimo et al., 2010) present
evidence for bias in favor of the home team in the issue of yellow and red cards. These
papers, and others, also show that the bias in favor of the home team is larger when
the stakes are higher (such as when the reward for winning the game is increased
from 2 to 3 points). Attendance, the ratio of attendance to stadium capacity, and the
composition of the crowd, were also shown to contribute to the bias.
     Another interesting factor that affects home bias is the physical proximity of
the crowd to the field. Dohmen (2008) finds evidence for weaker bias in Bundesliga
stadiums in which the crowd is separated from the field by an athletics track com-
pared to stadiums in which it is not. His findings have been replicated by others in
other leagues. Boeri and Severgnini (2011) document the effect of bribes on referee
decisions. Similar findings have also been reported for other sports (Dohmen and
Sauermann, 2016).
     Recent literature has also examined the effect of VAR on referees' decisions. Car-
los et al. (2019) find a reduction in yellow cards in the Italian Series A and the German
Bundesliga after the introduction of VAR. Lago-Peñas et al. (2020) find no impact of
VAR on yellow cards in the Spanish Primera Division. Dawson et al. (2020) inves-
tigating the introduction of the off-field referee in rugby, find that the addition of an
off-field referee did not decrease ­ and perhaps even slightly contributed to ­ the ad-
vantage typically enjoyed by home teams in rugby. The authors' explanation for this
surprising finding is that "[the on-field] referees may have been consciously or un-
consciously seeking to avoid contributing to home bias before the introduction of a
further official who is remote from the effects of the crowd," so that the additional
remote referee my have allowed the referees in the field to perhaps lower their guard
somewhat.


                                           7
      However, this literature has not examined the two key issues regarding the ef-
fect of public pressure on judging that are the focus of our analysis: the difference
between the type of decisions that are more and less affected by crowd pressure (and
in this connection the importance of the extent to which decisions can be objectively
assessed by outside observers) and how the impact of crowd pressure is moderated
by the extent to which this pressure is viewed as understandable or reasonable by
the decision-maker (and in this connection the power of crowd pressure to generate
make-up calls).


      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we describe the
institutional setting and the categorization of errors. The data is described in Section
3. In Section 4, we discuss our empirical methodology and present our results with
respect to referee errors. In Section 5, we examine the subject of yellow cards, and
show that referees' errors are stochastically independent, which indicates no bias with
respect to verifiable errors. Finally, Section 6 offers a brief conclusion.



2    Institutional Background
The data we use is from the German premier soccer league, the Bundesliga. Soccer is
the most popular sport in Germany. A Bundesliga game has an average number of
30,000 spectators present in the stadium.
      The Bundesliga consists of two divisions. The first Bundesliga is the highest soc-
cer division in Germany and consists of 18 teams, which face each other twice every
season. Each team is the home team in one such game and the visiting or away team in
the other game. This generates 34 match days per season with nine matches per match
day. The second Bundesliga has the same number of teams and the same number of
match days per season. At the end of each season, the two lowest-ranked teams in the
first Bundesliga are demoted to the second Bundesliga, and the two highest-ranked
teams of the second Bundesliga are promoted to the first Bundesliga. The team that is
ranked third from last in the first Bundesliga (16th place) plays two matches against
the third-ranked team of the second Bundesliga to determine the team that will play
in the first Bundesliga during the next season (a similar arrangement applies between
the second and third Bundesliga).
      In each game, the objective of each team is to win the game by scoring more


                                             8
goals than the other team. The interactions between the two teams are regulated by
the laws of soccer, which specify the playing time and permitted actions. Each team
is permitted to use all body parts except for arms and hands to move the ball in order
to score goals. Physical tackles between players are regulated.
      Each game is refereed by an official who is responsible for ensuring that both
teams adhere to the rules of the game. Bundesliga referees are experienced and are se-
lected through a system of sequential promotion tournaments. After passing a written
and physical test, referees typically start in the lowest Bundesliga division. Once they
have been promoted to the sixth division, they can be promoted at most one division
each year if judged to be qualified by official observers. The performance of referees
is monitored and judged by an official observer of the German Football Association
(DFB) who attends each game, and evaluates the game's referee for being "decided,
secure, with the courage to take unpopular decisions, and unimpressed by complain-
ing players" as well as for how well the referee interprets and implements the laws of
soccer. Referees who are found to be biased are dismissed (Dohmen, 2008).8
      Two assistants support the referee. The assistants' task is to indicate whether
the players were offside and whether the ball was out of bounds. The referee's task
is to detect (and sanction) violations of the rules, to stop play if the rules are violated,
and to ensure that play then continues according to the rules of the game. Failure
of the referee to detect violations or to recognize non-violations as such can have a
critical effect on the outcome of the game. The referee has the final authority to de-
cide whether the rules of the game have been violated. Specifically, the referee deter-
mines the followings: whether tackles between players are illegal (a "foul"); whether
a player illegally touched the ball with his hand or arm (a "hand ball"); whether a
player was in an illegal position ("offside"); whether the ball crossed the perimeter
line ("out of bounds"); and whether players or officials violated the rules of the game
in other ways.
      Violations of the rules lead to stoppages of play. In the case of fouls or hand balls,
play then restarts with a penalty kick or free kick for the team that did not commit the
violation. A penalty kick is given if the violation was committed inside the penalty
box and provides an excellent opportunity to score a goal by giving the team an unin-

   8 Referees are paid 3,800 and 2,000 Euros per match in the first and second Bundesliga, respectively,
on top of an annual base salary of 35,000 Euros in the second Bundesliga, and twice as much in the first
Bundesliga. They are also compensated for their travel expenses, including hotel accomodations and
transportation. In 2019, the average wage in Germany was a little over 48,000 Euros.


                                                   9
terrupted shot from a distance of 11 meters to the goal, which may only be blocked by
the goalkeeper (close to 80% of the penalty kicks in our sample were converted into
goals). A free kick can also be a good goal-scoring opportunity, but any player may
block it. The free kick's location is where the offense occurred. Following players'
violations of the rules, the referee may also sanction players with a warning (yellow
card) or dismissal (red card), depending on the severity of the violation. Offenses
justifying a yellow card include unsportsmanlike behavior, persistent infringement of
the rules, delaying the restart of the game, or dissent by word or action (FIFA, 2018).
Red cards are awarded for seriously foul play, illegally denying goal-scoring oppor-
tunities, violent conduct, insulting behavior, or receiving a second yellow card (FIFA,
2018).
     The referee may consult with two assistants. Video replay (VAR) was only in-
troduced in August 2017, and was not available to the referees in the games included
in our pre-VAR regime dataset. However, as mentioned above, it was generally avail-
able for the spectators watching the game, possibly with delay. At any point during
the game, the referee needs to make immediate decisions with respect to whether the
rules were violated and, if so, to determine the appropriate sanction. Thus, a referee
faces a quick succession of situations that demand his attention and consideration,
and errors in his assessment of the situation or in his sanctions, including serious er-
rors that have a large effect on the outcome of the game, are not uncommon. Players,
coaches, and sports' fans alike all hotly debate referees' errors both during and after
each game.
     For the purpose of our analysis we consider referee errors that were recorded
on the website www.wahretabelle.de. This website was established in 2006 with the
goal of recording the correct result for all Bundesliga games. Accordingly, the web-
site establishes what would have been the final score of the game if the referee had
not made any errors. The website allows users to submit photos and video-recorded
scenes from Bundesliga games for review if they believe that the referee's decision
was wrong and potentially affected the result of the game.
     A panel of experts assembled from the regular contributors to the website who
have distinguished themselves for impartial contributions to the discussions and rul-
ings on the website decides whether the referee's decision was correct or not. The
members of the panel represent supporters of different clubs. Their number fluctu-
ates over time; as of March 2021, it included seventeen members. Neither the panel


                                          10
nor the website plays any official role in the running of the German leagues. In partic-
ular, referees are not held accountable to this panel or to the website.9 The purpose of
the panel is just to accurately record events on the website, based on the panel's best
judgement. On the day after each game, the panel convenes to vote on referees' errors.
For each ruling by the panel, the individual votes are publicly displayed on the web-
site and each panel member issues a brief statement explaining its decision. To protect
the panel members' anonymity, no data on the panelists' identities is provided.
       Wrong referees' decisions are recorded as such only if they are judged by the
panel to have had a direct impact on the final score of the game. If the team that was
advantaged by the error did not profit from the error, the error is not recorded in this
dataset. In particular, this is the case if:

    · A referee incorrectly approves a goal. For example, if the referee fails to notice
       that an attacking player fouled a defending player just prior to scoring the goal
       or touched the ball with his hand.

    · A referee sanctions the defending team incorrectly, and this leads to a goal. For
       example, by the referee incorrectly approves a penalty kick, which is then con-
       verted into a goal.

    · A referee incorrectly denies a goal. For example, the referee incorrectly calls an
       offside offense against the attacking team.

    · A referee fails to call an offense by the defending team that has a sanction that
       would have provided the attacking team with an excellent opportunity to score
       a goal. For example, if the referee fails to notice a foul inside the penalty box,
       which would have resulted in a penalty kick for the attacking team.



3     Data and Summary Statistics
Our dataset consists of all the matches in the first German Bundesliga from the start of
the 2009-10 season, and in the second Bundesliga from the start of the 2013-14 season,

    9 TheBundesliga also has an internal referee evaluation system. However, the data used in this
system and its deliberations are not publicly available. This system is frequently criticized for its lack of
transparency, and for its overreliance on the goodwill of the head referee who is in charge of the system
(see https://www.n-tv.de/sport/fussball/collinas_erben/Manipulation-Machtmissbrauch-Mobbing-
article20099310.html) for an example report.)


                                                     11
until approximately the middle of the 2020-2021 season. Video assistant referee (VAR)
technology was introduced into the first Bundesliga in the 2017-18 season and into the
second Bundesliga in the 2019-20 season. As expected, the availability of VAR greatly
reduced the number of referee errors. The presence of VAR also changed the nature
of referees' errors. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, all the games played after March
13, 2020, were played behind closed doors, with no crowd present.
       The data we use is extracted from publicly available match summaries at
www.wahretabelle.de using a computer algorithm. The data is supplemented by
data from forum discussions on www.wahretabelle.de in all cases where match sum-
maries are contradictory or incomplete. All reports about possible errors are submit-
ted for consideration through this forum. The forum also exhibits the vote and the
panel's ruling on submitted possible errors, as well as all the evidence that was con-
sidered. We use majority ruling by the panel to classify errors. We use the match
summaries available at www.wahretabelle.de to extract other relevant information
about the game.
       We supplement our dataset with match-, team-, and referee-related data ex-
tracted from the German Football Association's website and the Kicker website www.kicker.de.
Kicker is Germany's largest soccer magazine. It records extensive statistics and offers
live descriptions of matches. From these descriptions we extract the timing of yellow
and red cards issued to players at all games in the dataset.10 Team rankings in the
league table are also extracted from Kicker.
       Our data lists 76 unique referees, with about 28 unique referees per division, per
season. The average age of referees in our sample is 37 with a standard deviation of
5.5.11 For each referee in each game, we have information about the referee's expe-
rience at the time of the game. In our sample, on average, the referee of each game
already refereed 67 previous games with a standard deviation of 53.12
       The data contains 4,274 games played in the pre-VAR period under the pre-VAR
regime, 1,062 games played under the VAR regime, and 395 games played under the

  10 The number of red cards in our sample is too small to use as a separate dependent variable; there-
fore, we count red cards as two yellow cards.
  11 This   data is taken from the website of the German Football Association.
  12 Referees in the second Bundesliga division are four years younger, on average, than those in the
first. They are also less experienced, on average, than those in the first. Referees in the first Bun-
desliga division have refereed 76 Bundesliga previous games in our sample, while those in the second
Bundesliga division have only refereed 53 previous games in our sample.


                                                    12
VAR/no-crowd regime. Table 1 below shows the following summary statistics for
each one of the regimes. All numbers represent the average per game in the regime
considered.

                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
   Panel A: Pre-VAR regime
                                               Average       Away Team   Home Team    diff   P-value
   Number of Goals                                2.79          1.24         1.55    -0.31     0.00
                                                 (1.70)        (1.17)        (1.3)
   Number of Referee Errors                       0.37          0.19         0.18    0.01     0.12
                                                 (0.64)        (0.45)       (0.43)
   Minutes to First Error                        47.20         48.29        46.04    2.24     0.11
                                                (25.16)        (25.7)      (24.53)
   Number of Games with  1 Errors                 1260          722           675
   Number of Yellow Cards                         3.92          2.15         1.77    0.38     0.00
                                                 (2.12)        (1.41)       (1.33)
   Number of Games                                4274


   Panel B: VAR regime
                                               Average       Away Team   Home Team    diff   P-value
   Number of Goals                                3.02           1.34        1.68    -0.34     0.00
                                                 (1.70)         (1.24)      (1.36)
   Number of Referee Errors                       0.22           0.12        0.10    0.02     0.21
                                                 (0.47)         (0.34)      (0.32)
   Minutes to First Error                        47.80          48.10       47.44    0.66     0.86
                                                (26.51)        (25.94)     (27.32)
   Number of Games with  1 Errors                 207            114          93
   Number of Yellow Cards                         3.78           2.06        1.73    0.33     0.00
                                                 (2.02)         (1.31)      (1.31)
   Number of Games                               1,062


   Panel C: VAR/no-crowd regime
                                               Average       Away Team   Home Team    diff   P-value
   Number of Goals                                3.03           1.45        1.58    -0.13     0.18
                                                 (1.69)         (1.27)      (1.32)
   Number of Referee Errors                       0.18           0.08        0.10    -0.01    0.56
                                                 (0.43)         (0.29)      (0.31)
   Minutes to First Error                        49.31           49.0       49.69    -0.69    0.92
                                                (26.43)        (26.60)     (26.70)
   Number of Games with  1 Errors                  64             35          29
   Number of Yellow Cards                         4.40           2.23        2.17    0.05     0.57
                                                 (2.11)         (1.32)      (1.49)
   Number of Games                                395
        Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses.


     On average, under the pre-VAR regime 2.79 goals are scored in each game: the
away team scores 1.24 goals, and the home team scores 1.55 goals. A t-test indicates

                                                        13
that the rather large difference between these two means is statistically significant at
the 1% level. The difference in the number of goals scored indicates that the home
team generally possesses an advantage over the away team.
       Out of the 4,274 games under the pre-VAR regime, in 1,260 games there was at
least one referee error. In 609 games the first error was against the away team and
in 651 games the first error was against the home team. Table 1, Panel A shows that
referees make 0.37 errors per game on average, 0.19 against the Away Team, and 0.18
against the home team. This difference is small and not statistically significant. The
number of errors has to be considered in relation to the average number of goals in
the game, which is 2.79. Hence, when an error occurs, it has a large effect on the final
score of the game.
       Table 1, Panel A shows that the mean time to the first error is 47.20 minutes, with
48.29 minutes if the first error is against the away team, and 46.04 minutes if the first
error is against the home team. The p-value for the difference between these values is
marginally statistically significant and small in magnitude. We rely on this number to
control for the difference between games with and without errors, as explained below.
       Table 1, Panel A also shows that referees issue an average of 3.92 yellow cards
per game, with 2.15 yellow cards issued to the away team, and 1.77 to the home team.
This difference is large and statistically significant at the 1% level. It is indicative of
the presence of a bias in favor of the home team, as we argue below.
       Table 1, Panels B and C provide the same summary statistics for the VAR and
VAR/no-crowd regimes. The mean time to the first error under the VAR and VAR/no-
crowd regime is similar to that in the pre-VAR regime.
       Table 1, Panel B shows that in games played under the VAR regime the percent-
age of games with a referee error decreased to 0.22, compared to 0.37 in the pre-VAR
regime. As in the pre-VAR regime, referees do not seem to err less against the home
compared to the away team. The average number of errors against the away and
home teams is 0.12 and 0.10, respectively. A t-test indicates that these two means are
not different.
       Table 1, Panel B exhibits a similar home bias in goals compared to the pre-VAR
regime. On average there are 3.02 goals per game, with the away and home teams
scoring 1.34 and 1.68 goals, respectively. A t-test indicates a large and statistically
significant difference between these two means (-0.34 with a p-value smaller than
1%).


                                            14
        The table shows that referees issue more yellow cards to the away compared
to the home team also under the VAR regime. Referees issue on average 3.78 yellow
cards per game, with 2.06 and 1.73 yellow cards issued to the away and home teams,
respectively. Again, this difference is large in magnitude and statistically significant
at the 1% level.
        Table 1, Panel C shows that under the VAR/no-crowd regime, the well-known
persistent home bias in goals disappears. On average there are 3.03 goals per game,
with the away and home teams scoring 1.45 and 1.58 goals each, respectively. A t-test
confirms that this rather small difference is also statistically insignificant.
        Panel C also shows that referees stop favoring the home team with respect to
yellow cards. Referees issue on average 4.39 yellow cards per game, with 2.23 and 2.17
yellow cards issued to the away and home teams, respectively. As with the difference
in goals, this small difference is also statistically insignificant.
        Finally, stadiums in our sample have an average capacity of 35,000 spectators.
Attendance in games is usually high, with an average attendance to capacity ratio of
86%. There are 64 unique referees in our sample; in each season there are about 40
unique referees. On average they each referee 17 games per season. The average age
of referees is 37.



4      "Disputable" vs. "Indisputable" Errors
On average, the crowd in each game consists of more than 30,000 spectators, of which
about 92% support the home team (with a standard deviation of 6.2%).13 This implies
that public pressure on the referee is likely to be very strong, especially in favor of the

    13 Data
          on the number of spectators is obtained from kicker.de and included in our dataset. The
number of away fans is obtained from the website www.fussballmafia.de, which collects estimates on
the number of fans directly from the away team. This number is available from the start of the 2017-18
season. Our data includes information on the number of spectators in each game up to the 26th week
in the 2019-20 season, which, because of the Covid-19 pandemic, was the last game played in front of
a live crowd. Our data also includes information on the number of away team fans in each game from
the start of the 2017-18 season until the 26th week in the 2019-20 season obtained from the website
www.fussballmafia.de, which collects estimates on the number of fans directly from the away team.
We use this information to impute the number of away team fans for the games played in the seasons
prior to when this information became available. We performed the imputation by regressing the
number of away team fans, for those seasons for which we do have data, on the following covariates:
division, round, distance (for the away team), fixed effects for each of the two teams, teams' rankings,
various measures of the record of the two teams' previously played games, and the day of the week.
The correlation obtained between the actual number of away fans and the predicted number of away
fans is about 0.9.

                                                  15
home team.
     Nevertheless, as explained in the introduction, we hypothesize that: (1) referees'
integrity is sufficiently strong to withstand crowd pressure on those decisions where
an error would be "indisputable," such as decisions on the validation or invalidation
of goals and penalty kicks. (2) Referees' integrity is not sufficiently strong to with-
stand crowd pressure on those decisions where an error would not be "indisputable,"
such as decisions on the issuance or nonissuance of a yellow card.
     In order to test this hypothesis, we run the following regression:

                  Yg,i =
                            1 Home Team g,i +  2 Home Team g,i × Mild g
                           +  3 Home Team g,i × High g +  g +   g ,r , i ,


where g represents indexed games. For each game we have two rows, one for each
team. The index i  {1, 2} represents the first or second playing team. The dependent
variable Yg,i is the number of errors against/yellow cards given to team i in game g.
Our main variable of interest is Home Team, which is a dummy variable that is equal to
1 if the game is a home game for the team, and 0 otherwise. This variable is supposed
to capture the bias, if any, created by crowd pressure. The variables Mild and High
are dummies that are equal to one if the game is "mildly" or "highly" important, and
zero otherwise. Remaining games are considered to be of "low" importance.
     We define a game to be important for a team if the team ranks among those in
the top or bottom third in the Bundesliga table at the time of the game, and the ab-
solute difference in score between the team and those adjacent to it in the Bundesliga
table (from above and below) is less than or equal to 2. This definition of importance
is motivated by the idea that teams in the top or bottom third of the Bundesliga table
have a stronger incentive to do well. Those in the top want to secure their top position,
which allows them to compete in European leagues and promises other rewards, and
those in the bottom third want to avoid being demoted to a lower division at the end
of the season. We define a game to be "of low importance" if it is not important to ei-
ther the home or away team according to our definition; a game is "mildly" important
if it is important to the away but not to the home team; and a game is "highly" im-
portant if it is important to the home team (regardless of its importance to the away
team). The reason we assign a bigger weight to the home team is that most of the


                                            16
crowd in the stadium supports the home team (as mentioned above, on average, only
about 8­10% of the crowd support the away team), so that if a game is important to
the home team, it is also important to a much larger fraction of the crowd. Hence, our
measure of importance captures whether a game is expected to be important, ex-ante,
before the game is played.
      The regression, as well as all other regressions below, controls for unique game
dummies.14 Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game.15 Table 2
below presents a basic analysis of home bias.


                   Table 2: Number of Errors/Yellow Cards by Importance
                                    Pre-VAR                                  VAR                         VAR/no-crowd
                             Errors    Yellow Cards              Errors       Yellow Cards           Errors  Yellow Cards
                               (1)           (2)                   (3)              (4)                (5)         (6)
 Home Team                   0.0013     -0.3953                  0.0064         -0.3718              0.0220     -0.0659
                            (0.0235)      (0.0680)              (0.0310)         (0.1543)           (0.0515)    (0.1847)

 Home Team x Mild           -0.0201            0.0136           -0.0252            0.0936            0.0225     -0.0563
                            (0.0327)          (0.0903)          (0.0321)          (0.1756)          (0.0782)   (0.2320)

 Home Team x High           -0.0231            0.0123           -0.0220            -0.0071          -0.0267     0.0519
                            (0.0274)          (0.0771)          (0.0327)          (0.1720)          (0.0623)   (0.2274)
 N                            8,324             8,324             2,000             2,000              790        790
 R2                           0.06              0.21              0.02               0.22             -0.01      0.12
 Mean                          0.18             1.96              0.11               1.89              0.09      2.19
                 Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parentheses.
                 Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                 We control for unique game dummies.


      Table 2 shows the results of running the regression on errors and yellow cards
while controlling for the importance of the game and its interaction with the variable
Home Team. Columns (1), (3), and (5), exhibit the results when the dependent variable
is the number of errors under the three regimes, respectively. The estimated measure
of crowd pressure (measured through the coefficients of Home Team and its two in-
teractions) is not statistically significant under all three regimes. The results indicate
that there are more errors in mildly and highly important games, but these effect are
borderline statistically significant. This implies that, even in games that are more im-
portant to the home team, where we expect crowd pressure from the home team fans

  14 Runningthe regressions controlling for division, season, week, teams, team rankings and referee
dummies instead of for unique game dummies does not change our results.
  15 Running   the regressions using different clusterings does not change our results.


                                                               17
to be stronger, there is no extra bias in favor of the home team. We also find that the
ratio of attendance to capacity, which measures how packed the stadium is, which in-
tuitively is positively correlated with the pressure that the crowd exerts on the referee,
and the size of the stadium, have no effect of the number of errors.
      Table 2, Columns (2), (4), and (6) exhibit a similar analysis for the number of
yellow cards. The results show a large and statistically significant home bias at the 1%
level under both the pre-VAR and VAR regimes. On average the Home Team receives
approximately 20% fewer yellow cards in a game. This effect disappears under the
VAR/no-crowd regime. Under all three regimes, the importance of the game has a
positive effect on the number of yellow cards issued, which is to be expected, but this
effect is not statistically significant.
      The results in Table 2 are consistent with our hypothesis that errors made in
referee decisions whether to validate goals or award penalty kicks do not exhibit a
bias in favor of the home team. However, we find evidence that decisions whether
to issue yellow cards are biased in favor of the home team when the game is played
in front of a live crowd. In particular, we find that referees issue more yellow cards
to the away team, relative to the home team, and that this effect is both economically
and statistically significant. The bias in favor of the home team in the issue of yellow
cards disappears when the game is played behind closed doors, with no crowd.



5    The Effect of an Indisputable Error
Our second hypothesis concerns referees' responses to their previous indisputable
errors. An indisputable error against the home team is very likely to elicit a strong
response from the crowd, and so, as explained in the introduction, we hypothesize
that a referee who errs against the home team in an indisputable way tries, possibly
subconsciously, to make up for his error in some way. On average, less than 10% of
the crowd supports the away team. This implies that an indisputable error against
the away team is less likely to elicit a strong reaction from the crowd, and so is also
less likely to induce the referee to try to make up for it.
      Indeed, we show that referees make up for their errors against the home team by
giving more yellow cards to the away team, and not vice versa, but not when the game
is played behind closed doors, which is consistent with our hypothesis. Importantly,
we also find that referees do not make up for their errors with respect to the validation


                                            18
or invalidation of goals and the awarding of penalty kicks, by making additional such
errors.


5.1      Yellow Cards
In this section, we show that referees exhibit a home bias in the following sense: they
issue more yellow cards to the away team after an error against the home team, but
not vice versa, whenever the game is played in front of a crowd.
         To test the idea that referees issue more yellow cards to the away team after an
error against the home team, but not vice versa, we compare the number of yellow
cards given to the two teams before and after the first error in games with at least
one error with the number of yellow cards given to the two teams before and after
halftime in games with no errors.
         To make this comparison, from each game in our sample we derive four obser-
vations: two observations for the home team and two observations for the away team.
The first observation for each team is of the number of yellow cards before the first er-
ror, or halftime in games with no errors; and the second observation is of the number
of yellow cards after the first error, or halftime in games with no errors.
         However, if the first error occurred, say, 30 minutes after the start of the game,
then it is likely that the number of yellow cards given in such a game before the error
occurred, is smaller than the number of yellow cards given in the first half (45 min-
utes) of a game without errors.16 Likewise, the number of yellow cards given in such
a game after the error is likely to be larger than the number of yellow cards given
in the second half of a game without errors, because in the former game, there are
60 minutes in which yellow cards can be given, whereas in the latter game, there are
only 45 minutes.
         Therefore, in order for the comparison between the number of yellow cards in
games with and without errors to be meaningful, we multiply the number of yellow
cards given before and after an error by the ratio of the number of minutes to the first
error and 45. For example, if the first error occurred in the 30th minute, then we split
the game into two parts: the first part includes all yellow cards up to the 30th minute,
and the second part includes all yellow cards in the remaining 60 minutes after the
error. In order to account for the different length of time in which a yellow card can be

  16 A   game is played for 90 minutes. Halftime begins in the 45th minute.


                                                   19
given in these two parts of the game, we adjust the dependent variable by multiplying
                                                                                                                  45       3
the number of yellow cards in the first and second parts of the game by                                           30   =   2   and
     45       3
by   60   =   4,   respectively. More generally, if the first error occurred in the  -th minute,
then we multiply the number of yellow cards given before and after the first error by
45                  45
     and by        90- ,   respectively. This transformation accounts for the fact that the time
before and after the first error occurred can be longer or shorter than halftime, or 45
minutes.17 We also winsorize the number of yellow cards before and after the first
error to avoid extreme values in case the first error occurred in the first or last few
minutes of the game.
          In order for the comparison between the number of yellow cards given before
and after the first error to be valid, we need to verify that both the occurrence and,
importantly, the direction of the first error is not itself biased in favor of the home (or
away) team. We therefore run similar regressions to those reported in Table 2, except
that the dependent variable is First error, which is a dummy variable equal to one if
the first error was against team i in game g, and zero otherwise.


                                                      Table 3: First Error
                                          Pre-VAR                                VAR                       VAR/no-crowd
     Games                            All     With Errors               All       With Errors             All   With Errors
                                      (1)         (2)                   (3)           (4)                 (5)        (6)
     Home Team                      0.0066      0.0239                0.0000        0.0000              0.0110     0.0588
                                   (0.0214)    (0.0781)              (0.0355)      (0.1993)            (0.0457)   (0.2506)

     Home Team x Mild               -0.0263         -0.0868          -0.0188          -0.0769           0.0335     0.2269
                                   (0.0323)         (0.1099)         (0.0346)         (0.1850)         (0.0743)   (0.4492)

     Home Team x High               -0.0179         -0.0623          -0.0156          -0.0874          -0.0063    -0.0285
                                   (0.0240)         (0.0861)         (0.0369)         (0.2084)         (0.0570)   (0.3314)
     N                               8,324            2,460            2,000             392              790        128
     R2                              0.414           0.002            0.446            0.006            0.458      0.019
     Mean                            0.148            0.500            0.098            0.500            0.081      0.500
                     Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parentheses.
                     Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                     We control for unique game dummies.


          The results of these regressions are presented in Table 3. Columns (1), (3), and
(5) exhibit the results for all games. Columns (2), (4), and (6) repeat the analysis on
the subset of games with errors. The results show that regardless of the regime and of
whether we run the analysis on all games or just on the subset of games with referee

  17 Recall   that the mean time to a first error in games in which one occurs is 47.49 minutes.


                                                                   20
errors, the estimated measure of a home bias (the coefficient of Home Team) is not
statistically significant. The results also show that the interaction of the importance
of the game with Home Team is not statistically significant. This implies that there
is no extra home bias that depends on the importance of the game. These results
are consistent with our hypothesis that pressure from the crowd does not bias the
direction of the referee's first error in either way, and justifies treating the first error as
an unbiased variable.
      As explained above, we hypothesize that in games with errors, the number of
yellow cards given to a team following a first error against the other team is larger
than if no error was made. As explained above, we find that, in games that are played
in front of a crowd, this is indeed the case when the first error was committed against
the home team, but not in games where the first error was committed against the
away team.
      To test this hypothesis we run the following regression:

Yellow Cards g,i,t =
                        1 Home Team g,i +  2 A f ter g,t +  3 Home Team g,i × A f ter g,t
                       +  4 Home Error g × Home Team g,i
                       +  5 Away Error g × HomeTeam g,i +  6 Home Error g × A f ter g,t
                       +  7 Away Error g × A f ter g,t +  8 Home Error g × Home Team g,i × A f ter g,t
                       +  9 Away Error g × Home Team g,i × A f ter g,t +  g +       g ,i , t .


      The dependent variable Yellow Cardsg,i,t is the number of yellow cards given to
team i  (1, 2), that played in game g, in part t  { f irst, second}, where t = second
if it is the second half of the game in games with no errors or if it is after the first
error in games with errors, and t = f irst otherwise (if it is the first half of the game
in games with no errors or if it is before the first error in games with errors). The
dependent variable Home Team g,i is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if team i is the
home team. Afterg,t is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if t = second. Namely, it is
equal to 1 if the yellow card was issued after the first error or in the second half of the
game in games with no errors. Home Errorg,i and Away Errorg,i are dummy variables
that are equal to 1 if the first error in the game was against the home and away teams,
respectively.
      The coefficient of the variable Home Team describes whether the home team re-


                                                 21
ceives more/less yellow cards. The coefficient of the variable A f ter describes whether
more/less yellow cards are given to the team after a referee error, or in the second
half in games with no errors. The coefficient of the variable Home Team × A f ter de-
scribes whether the home team receives even more/less yellow cards after a referee
error, or in the second half in games with no errors. The coefficient of the variable
Home Error × Home Team measures whether in games with a first error against the
home team, more/less yellow cards are given to the home team, and the coefficient
of the variable Away Error × HomeTeam measures whether in games with a first error
against the away team, more/less yellow cards are given to the home team. The co-
efficient of the variable Home Error × A f ter measures whether in games with a first
error against the home team, more/less yellow cards are given, and the coefficient of
the variable Away Error × A f ter measures whether in games with a first error against
the away team, more/less yellow cards are given. Finally, the 3-way interaction terms
Home Error × Home Team × A f ter and Away Error × Home Team × A f ter are our main
variables of interest. The coefficient of the former measures whether in games with a
first error against the home team, more/less yellow cards are given to the home team
after the error, or in the second half of the game in games with no errors, and the
latter coefficient measures whether in games with a first error against the away team,
more/less yellow cards are given to the home team after the error, or in the second
half of the game in games with no errors. Finally, the coefficients al pha g are unique
game dummy variables that measure the effect of all the variables that are fixed for
the game, such as location, division, season, week, teams, team rankings, referee, etc.
The variable  g,i,t describes random noise.
     Table 4 below shows the results. Columns (1), (3), and (5), include all games, and
Columns (2), (4), and (6), exclude games with a first error in the last five minutes of
the game. In such games, the referee's chance of finding himself in a situation where
he can compensate a team for an error he made against it is quite limited.
     In the pre-VAR regime, the results reported in Columns (1) and (2) show that, on
average, home teams receive less yellow cards. This effect is large and statistically sig-
nificant. We also find that the number of yellow cards in the second part of the game
is larger and statistically significant, which suggests that games become more intense
as they progress over time. That is, players play more aggressively and are cautioned
more often for aggressive play. However, the fact that the Home Team g,i × A f ter g,t
interaction variable is small and insignificant implies that there is no additional home


                                           22
bias in the second half of the game. In games where the first error was against the
home team, the home team receives more yellow cards than in games with no errors.
However, there is no statistically significant difference in the number of yellow cards
given to the home team in games where the first error was against the away team.
The coefficients of the two terms HomeError g,i × A f ter g,t and AwayError g,i × A f ter g,t
are both positive and statistically significant. These variables capture the intensity of
the game in the second half, in games with referees' errors. Such games are probably
more intense, which implies both more errors and more yellow cards.
      Notably, the coefficient of the 3-way interaction term HomeError g,i × HomeTeam g,i ×
A f ter g,t is negative and statistically significant. This suggests that referees favor the
home team by giving it fewer yellow cards after a first error against the home team.
The fact that the coefficient of the term AwayError g,i × HomeTeam g,i × A f ter g,t is very
small and not statistically different from zero implies that referees do not exhibit a
symmetric attitude towards the away team after a first error against it. Column (2)
shows that the results described in Column (1) are not affected by the last minutes of
the game.
      Columns (3) and (4) show the results for the VAR regime. As with the pre-VAR
regime, on average, away teams receive more yellow cards, and the number of yellow
cards in the second part of the game is larger (both coefficients are statistically signifi-
cant at the 1% level). The table also shows that the HomeTeam g,i × A f ter g,t interaction
variable is small and insignificant, which implies that the difference in the number
of yellow cards between home and away teams is not larger in the second half of
the game. The results for all the interaction terms between HomeTeam and Error are
small and statistically insignificant. The coefficient of the HomeError × A f ter term
is statistically significant and larger in magnitude compared to the pre-VAR regime.
This suggests that in games with VAR, the crowd responds more angrily to referees'
errors against the home team, which contributes to the intensity of the game and gen-
erates more yellow cards to both teams. This effect is not found after a first error
against the away team. The regression results that we get for the 3-way interactions
in Columns (3) and (4) are somewhat different than those in Columns (1) and (2).
The 3-way interaction HomeError g,i × HomeTeam g,i × A f ter g,t , when all games are in-
cluded (Column (3)), is negative, with similar magnitude as in the pre-VAR regime,
however, it is not statistically significant. But when games in which the first error oc-
curred in the last five minutes of the game are excluded (Column (4); there are only


                                             23
19 such games), then the 3-way interaction coefficient increases in magnitude and be-
comes statistically significant at the 5% level (-0.309 under the pre-VAR regime and
-0.505 under the VAR regime). In comparison to the pre-VAR regime, the coefficient
of 3-way interaction Away Error g,i × Home Team g,i × A f ter g,t increases substantially
in magnitude (from -0.008 and 0.016 under the pre-VAR regime to 0.211 and 0.304
under the VAR regime, respectively). While this coefficient is not statistically signifi-
cant when all games are included (Column (3)), it is statistically significant at a level
of 10% when games in which the first error occurred in the last five minutes of the
game are excluded (Column (4)).
     Columns (5) and (6) show the results for the VAR/no-crowd regime. In con-
trast to the other two regimes we do not find that away teams receive more yellow
cards than home teams. The magnitude of the coefficient of Home Team is substan-
tially smaller (-0.031 compared to -0.162 and -0.166 under the pre-VAR and VAR
regimes, respectively) and is not statistically significant. All the 2-way interaction
terms are not statistically different from zero. We also find that the 3-way interactions
are small in magnitude and are not statistically significant. However, this finding is
tempered by the fact that the number of games included in the VAR/no-crowd regime
is much smaller compared to the other two regimes (about 4,000, 1000, and 400 games
were played under the pre-VAR, VAR, and VAR/no-crowd regimes, respectively).
     Inspection of the results presented in Table 4 is consistent with our hypotheses
as described in the introduction:

  1. Referees make up for their errors against the home team by giving more yellow
     cards to the away team, but not when the game is played behind closed doors.
     Referees do not make up for their errors against the away team by giving more
     yellow cards to the home team (or less yellow cards to the away team).

  2. Under the VAR regime, the compensation to the home team through yellow
     cards to the away team after an error against the home team increases in size.
     Notably, with VAR, referees also make up for errors against the away team by
     giving more yellow cards to the home team. As explained above, this is not sur-
     prising because under VAR referees' errors become more glaring, which implies
     that the crowd's reaction to these errors is likely to be stronger.

  3. Under VAR/no-crowd regime the referees' tendency to make up for their errors
     against one team by giving more yellow cards to the other team disappears.

                                           24
      An alternative explanation that could account for the finding that referees is-
sue more yellow cards to the away team after an error against the home team may
be that when the home team is behind, it changes its game strategy by playing more
offensively (Bartling et al., 2005, provide evidence that supports this view).18 Pre-
sumably, this implies that the away team is pushed to play more defensively, which
in turn implies that it also receives more yellow cards. This could indeed be an al-
ternative explanation for our finding that the referee issues more yellow cards to the
away team after an error against the home team (but not vice versa). However, the
results described in Columns (5) and (6) show that this effect disappears when the
game is played behind closed doors. Thus, this alternative explanation requires that
home teams change their strategies when behind only when the game is played in
front of a crowd, but not when the game is played behind closed doors. While such
an explanation is not inconceivable, we find it to be less plausible than our explana-
tion that the increased number of yellow cards is due to increased pressure from the
crowd following an error of the referee against the home team.




 18 This   explanation was suggested to us by a referee.


                                                   25
                      Table 4: Yellow Cards Home/Away Team, Before/After
                                                   pre-VAR                               VAR                          VAR / no-crowd
                                      All Games       Last 5 min. excl.    All Games      Last 5 min. excl.   All Games Last 5 min. excl.
                                           (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
 Home Team                             -0.166            -0.166             -0.162           -0.162             -0.031            -0.031
                                        (0.018)            (0.018)           (0.031)           (0.031)         (0.061)           (0.061)

 After                                  0.640             0.640             0.608              0.608           0.656          0.656
                                         (0.036)           (0.036)           (0.043)            (0.043)         (0.096)        (0.096)

 Home Team x After                       -0.036             -0.036            -0.012            -0.012          0.027          0.027
                                        (0.040)            (0.040)           (0.064)           (0.064)         (0.115)        (0.115)

 Home Error x Home Team                 0.149             0.155               0.046             0.055          -0.079         -0.056
                                         (0.050)           (0.053)           (0.131)           (0.137)         (0.233)        (0.258)

 Away Error x Home Team                  -0.034             -0.039            -0.008            -0.044          -0.011         -0.034
                                        (0.054)            (0.057)           (0.101)           (0.101)         (0.130)        (0.130)

 Home Error x After                     0.313             0.341             0.552              0.615            -0.015         0.086
                                         (0.068)           (0.063)           (0.153)            (0.158)        (0.295)        (0.305)

 Away Error x After                     0.224             0.217               0.030             0.047           0.308          0.297
                                         (0.066)           (0.063)           (0.175)           (0.160)         (0.350)        (0.350)

 Home Error x Home Team x After        -0.304             -0.309              -0.342           -0.505           0.223          0.043
                                        (0.077)            (0.082)           (0.245)            (0.235)        (0.465)        (0.467)

 Away Error x Home Team x After         -0.008              0.016             0.211            0.304            -0.071         -0.049
                                        (0.093)            (0.096)           (0.187)           (0.179)         (0.286)        (0.283)
 N                                      16,530             16,188             3,980             3,904           1,404          1,392
 R2                                     0.3706             0.3718            0.3817            0.3831          0.3474         0.3506
 Mean                                   0.9716             0.9676            0.9291            0.9284          1.0807         1.0817

                  Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parenthesis.
                 Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                 We control for unique game dummies.


         In Table 5, we exhibit the results of a regression that is similar to the one de-
scribed in Table 4, except that we run the regression separately for games that are
more or less "important" to the teams (Columns (1)­(3)) and "close" or "not-close"
(Columns (4)­(5)). A game is defined as "close" if the score of the game was even,
at the moment of the first error in games with at least one error, or at halftime in
games with no errors. While "importance" measures whether a game is considered
important, ex-ante, before the start of the game, "closeness" is an endogenous mea-
sure of importance, because it depends on how the game develops. We perform this
analysis only for the pre-VAR regime, because splitting the VAR and VAR/no-crowd
regimes into these subgroups reduces the number of observations per subgroup to an
extent that does not allow us to obtain accurate results. Yet, despite the fact that the
results are noisier, they are qualitatively similar to those observed under the pre-VAR
regime.19

  19 We   have not included the results of these regressions in the paper.


                                                               26
      Inspection of the sign and statistical significance of the 3-way interaction term,
which is our main variable of interest, indicates that referees tend to deferentially
compensate the home team only in games that are mildly and highly important for
the home team. Specifically, Column (1) of Table 5 shows that in games that are of
low importance for the home team the coefficients of our main variables of interest
are small and insignificant. However, in Columns (2) and (3) of Table 5, which report
the results of more important games, these coefficients are larger in magnitude and
also statistically significant at the 5% and 1% levels.
      Column (5) of Table 5 includes games in which the score of the game was tied
at the moment of the first error or halftime. Column (4) includes all the remaining
games. Inspection of the results presented in Table 5 reveals that our main variable
of interest, namely, the coefficient of the 3-way interaction term, is negative and sta-
tistically significant only in "close" games. We hypothesise that this is due to the fact
that the crowd exerts a stronger pressure on referees in close games. The effect is of
greater magnitude than in Table 4, and is statistically significant at the 1% level.
      The results reported in Table 5 are consistent with our hypothesis that the in-
crease in bias in favor of the home team is magnified when the referee's erroneous
decision occurred (i) during a game that is more important, or (ii) at the point of time
in the game in which the score was close and so the error was likely to be more con-
sequential.




                                            27
       Table 5: Yellow Cards Before/After an Error by Importance/Closeness
                                                                       Importance                            Closeness
                                                           Low            Mild     High                   No         Yes
                                                             (1)            (2)     (3)                    (4)       (5)
   Home Team                                             -0.130         -0.166 -0.178                  -0.189 -0.160
                                                          (0.035)        (0.043)  (0.026)               (0.051)    (0.020)

   After                                                  0.582          0.630           0.664         0.408      0.687
                                                           (0.074)        (0.066)         (0.038)       (0.062)    (0.038)

   Home x After                                            -0.128t         0.020          -0.030         0.010      -0.053
                                                           (0.084)        (0.083)         (0.049)       (0.091)    (0.045)

   Home Mistake x Home Team                                0.167          0.267            0.102t       -0.089    0.201
                                                           (0.097)        (0.133)         (0.066)       (0.127)    (0.063)

   Away Mistake x Away Team                               -0.228           0.041          -0.018        -0.093      -0.020
                                                          (0.135)         (0.102)         (0.076)       (0.117)    (0.056)

   Home Mistake x After                                    0.225         0.481           0.316           0.090    0.358
                                                           (0.113)        (0.162)         (0.090)       (0.231)    (0.058)

   Away Mistake x After                                     0.319t        0.356            0.122        0.346     0.201
                                                           (0.204)        (0.136)         (0.086)       (0.183)    (0.070)

   Home Mistake x Home Team x After                         -0.032       -0.488          -0.320          0.118    -0.357
                                                           (0.193)        (0.240)         (0.117)       (0.264)    (0.094)

   Away Mistake x Home Team x After                         0.295          -0.118          -0.010        -0.088     0.033
                                                           (0.262)        (0.201)         (0.100)       (0.220)    (0.095)
   N                                                        2,984           4,084           9,120        2,644     14,020
   R2                                                      0.3789         0.3727          0.3711        0.3323     0.3807
   Mean                                                    0.9288         0.9723          0.9782        0.9438     0.9759
           Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parentheses.
           Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
           We control for unique game dummies.




5.2   Referee Errors
In this subsection, we show that referees do not make up for their errors against one
team by making an error against the other team. To test this, we examine whether
a referee who made an error against the home (away) team is more likely to make a
second error against the away (home) than against the home (away) team.
      The distribution of the order of referee errors is depicted in the tree-diagram be-
low. The numbers are listed in the order of their relevant regime, so that, for example,
the entry "4274, 1062, 395 Games" means 4274, 1062, and 395 games played under the
pre-VAR, VAR, and VAR/no-crowd regime, respectively.

                                                                  28
   Distribution of Errors under the pre-VAR, VAR, and VAR/No-Crowd Regimes
                                            4274, 1062, 395 Games




  3014, 855, 331 Games     609, 93, 35 Games                                            651, 114, 29 Games

      w/o errors               1st error                                                     1st error

                            against Home                                                  against Away




       485, 84, 31 Games     57, 3, 2 Games      67, 6, 2 Games     527, 99, 26 Games     60, 9, 1 Games     64, 6, 2 Games

            no more             2nd error          2nd error            no more              2nd error         2nd error

             errors          against Home        against Away            errors            against Home      against Away



       Out of the 4274 games played under the pre-VAR regime, in 3014 games (71%)
there were no errors, in 609 games (14%) the first error was against the home team,
and in 651 games (15%) the first error was against the away team.
       Out of the 609 games played under the pre-VAR regime in which the first error
was against the home team, in 485 games (80%) there were no additional errors, in
57 games (9%) the second error was against the home team, and in 67 games (11%)
the second error was against the away team. Out of the 651 games played under the
pre-VAR regime in which the first error was against the home team, in 527 games
(81%) there were no additional errors, in 60 games (9%) the second error was against
the Home team, and in 64 games (10%) the second error was against the away team.
The fact that the proportion of games with no additional errors beyond the first one
in these two (sub-)conditional distributions, 80% and 81%, respectively, is larger than
the proportion of games with no errors at all, 71%, is due to the fact that less time
remains for a second error to occur compared to a first error.20
       As can be seen from the tree-diagram above, among games played under the
pre-VAR regime, errors against the home and away teams are distributed quite sym-
metrically. This pattern holds true both for the first and second errors. This suggests
that crowd pressure has little, if any, influence on referee's decisions that are indis-

  20 Among    the games played under the pre-VAR regime, there are only 45 (24 and 7 in the VAR and
VAR/no-crowd regimes respectively) games with three or more errors. There are four different condi-
tional distributions of the third error (after two errors against the home team, after an error against the
home team that is followed by an error against the away team, etc.). The number of games in each one
of the relevant categories is small and therefore we do not present these games here. However, these
games are included in the regression analysis that is performed below.


                                                               29
putably observable. In particular, following a first error against the home team, out
of the 124 games with at least two errors, in 54% of the games the second error was
against the away team, and following a first error against the away team, out of the the
124 games with at least two errors, in 48% of the games the second error was against
the home team. A simple t-test fails to reject the null hypothesis that these numbers
are equal to one-half, which implies that there is no home bias.
      The number of games played under the VAR and VAR/no-crowd regimes is too
small for a similar comparison to be meaningful because a difference of even one error
has a large effect on the conditional distribution of the second error following a first
error against one of the teams.
      However, because a simple t-test cannot control for additional variables, we run
the following regression:

2nd Error g,i =
                   1 Home Team g,i +  2 Home Team g,i × 1st Error Against Home g +  g +   g ,r , i


The dependent variable, 2nd Error, is a dummy variable equal to one if there was a
second error, and zero otherwise. 1st Error Against Home is a dummy variable equal
to one if the first error was against the home team, and zero otherwise.
      We expect stronger pressure from the crowd on the referee after an error against
the home team compared to after an error against the away team because, on average,
most of the crowd (90%) consists of fans of the home team. We expect this pressure to
be even stronger in games that are deemed "important," and/or "close," as defined
above. As explained above, we expect the referee to exhibit a stronger bias in favor of
the home team when he is subject to stronger crowd pressure. The fact that we do not
find any indication of such a bias even in close and important games as shown in the
regression tables below indicates that no such bias exists.




                                              30
    Table 6: Second Error by Importance/Closeness under the Pre-VAR Regime
                                                                              Importance                        Closeness
                                                        (1)            (2)         (3)       (4)              (5)        (6)
                                                       All           Low          Mild     High              No         Yes
 Home Team                                           -0.0094        -0.0294      0.0296   -0.0219          -0.0300    -0.0056
                                                    (0.0160)       (0.0368)     (0.0326) (0.0220)         (0.0356) (0.0187)

 Home Team x 1st Mistake to Home                     -0.0141        -0.0173       -0.0497       0.0042     0.0184     -0.0200
                                                    (0.0254)       (0.0570)      (0.0545)      (0.0285)   (0.0444)   (0.0301)
 N                                                    2,460           418           636          1,406       372       2,088
 R2                                                   0.445          0.442         0.442        0.449      0.478       0.440
 Mean                                                 0.100          0.110         0.107         0.094      0.048      0.109
        Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parentheses.
        Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
        We control for unique game dummies.


        Table 6, Column (1) shows the results for the pre-VAR regime when all games are
included. The results show that our coefficient of interest, namely, the coefficient of
the interaction term, is small in magnitude and insignificant. Columns (2)­(4) reveal
similar results when only "low", "mild," and "high" importance games are included.
In Columns (5) and (6) we rerun the regression separately for games that we define
as "close" and "not close." Columns (5) and (6) show that regardless of whether the
games are close or not, our coefficient of interest is small in magnitude and insignifi-
cant.
        The coefficients of our main independent variable of interest, which is the in-
teraction of Home Team and 1st Error Against Home, is small and insignificant in all
the above regressions, suggesting that referees do not compensate for their errors by
making additional errors against the other team. Our results are consistent with our
hypothesis that crowd pressure has less influence on referee decisions that are indis-
putable.




                                                                  31
          Table 7: Second Error under the VAR and VAR/No-Crowd Regimes
                                                                          (1)               (2)
                                                                         VAR         VAR / no-crowd
                       Home Team                                        0.0190           -0.0345
                                                                       (0.0308)         (0.0603)

                       Home Team x 1st Error to Home                    -0.0520              0.0345
                                                                       (0.0361)             (0.0840)
                       N                                                   392                 128
                       R2                                               0.4720               0.4737
                       Mean                                              0.0587              0.0547
      Note: Standard errors are clustered by the referee and unique game and are in parentheses.
      Stars denote the level of statistical significance: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
      We control for unique game dummies.


      Table 7 reproduces the results reported in Table 6 for the other two regimes.
Column (1) shows the results for the VAR regime and Column (2) shows the results
for the VAR/no-crowd regime, when all games are included. The results show that
our main coefficient of interest, namely, the coefficient of the interaction term, is small
in magnitude and statistically insignificant. We do not run the regressions for the VAR
and VAR/no-crowd regimes separately by the importance and closeness of the game,
because splitting the set of games reduces the number of observations per subgroup
to an extent that does not allow us to obtain accurate results.



6    Conclusion
There is a long-standing concern about the effects of public pressure on judging. Our
objective in this paper has been to contribute to the empirical investigation of this sub-
ject. In particular, we have focused on investigating the circumstances under which
public pressure is more and less likely to affect judging. To this end, we have used
detailed and rich data from Germany's top soccer league.
      A key insight of our analysis is that the extent to which public pressure affects
judging depends on the extent to which judging decisions seeking to placate public
pressure can be indisputably identified as erroneous by outside observers and thereby
impose a reputational cost on the decision maker. Another key insight is that with
respect to those decisions where public pressure affects judging, the strength of the
effect depends on the extent to which such pressure is viewed by the decision maker
as understandable or reasonable. We hope that future empirical work will further


                                                                32
study the circumstances in which public pressure is more and less likely to affect
judging.



References
[1] Balmer, N., A. M. Nevill, and A. M. Williams (2002) "The Influence of Crowd
  Noise and Experience upon Refereeing Decisions in Football," Psychology of Sport
  and Exercise 3, 261-272.

[2] Bartling, B., L. Brandes, and D. Schunk (2015) "Expectations as reference points:
  field evidence from professional soccer," Management Science 61, 2646-2661.

[3] Berdejó, Carlos, and Noam Yuchtman (2013), "Crime, Punishment, and Politics:
  An Analysis of Political Cycles in Criminal Sentencing," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 95(3), 741­756., doi:10.1162/rest_a_00296.

[4] Boeri, T., and B. Severgnini (2011), "Match rigging and the career concerns of ref-
  erees," Labour Economics, 18(3), 349-359.

[5] Bryson, A., P. Dolton, J. J. Reade, D. Schreyer, and C. Singleton (2021) "Causal
  effects of an absent crowd on performances and refereeing decisions during Covid-
  19," Economics Letters 198, 109664.

[6] Buraimo, B., Forrest, D., and R. Simmons (2010),"The 12th man?: refereeing bias in
  English and German soccer," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics
  in Society), 173(2), 431-449.

[7] Carlos, C., Ezequiel, R., and Anton, K. (2019) "How does Video Assistant Referee
  (VAR) modify the game in elite soccer?", International Journal of Performance Analysis
  in Sport,19, 646-653

[8] Cohen, A., Klement, A., and Neeman, Z. (2014), "Judicial Decision Making: A
  Dynamic Reputation Approach," Journal of Legal Studies 44, 133-159.

[9] Dawson, P., Dobson, S., Goddard, J., and Wilson, J. (2007), "Are football referees
  really biased and inconsistent?: evidence on the incidence of disciplinary sanction
  in the English Premier League," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statis-
  tics in Society), 170(1), 231-250.


                                            33
[10] Dawson, P., Massey, and Downward, P. (2020) "Television match officials, refer-
  ees, and home advantage: Evidence from the European Rugby Cup," Sport Man-
  agement Review, 23, 443-454.

[11] Dohmen, T. J. (2008), "The influence of social forces: Evidence from the behavior
  of football referees," Economic Inquiry, 46(3), 411-424.

[12] Dohmen, T. J., and J. Sauermann (2016), "Referee Bias," Journal of Economic Sur-
  veys, 30(4), 679-695.

[13] Endrich, M., and T. Gesche (2020) "Home-bias in referee decisions: Evidence
  from "Ghost Matches" during the Covid19-Pandemic," Economics Letters 197,
  109621.

[14] Garicano, L., Palacios-Huerta, I., and Prendergast, C., 2005. Favoritism under
  social pressure," Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2), 208-216.

[15] Gomery, John H. (2006), "The Pros and Cons of Commissions of Inquiry, " McGill
  Law Journal, 51(4), 783-798.

[16] Huber, Gregory A., and Sanford C. Gordon (2004), "Accountability and Coercion:
  Is Justice Blind When It Runs for Office?" American Journal of Political Science, 48(2),
  247-263., doi:10.2307/1519881.

[17] Lago-Peñas, C., Gómez, M. A., and Pollard, R. (2020) "The effect of the Video
  Assistant Referee on referee's decisions in the Spanish LaLiga." International Journal
  of Sports Science Coaching

[18] Marder, Nancy S. (2014), "Jurors and Social Media: Is a Fair Trial Still Possible,"
  Southern Methodist University Law Review , 67(3), 617-668.

[19] Nevill, A. M., Newell, S. M., and Gale, S. (1996), "Factors associated with home
  advantage in English and Scottish soccer matches," Journal of Sports Sciences, 14(2),
  181-186.

[20] Pettersson-Lidbom, P. and M/ Priks (2010) "Behavior under social pressure:
  empty Italian stadiums and referee bias," Economics Letters 108, 212-214.

[21] Phillipson, Gavin (2008), "Trial by the Media: The Betrayal of the First Amend-
  ment's Purpose," Law & Contemporary Problems, 71(15), 15-29.

                                           34
[22] Scoppa, V. (2021) "Social pressure in the stadiums: Do agents change behavior
  without crowd support?" Journal of Economic Psychology 82, 102344.

[23] Shepherd, Joanna M. (2011), "Measuring Maximizing Judges: Empirical Legal
  Studies, Public Choice Theory, and Judicial Behavior," University of Illinois Law Re-
  view, 2011, 1753-1766.

[24] Steblay, Nancy Mehrkens, Jasmina Besirevic, Solomon M. Fulero, and Be-
  lia Jimenez-Lorente (1999), "The Effects of Pretrial Publicity on Juror Ver-
  dicts:   A Meta-Analytic Review," Law and Human Behavior, 23(2), 219­235.
  doi:10.1023/a:1022325019080.

[25] Sutter, M., and Kocher, M. G. (2004), "Favoritism of agents­the case of referees'
  home bias," Journal of Economic Psychology, 25(4), 461-469.




                                         35
