                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LEARNING ABOUT HOUSING COST:
             SURVEY EVIDENCE FROM THE GERMAN HOUSE PRICE BOOM

                                       Fabian Kindermann
                                         Julia Le Blanc
                                        Monika Piazzesi
                                        Martin Schneider

                                       Working Paper 28895
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28895


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Rudi Bachmann, Theresa Kuchler, Ulrike Malmendier, Charles Nathanson, Tom
Sargent, Johannes Stroebel, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Michael Weber, and seminar participants at
Bonn, Chicago, Deutsche Bundesbank, ECB, Federal Reserve Bank at Cleveland, Harvard,
HULM, Leuven, Manchester, Munich, "Micro and Macro Implications of Household Finance",
NBER Summer Institute, NYU, Queens, UBC, and UC Santa Cruz for helpful comments. A large
part of this paper was written while Julia Le Blanc was a senior research economist at the
Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt. We thank the Deutsche Bundesbank for kindly providing us
with all their available data on house prices and expectations as well as with an excellent research
infrastructure. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Fabian Kindermann, Julia Le Blanc, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning about Housing Cost: Survey Evidence from the German House Price Boom
Fabian Kindermann, Julia Le Blanc, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 28895
June 2021
JEL No. E0,G0,R0

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses new household survey data to study expectation formation during the recent
housing boom in Germany. The cross section of forecasts depends on only two household
characteristics: location and tenure. The average household in a region responds to local
conditions but underpredicts local price growth. Renters make on average higher and hence more
accurate forecasts than owners, although their forecasts are more dispersed and their mean
squared forecast errors are higher. A quantitative model of learning about housing cost can match
these facts. It emphasizes the unique information structure of housing among asset markets:
renters who do not own the asset are relatively well informed about its cash flow, since they pay
for housing services that owners simply consume. Renters then make more accurate forecasts in a
boom driven by an increase in rents and recovery from a financial crisis.


Fabian Kindermann                               Monika Piazzesi
University of Regensburg                        Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         Stanford University
93040 Regensburg                                579 Jane Stanford Way
Germany                                         Stanford, CA 94305-6072
fabian.kindermann@ur.de                         and NBER
                                                piazzesi@stanford.edu
Julia Le Blanc
Joint Research Centre of the                    Martin Schneider
European Commission                             Department of Economics
Via E. Fermi 2749                               Stanford University
Ispra (VA) 21027                                579 Jane Stanford Way
Italy                                           Stanford, CA 94305-6072
julia.le-blanc@ec.europa.eu                     and NBER
                                                schneidr@stanford.edu
1          Introduction

Expectation formation is a key ingredient of any account of asset market fluctuations. Re-
cent literature has turned to survey data to directly measure subjective expectations. For
housing markets, heterogeneity of expectations is particularly important: market partic-
ipants include a diverse group of individual households and booms often go along with
strong regional differences. Moreover, there are only few transactions in housing mar-
kets, and these often involve buyers who are currently renting: households who do not
own the asset before the transaction.1 Unfortunately, these same features have made it
more difficult to measure the expectations that matter in these transactions. During past
booms, such as the US housing boom of the early 2000s, major representative household
surveys did not yet incorporate detailed questions on expectation formation that would
have allowed researchers to explore the distribution of forecasts.

This paper studies expectation formation during the recent German housing boom. We
first use new Bundesbank survey data to characterize quantitative house price forecasts
across regions with different local housing market conditions, controlling for a rich set of
demographics. On average, households underpredict actual house price growth. In the
cross section of households, location and housing tenure are key determinants of price
growth forecasts, while other characteristics such as age, income, wealth, risk aversion,
and financial literacy play only minor roles. On average, renters' price growth forecasts
are 2 percentage points higher, and hence more accurate, than those of owners. At the
same time, the average renter's root mean squared error is more than 1pp higher than
that of the average owner. The differences are sizeable in light of actual growth between
3% and 9% per year, depending on the region.

We then develop a theory of learning about housing cost that can quantitatively account
for our facts on expectation formation. The basic idea is that housing is a special asset
when it comes to information about cash flow. Non-owners, who rent and tend to have
renter neighbors, have easy access to information about cash flow. In contrast, owners di-
rectly consume services from their home (as do their owner neighbors) and thus need not
pay much attention to rent, but get better information about house prices. During a boom
that features strong rent growth as well as recovery from financial distress, knowledge of
rents gives the average renter an edge in forecasting, even though noisier signals about
house prices generate a higher dispersion of forecasts and larger mean squared forecast
errors among renters.

    1 In
       Germany, 58 percent of homeowners who changed their main residence within the last decade were
previously renting. In contrast, only 3 percent of renters who changed their main residence within the
last decade were previously homeowners. These numbers are from the 2014 Panel of Household Finances,
which is further explained below.



                                                  1
In our model, differences in information matter for forecasts because house prices reflect
two persistent factors. First, as in many other asset markets, mean reverting fluctuations
in the stochastic discount factor generate excess volatility in prices over the present values
of future rents. Second, rent growth is itself quite persistent, unlike cash flow growth in
other markets such as equity. In our model, forecasters at any point in time are not sure
which force is driving prices: this is because they observe prices and rents with error,
for example they might sample only a few properties in their area. Those households
who believe a boom is due to rent growth expect the boom to continue ­ they forecast
momentum in price growth. In contrast, those who believe the boom is due to lower
discount rates ­ for example due to lower financial frictions ­ expect mean reversion and
forecast lower price growth.

Our explanation for forecast differences is centered around this signal extraction problem.
By 2010, Germany had seen a long period of decline in price-rent ratios, most recently
reinforced by the global financial crisis. At the same time, rent growth had been slug-
gish. A reasonable initial belief thus had low rent growth and a high discount rate both
contributing to low prices. As the economy recovered and the housing boom got under-
way, owners and renters interpreted price movements differently. Renters were aware of
strong rent growth leading price growth and attributed less of the boom to low discount
rates. Both effects led them to high price growth forecasts. In contrast, owners paid less
attention to rents and hence attributed more of the boom to a recovery, which made them
more pessimistic about its continuation.

Most of our empirical work is based on the 2014 Panel on Household Finances (PHF),
a representative survey by the Bundesbank that asks detailed questions not only about
household income and balance sheets, but also about expectations and behavior. In addi-
tion to measuring forecast distributions, we use PHF data to check a number of premises
of our theory. First, we show that housing is indeed a special asset in that non-owners feel
confident forming an opinion about prices. Indeed, when the survey elicits stock price ex-
pectations, about one half of non-owners take the "don't know" option. In contrast, the
overwhelming majority of renters ­ close to 85% ­ provide a quantitative forecast of house
price growth.

We further show that owners are aware of actual price movements, so their forecasting
mistakes cannot be attributed to a lack of attention to the market. Owners' nowcasts of
how much their own homes have been appreciating are close, on average, to the actual
growth rates. Confidence bounds around these nowcasts are large, consistent with im-
perfect information among owners. Moreover, forecast differences between owners and
renters are not due to whether they have recently moved or plan to move in the near
future, or whether renters plan to buy or not. These findings suggest that endogenous
information acquisition motivated by plans to trade is not behind our findings, and so we


                                              2
do not incorporate it into our model.

Some households own their primary residence as well as other real estate. While such real
estate investors are owners, they have more information about rents than other owners.
Our model predicts that these real estate investors should have forecasts that are higher
than forecasts of other owners, and more similar to renter forecasts. This indeed is the
case in the data.

As a piece of direct evidence on learning, we proposed a question on information acqui-
sition to the Bundesbank's 2019 Online Panel - Households (BOP-HH). In particular, we
elicit the importance of various sources of information households use when forecasting
house prices. Consistent with our approach, the most important source of information
­ mentioned by more than 80% of households ­ is direct observation of prices, a noisy
signal of local conditions. Other sources that aggregate information, such as classical and
social media or financial advisors, play a smaller role. In the cross section, owners look
more at prices, and renters look more at rents, as one would expect. Moreover, more
renters indicate that talking to family and friends is important. Altogether, these findings
support our approach of modeling expectation formation based on noisy signals that re-
flect subjective experience.

Formally, our model describes the joint dynamics of prices and rents perceived by house-
holds. We restrict beliefs to respect a standard asset pricing equation that expresses prices
as a discounted stream of future rents. The equation extends the familiar user cost model
of housing and can be interpreted as the first order condition of a developer who is active
in both housing and rental markets. We further assume that households are aware of the
two persistent factors driving prices, rent growth and the discount rate. Households ob-
serve prices and rents with error, meant to capture their sampling of a few properties that
produces an imperfect signal of current market conditions. Household types ­ owners
and renters ­ are identified by the magnitude of the errors, or equivalently the precision
of their signals. They arrive at forecasts by forming conditional expectations via Bayes'
rule. For a distribution of initial beliefs and a sequence of actual prices and rents, the
model then generates a sequence of forecast distributions for owners and renters.

We quantify the model by inferring parameters of households' subjective belief and in-
formation structure from data on prices and price forecasts. We assume that, at the start
of the boom in 2010, the average owner and renter agree on the price-rent ratio as well as
the underlying discount and rent growth rates. We then identify parameters by matching
means and dispersion of survey forecasts in our 2014 survey data, as well as uncondi-
tional moments of prices and rents in the data. The success of the quantitative exercise is
that the observation of a few years of boom prices can generate the observed divergence
between average owner and renter beliefs, even though signals contain enough noise to
generate observed dispersion in forecasts.

                                             3
Related Literature. We follow a long tradition of studying house price expectations through
the lens of a present-value relationship. Glaeser and Nathanson (2015) survey applica-
tions of the user cost model. The classic challenge is to find a mechanism for expectation
formation about rent growth so that the present value of rents satisfies key properties of
regional house prices: short term momentum (Case and Shiller, 1989, Guren, 2018), long
term reversal (Cutler, Poterba and Summers, 1991, Head, Lloyd-Ellis and Sun, 2014), as
well as excess volatility (Glaeser, Gyourko, Morales and Nathanson, 2014). Many au-
thors have turned to extrapolation from recent price observations, often via non-Bayesian
updating schemes (see, for example, Gelain and Lansing, 2014, Glaeser and Nathanson,
2017 or DeFusco, Nathanson and Zwick, 2018.) This feature also helps generate extrap-
olation in booms, such as documented in survey data from US cities by Case and Shiller
(2003) and Case, Shiller and Thompson (2012), for example. The learning mechanism in
our model relies instead on agents' confusion of persistent rent growth, which generates
momentum ­ as in many user cost models ­ and the discount rate, which generates rever-
sal. We share the emphasis on discount rate volatility with a broader literature in asset
pricing.2

At the heart of our model is differential updating of beliefs based on experience, in our
case for renters and owners who see prices and rents with different precision. The rel-
evance of experience for both expectations and choice has been established by a large
empirical literature. Early work focused on stock return expectations. Vissing-Jorgensen
(2003) and Malmendier and Nagel (2011) documented cohort effects on stock price expec-
tations in the short and long run, respectively. This evidence is consistent with experience-
driven learning models of stock prices such as Cogley and Sargent (2008). In the context
of housing, Malmendier and Steiny (2021) relate inflation experience to home ownership.
Bailey, Cao, Kuchler and Stroebel (2018) show that individuals' home purchase decisions
are related to the experience of their friends on social networks. Kuchler and Zafar (2019)
document that households' views about both first and second moments of future house
prices are affected by recent local price observations. Armona, Fuster and Zafar (2019)
describe an information experiment, in which individuals revise forecasts when they are
told the actual recent price experience in their region. These results are consistent with
our assumption that households do not have a firm view of "the market price of housing",
but instead base their forecasts on noisy signals.

There is limited work on heterogeneity of beliefs between renters and owners. Favara

  2 The typical statistical decomposition of price-dividend ratios for equity in Campbell and Shiller (1988)
attributes the overwhelming majority of variation to discount rate news. For an analogous result for US
aggregate housing indices, see Campbell, Davis, Gallin and Martin (2009). Our exercise does not assume
properties of this statistical decomposition but instead infers a subjective version of it. Here we follow De la
O and Myers (2019) who use analyst forecasts to derive a subjective decomposition of price-dividend ratio
movements for equity; their main result is that most variation comes from cash flow news. See Lewellen
and Shanken (2002) for a Bayesian learning model that is consistent with this result.


                                                       4
and Song (2014) develop a theoretical model of the housing market with asymmetric in-
formation: in equilibrium more optimistic agents sort into ownership, whereas renters are
more pessimistic. Our results suggest that asymmetric information is indeed important,
but that sorting does not occur right away during a boom, perhaps because of transaction
costs. It is plausible, however, that the belief differences we document lead to trade; since
renter-owner transitions are a large share of housing market volume, they may thereby
have a large effect on transaction prices.3 Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2018) measure
households' perceptions of house price risk and show that renters view housing as riskier
than owners. In our model, renters' subjective variance of house prices is also higher than
that of owners. Indeed, while renters have better signals of rent, they rely on noisier sig-
nals of prices. As a result, they perceive high uncertainty about the discount rate, which
accounts for the bulk of price volatility.

Finally, our work relates to an emerging literature that incorporates survey evidence on
expectations into quantitative models of housing choice and house prices. Landvoigt
(2017) as well as Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2020) have emphasized the role of expec-
tations for the 2000s housing boom in the US. Leombroni, Piazzesi, Schneider and Rogers
(2020) study how heterogeneous inflation expectations affected house prices and interest
rates in the 1970s. Ludwig, Mankart, Quintana, Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2020) show
how heterogeneous beliefs drive price dynamics in the recent Dutch housing boom-bust
cycle; they also rely on a dataset with detailed income, balance sheet and expectations
information at the household level. In this paper we approach the relationship between
survey expectations and prices from the opposite side: rather than establish an effect of
the distribution of beliefs on prices, we derive distributions of beliefs from price (and
rent) histories.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents historical data on the housing mar-
ket in Germany. Section 3 introduces the survey data and documents key stylized facts
about the cross section of house price growth forecasts. Section 4 provides direct evidence
on the information sets of renters and owners. Section 5 presents the model and its quan-
titative implications. The appendix contains details about the data, empirical results, and
model derivations.
  3 Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) study a search model with heterogeneous beliefs and short sale con-
straints and show how entry of a small share of optimistic agents can have a large price impact. See Gao,
Sockin and Xiong (2020) for a model where information frictions in housing affect migration and local
capital accumulation.




                                                   5
2      Housing in Germany

In this section, after describing the institutional features of the German housing and rental
market, we provide an overview of recent price and rent movements in Germany. In the
aftermath of the financial crisis, Germany emerged from a decades-long housing slump.
The boom saw an initial acceleration in rents followed by a boom in prices and price-rent
ratios. New regional price data further show substantial regional heterogeneity, with a
stronger boom starting earlier in major metropolitan areas.


2.1     Institutional Background

The German housing market is characterized by a low homeownership rate. Between
2010 and 2017 the share of households owning their main residence ranged around 44
percent, compared with about 60 percent in the Euro area as a whole. Germany has
high transfer taxes on buying real estate, no mortgage interest tax deductions for owner-
occupiers, and strong renter protections, see for example Kaas, Kocharkov, Preugschat
and Siassi (2020) and Weber and Lee (2018). Overall, the rental market is very well de-
veloped and households are able to find rental housing in essentially all locations and
quality segments.

The German rental market offers housing units of different qualities. Compared to the
U.S., where the markets for owner-occupied and rental units are highly segmented, the
German housing markets are far more integrated. For example, there are rental units
among single family homes and townhouses in the top quality segment. As a result, rent-
ing is a choice made by a broad part of the population. In fact, in 2014 the homeownership
rate in the top income decile was only 71 percent, while the CPS reports a number of al-
most 84 percent for the US. Even in the top net wealth quintile, there are 12 percent of
households who rent their primary residence in Germany.


2.2     Average house price and rent data

Our housing data come from bulwiengesa AG, a leading German real estate data and
consulting firm. For the period since 2005, they provide average transaction prices and
market rents in each of the 401 German counties, measured in Euros per square meter.4
For each county, we observe separate price indices by dwelling type (single-family house,
town house as well as existing and newly built apartments), while for rentals we have

    4 Throughout,we use the term "county" to denote both "Kreise" ­ the administrative subdivision above
a municipality ­ and "kreisfreie Staedte" ­ cities that are not part of any "Kreis" but provide the services of
a "Kreis" at the municipality level.


                                                      6
separate rent indices for existing and newly built apartments. To compare prices to survey
forecasts below, we would like to measure the value of the typical house in a region ­
the subject of the survey question ­ as opposed to the average transaction price. We
would also like to aggregate price data to larger regions for which we have enough data
to meaningfully measure average forecasts.

We thus build price indices for Germany as a whole as well as four regions that differ in
average growth rates. We aggregate county level indices to larger regions ­ for example,
all of Germany ­ using survey weights from the 2014 Bundesbank's Panel on House-
hold Finances (PHF), a representative country-wide survey that we also use to measure
forecasts (described in more detail below).5 For every household in the survey, we know
county and dwelling type. We can thus compute, for any region, the weighted average lo-
cal rent or house price using the information on dwelling types of all survey respondents
living in a region. The advantage of this approach ­ over weighting prices by transac-
tions ­ is that the composition of our price indices resembles as closely as possible the
composition of average forecasts in the survey. If the survey is indeed representative,
then so are our actual price indices and average forecasts. In Appendix A we provide
more information on the weighting procedures.

Figure 1 summarizes our data on house prices and rents. The left panel shows the be-
havior of Germany-wide aggregates: average house prices (solid line, left axis) and rental
prices (dashed line, right axes) since the year 2005. Both price series are in Euros per
square meter. During the years 2005-2020, house prices increased by 68 percent, while
rental prices only increased by 46 percent. Consequently, the average price-rent ratio in-
creased by almost 40 percent. We arranged the axes so that the price series start at exactly
the same point in 2005 and growth rates are comparable between the two series. The
graph shows that house prices stagnated until 2010, while rents were already growing
since 2005. This combination led to a fall in the price-rent ratio from 2005 to 2010. Af-
ter 2010, the growth rate of house prices outpaced the growth rate of rents, so that the
price-rent ratio started to increase.


2.3    House price and rent data by region

Different regions in Germany have fared very differently during the housing boom. To
document this regional heterogeneity, we divide the 401 counties into four "growth re-
gions", that is, quartiles according to trend nominal house price growth over the decade
2010-2020. Here trend growth is the slope of a linear regression of the log house price on
time. The right panel of Figure 1 shows the evolution of house prices (solid lines) across

  5 Reassuringly, when we weight county indices using Census data on county population sizes in the year
2014 instead of survey weights, we obtain very similar price indices.


                                                   7
                                                             Figure 1: House and Rental Prices Across Regions

                                                  Price (left axis)                   10
                                     2600                                                                                                                                 280
 Average House Price (Euros / sqm)




                                                                                            Average Rental Price (Euros / sqm)
                                                  Rent (right axis)                   9.5




                                                                                                                                     Normalized Price (base year: 2005)
                                                                                                                                                                          260
                                     2400                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                          240
                                                                                      8.5
                                     2200                                                                                                                                 220
                                                                                      8
                                     2000                                             7.5                                                                                 200
                                                                                      7                                                                                   180
                                     1800
                                                                                      6.5                                                                                 160
                                     1600                                             6                                                                                   140
                                                                                      5.5
                                     1400                                                                                                                                 120
                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                     1200
                                            2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                                                2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018   2020



                                       (a) Average house prices and rents                                                                                                  (b) High versus low growth regions
House prices are solid lines, rental prices are dotted lines. Panel (a) measures the national average of house
prices on the left axis, rents on the right axis both in Euros per square meter. Panel (b) shows house prices
in four growth regions (counties sorted into quartiles based on their trend growth over the years 2010-2020)
normalized so that 100 corresponds to the national average in 2005. The rental series are normalized to
the same value as the corresponding price series in 2005. Source: Own calculations based on data from
bulwiengesa AG, PHF and OECD.


growth regions since 2005, normalized so that a level of 100 corresponds to the national
average in 2005. There are large regional differences in the strength of the boom: in the
high growth region, house prices more than double during the boom, while in the low
growth region house prices increase by merely 25%. Moreover, the boom worked its way
slowly through the regions: it started earlier in the highest growth region, with the first
strong growth rate in 2011, whereas in the lowest growth region prices began to pick up
only in 2014. The figure also shows the evolution of rental prices (dotted lines). Here we
have normalized the rent series for each region to start in 2005 at the same values as the
house price in the same region, in order to allow for a simple comparison of price and
rent within regions. In all regions, rents began to grow before prices, but have now been
overtaken in all but the lowest growth region.

To understand which regions belong to the faster growing regions, we produce a map
of German counties in the left panel of Figure 2, with different colors indicating differ-
ences in the extent of trend house price growth. (The color coding is the same as in the
right panel of Figure 1). High house price growth is concentrated in larger cities, and in
particular the metropolitan area of München and surrounding Bavarian cities such as In-
golstadt. Low growth is prevalent in more rural areas, but also the Ruhr area, the largest
historical coal mining region in Germany now in decline. In the right panel of Figure
2, we correlate trend house price growth (measured on the vertical axis) with the house
price at the beginning of the housing boom (in the year 2010, measured on the horizontal


                                                                                                                                 8
                      Figure 2: House Prices and Growth Across Germany




                                                                    12
                                                      Trend Growth HP 2010-20 (in %)
                                                        2     4     6
                                                                    0     8      10


                                                                                       500   1000      1500     2000       2500       3000   3500
                                                                                                    SQM House Price in 2010 (in Euro)




             xxx low growth   xxx medium low growth         xxx medium high growth                            xxx high growth

              Source: Own calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG and PHF.



axis). Many regions that have been growing the most began with relatively high prices in
the years before the boom. Thus, the boom was not a period of convergence for different
regions, but instead amplified regional differences. Since the relative ranking in housing
affordability of different areas has not changed during this decade, the new media often
focuses its coverage on the seven most expensive cities, which are referred to as the "Big
Seven" (in English language for emphasis) and colored in pink in our map: München,
Frankfurt, Hamburg, Berlin, Stuttgart, Düsseldorf, and Köln.


2.4   The house price boom in historical perspective

The detailed county-level dataset for Germany covers a relatively short sample. To pro-
vide a historical perspective of housing markets in Germany, the green line in the left
panel of Figure 3 shows a Germany-wide house price index going back to the 1970s. This
"official" index is calculated by the Deutsche Bundesbank and also used, for example,


                                                      9
by the OECD and the BIS. The underlying data consists of house prices in a sample of
50 German cities during the 1970s and 1980s. After reunification, the number of sample
cities was extended to 100 and successively to 125. Finally, starting from 2005, the Bun-
desbank uses data on the full set of 401 counties from bulwiengesa AG and combines it
with data from other providers. Because of these changes in methodology, there are sev-
eral structural breaks in the series, which make it rather difficult to interpret its evolution
over time.

To obtain a more consistent series, we obtain house price data for 50 German cities since
the 1970s from bulwiengesa AG, and select those 28 cities that are in the highest growth
region during the current house price boom. The house price data only has prices for
newly built apartments going back to 1970s, which are always higher than prices for
existing properties. We therefore use the county-level data to compute a short house
price series for all properties in the 28 cities for 2005-2020. We then rescale our long series
for newly built apartments so that it matches the short series on average (over the years
2005-2020). The left panel of Figure 3 shows the long house price data on newly built
apartments (in blue) and the short series based on detailed data (in grey with black dots.)
We see that the difference between the two series is only in levels. Rescaling the long-run
newly build price series makes the two lines almost indistinguishable. It is reassuring
that the long series is actually a good proxy for the overall housing market performance
in these 28 cities. Our long series is similar to the official German aggregate house price
index during the 1970s and 1980s, but the two series diverge somewhat starting in the
1990s and show a remarkably different behavior starting in 2005.

With our house prices index for the same 28 cities, we can now interpret the evolution of
house prices over time. The blue line in the left panel of Figure 3 shows that the current
house price boom was an unusual development. Nominal house prices approximately
doubled over the two decades between 1975 and 1995 and then stagnated for about 15
years. In the recent house price boom starting in 2010, house prices more than doubled
over a single decade. This is an exceptional event in the history of German house prices.
Note that, when looking at the official price series, one might come to a different con-
clusion, namely that the current house price growth is merely a return to long-run trend
growth and not an exceptional boom. However, the consistent series for 28 cities in the
highest growth region over the course of 45 years brings us to a different conclusion.

The right panel of Figure 3 shows the long-run rent data from bulwiengesa AG (for newly
built and existing apartments) which coincides with the detailed data we have available
for our 28 sample cities since 2005. The green line in this figure is the OECD's rent price
index, where we normalized prices to the same level in 2005. The two rent series histor-
ically show quite some similarity, albeit the fact that bulwiengesa uses transaction data
while the OECD calculates rents based on the rent component of the CPI. Only in the


                                              10
                                                                       Figure 3: Long house price and rent data

                                     5000
                                                  28 Cities (long run)                                                           12       28 Cities (long run)
 Average House Price (Euros / sqm)




                                                  28 Cities (detailed data since 2005)                                                    28 Cities (detailed data since 2005)




                                                                                              Average Rent Price (Euros / sqm)
                                     4500                                                                                        11
                                                  German House Price Index (official)                                                     OECD rent data
                                     4000                                                                                        10

                                     3500                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                  8
                                     3000
                                                                                                                                  7
                                     2500                                                                                         6
                                     2000                                                                                         5

                                     1500                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                  3
                                     1000
                                         1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                                        1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020


                                                    (a) House price                                                                                   (b) Rent
                                            Source: Own calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG, PHF and OECD.



current boom do we see a strong divergence between the series, which is quite consistent
with what we observe for prices. The reason is that our 28 cities are a select sample of
what happened in Germany as a whole. However, they are a consistent sample over the
course of 45 years, allowing us to analyze the strength of the German house price boom.

Figure 4 shows the house price-rent ratio (left panel) as well as rent growth (right panel)
calculated from the price and rent series of the 28 cities presented above. During the infla-
tion of the 1970s and '80s, the price-rent ratio was extraordinarily high (as in many other
countries, see Figure 2 in Piazzesi and Schneider (2008)). Starting in the mid 1980s, the
price-rent ratio began to fall continuously, owing to the poor performance in house price
growth. This long episode of a falling price-rent ratio is only briefly interrupted by some
turbulence in the rental market after German reunification in the 1990s. The price-rent
ratio reached its trough at around 21.5 in 2010 and then increased to almost 30 in 2020,
about a 40% increase. While extraordinary in speed, the 2010s boom in house prices still
represents a recovery from a slump in the price-rent ratio since the Great Inflation. Rent
growth, in the right panel of Figure 4, spiked once in the 1980s and then again quickly
after reunification, as migrants from the East pushed into West German cities. This last
episode of high rent growth, however, was accompanied by a "correction" period of neg-
ative nominal rent growth in the late 1990s. After the financial crises, rents again picked
up growth, much earlier than house prices.




                                                                                         11
                                      Figure 4: House Price-Rent Ratio and Rent Growth in Germany

                       34                                                                           0.15

                       32
                                                                                                    0.10




                                                                              Nominal Rent Growth
                       30
 Price-to-Rent Ratio




                                                                                                    0.05
                       28

                       26
                                                                                                    0.00

                       24
                                                                                                    -0.05
                       22

                       20                                                                           -0.10
                         1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                               1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020


                                (a) House price-rent ratio                                                         (b) Rent growth
                                Source: Own calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG and PHF.



3                           Household forecasts of house price growth

Our main source for households' price expectations is the Panel on Household Finances
(PHF), a representative survey of German households conducted every three years by
the Deutsche Bundesbank. The survey collects data on household portfolios, consump-
tion and income; the extent of detail on financial decisions resembles the US Federal Re-
serve Board's Survey of Consumer Finances. We mostly focus on the second survey wave
which sampled 4,168 households in early 2014. We also perform some robustness checks
drawing on 2017 data.

Our analysis makes use of two key strengths of the PHF. First, recent waves of the sur-
vey ask not only about actual decisions, but also contain a large number of questions on
expectations of asset prices, as well as on households' attitudes and investment plans.
Second, we can study expectations by region. Indeed, the survey question at the center of
our analysis asks households about regional house price growth over the next 12 months.
We have access to a restricted version of the dataset that allows us to match households
to the counties they live in, and hence the growth regions defined in Section 2.

Beliefs about regional house prices are elicited via a two-part question. First, respondents
are asked to give a qualitative view about the direction of the housing market (question
dhni0900):

                            What do you think, how will real estate prices in your area change in the next twelve
                            months?

There are six candidate answers: (i) increase significantly, (ii) increase somewhat, (iii)

                                                                         12
stay about the same, (iv) decrease somewhat, (v) decrease significantly, and (vi) don't
know/no answer. Second, respondents who give a positive or negative direction, that
is, they answer (i), (ii), (iv) or (v) are then asked the follow-up quantitative question
(dhni0950):

      What do you think, by what percentage will real estate prices rise / fall in your area
      over the next 12 months?

We focus on households who have an opinion about the housing market and hence drop
everyone who responds "don't know" to the first question; we come back to these house-
holds when discussing information sets in Section 4 below. Our quantitative measure of
price expectations then codes response (iii) as zero and uses the quantitative answer for
the second question for all other households. After dropping the bottom and top 1 per-
cent of house price forecasts from the distribution in order to guard against outliers, we
are left with a total of 3,647 observations.


3.1   The cross section of household forecasts

In this section, we run regressions of household forecasts on household characteristics.
The idea is to find out whether there are systematic differences of opinion between house-
holds along observable dimensions. We start with simple linear regressions and then
proceed to nonlinear specifications. The dependent variable in all specifications is our
quantitative measure of one-year-ahead expected house price growth in the region where
the household lives. Average expected price growth among households in early 2014 was
3.1%, substantially below the subsequently realized growth rate of 5%.

Our choice of regressors fall into three broad categories. First, we consider characteris-
tics that typically serve as state variables in life cycle models of household behavior, in
particular, age, wealth, income and housing tenure. Second, the PHF asks questions that
elicit risk aversion, financial literacy and patience. In economic models, these behavioral
traits would typically correspond to features of preferences. Finally, to account for hetero-
geneity in local housing markets, we include variables that capture geography and house
quality. Appendix B describes all variables used in regression tables and figures in detail.

Table 1 reports results from linear regressions. Different columns correspond to differ-
ent sets of regressors. To save space, we list regressors here only if their coefficients are
significantly different from zero at the one percent level in at least one specification. Full
results, together with clustered standard errors, are in Appendix C. Column (1) shows
that typical drivers of savings and portfolio choice ­ age, income and wealth ­ are weakly
correlated with household expectations. The regressors are dummies indicating ten year

                                               13
             Table 1: The cross section of house price growth forecasts in 2014

                                              (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
    Demographics, Income, Wealth
    Age Group 30­39                           1.365          1.315     0.957     0.711     0.371
                                             (0.591)        (0.587)   (0.578)   (0.566)   (0.582)
    1st Net Wealth Quartile                   1.903          1.906     0.132     0.024    -0.274
                                             (0.494)        (0.503)   (0.567)   (0.552)   (0.553)
    2nd Net Wealth Quartile                   0.939          0.980    -0.197    -0.149    -0.159
                                             (0.448)        (0.441)   (0.467)   (0.454)   (0.459)
    Behavioral Traits                                        yes        yes       yes       yes
    Tenure
    Renter                                                             2.438     2.342     2.087
                                                                      (0.382)   (0.371)   (0.378)
    Growth Region
    Low                                                                         -2.063 -1.559
                                                                                (0.439) (0.427)
    Medium Low                                                                  -1.578 -1.450
                                                                                (0.433) (0.434)
    High                                                                         1.368     1.019
                                                                                (0.416)   (0.399)
    Housing/Regional Characteristics
    City Center  500k Inh.                                                                 1.762
                                                                                          (0.720)
    Sqm size/100                                                                          -1.619
                                                                                          (0.617)
    (Sqm size/100)2                                                                        0.423
                                                                                          (0.127)
    Number of Cases                          3647           3646       3646      3646      3598
    R2                                       0.038          0.042      0.063     0.119     0.142
    Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01



age bins for the age of the household head, income quartiles and net worth quartiles, as
well as the number of household members and whether the household head is college
educated. The main finding is that young (below age 40) and poor (in the bottom 25% by
net worth) households expect about 1.5-2 percentage point (abbreviated pp below) higher
price growth compared to older and richer households.

Column (2) introduces three behavioral traits. The PHF measures self-assessed risk aver-
sion by asking households to answer "Are you in general a risk-taking person or do you
try to avoid risks?" on an eleven point scale from 0 ("not at all ready to take risks") to
10 ("very willing to take risks"). Similarly, patience is the response to "Are you in gen-
eral a person who is patient or do you tend to be impatient?" again on an eleven point


                                                       14
scale from "very patient" to "very impatient". Finally, financial literacy is assessed by
asking households three common questions that test their understanding of compound
interest, nominal versus real rates of return, and portfolio diversification. We aggregate
answers into a score equal to the number of correct answers, from zero to three. In a
linear regression, adding behavioral traits marginally improves explanatory power, but
otherwise does not change coefficients.

Column (3) introduces housing tenure, which is a strong predictor of price growth ex-
pectations. Indeed, households who rent the property they live in forecast almost 2.5pp
higher price growth than homeowners. Moreover, much of the explanatory power from
other demographics in columns (1) and (2) was due to the fact that young and poor house-
holds are more likely to rent ­ coefficients on age and net worth in column (3) are smaller
in magnitude and lose significance. In fact, if we regress respondents' price growth fore-
casts on tenure alone, excluding all other variables, we also find a highly significant differ-
ence of about 2.5pp, as well as an R2 of 0.05, close to the .063 in column (3). We conclude
that housing tenure is a sufficient statistic for forecasts, given household characteristics
like age, income, wealth, and behavioral traits.

A simple candidate explanation for this result is composition. Suppose that renters live
predominantly in larger cities that also experience higher price growth. Suppose further
that all residents of a city share the same opinion about local markets. Tenure might then
appear like a good predictor of forecasts, because it is the best proxy for region, better than
say, age or wealth. It is therefore important to control for region in order to understand
the effect of tenure. An analogous composition effect might arise within regions. We know
that housing booms often feature heterogeneity of capital gains by market segment ­ for
example, lower quality houses, might become relatively scarce and increase more in price
than the top end of the market. If those properties are in areas with more renters, we
might naturally see higher price forecasts by renters. This effect calls for another set of
controls that capture house quality.

Column (4) shows that tenure generates large significant differences in forecasts even
controlling for region. We include dummies for three of our four growth regions, with the
medium high growth region as base level. We do find that price growth forecasts align
with local housing market conditions: residents of regions that have seen higher growth
also forecast higher growth. The difference in average forecasts between the lowest and
highest growth region is 3.4pp, about half the 6.25pp difference in realized growth rates
between these regions over the year 2013, right before the survey was taken. Regional
variation is important for explaining variation in forecasts: the R2 now increases to 0.12.
At the same time, the coefficient on tenure barely changes: unlike age and wealth, tenure
is not a proxy for region. Appendix C shows similar results for a specification with more
granular controls for the household's past house price growth experience.


                                              15
Column (5) shows that the result persists when we add additional regional and housing
characteristics. In particular, we control for the time span the household already lived in
its current residence, the community size on a 10 point scale, whether the household lives
in a city center or in the periphery, whether the building the household lives in needs
renovation and a general rating of the dwelling quality on different levels in between
"Very Simple" and "Exclusive". The one variable that plays a sizeable role in accounting
for forecast variation is whether the household lives at the center of a very large city.
Large city dwellers forecast higher price growth, and since they often rent, this reduces
the coefficient on tenure slightly, to just above 2pp.

We also have data on the square meter size of the house or apartment, and column (5)
includes both size and its squared value to accommodate possible nonlinear effects. While
both coefficients are significant, the overall relevance of size if minor. The average size
of a residence in our sample is around 100 square meters with most variation between
50 and 200 square meters. The coefficients thus imply a significant negative relationship
between the size of the household's residence and house price forecasts. At the same time,
size adds little explanatory power. If we include only square meter size and its squared
value into the regression on top of the regressors in column (4) the R2 only increases to
0.126, indicating that the predictive power of the size of the residence is limited.


3.2   The role of tenure for expectations

The previous section has shown that, in a linear regression setting, only two variables
are relevant for explaining households' forecasts: tenure and location. To understand
further the economic mechanism behind the role of tenure, this section goes beyond linear
regressions. We report specifications that interact tenure with household characteristics,
in order to understand whether the difference between renters and owners is driven by
particular subgroups of households.

Table 3 again reports regressions of forecasts on predictors. Column (1) reproduces the
last column of Table 2 that includes tenure, growth region as well as many other controls.
These variables enter all specifications in Table 3, too. In addition, columns (2)-(4) interact
tenure with age, risk aversion and financial literacy, respectively. In each case, we divide
the characteristic into two bins and define dummies for one of them. We have run similar
regressions with finer bins as well as with all the other characteristics included in Table 2
above. The three variables shown here are the ones for which we obtained quantitatively
large, but not necessarily significant, coefficients.

Column (2) shows that the forecast differences between owners and renters are driven by
mostly young and middle aged households, but are much weaker for households over 70.


                                              16
The baseline renter below 70 forecasts 2.3pp higher house price growth than an owner un-
der 70. In contrast, a renter above 70 predicts only about one percent higher growth than
an owner over 70. Results on age are interesting also because there is existing evidence
that forecasts ­ for example of inflation ­ are systematically related to experience. We al-
ready know from Table 2 that age by itself does not play an important role. A new point
here is that there is a systematic difference between young and old renters; the latter fore-
cast one 1pp lower growth. At the same time, we do not see a significant difference for
owners. In light of these findings, we do not pursue the role of age as a predictor in our
model below.

Columns (3) and (4) consider the role of risk aversion. We first consider the generic mea-
sure of self-assessed risk attitude introduced above (in Section 3.1). The finding here is
that forecast differences between renters and owners are less pronounced among house-
holds with below median risk aversion. Indeed, the baseline in column (3) is an owner
with above median risk aversion, and a renter with above median risk aversion forecasts
2.8pp higher price growth. In contrast, the difference between owners and renters with
below median risk aversion is only about 1pp. A possible explanation is that forecasts are
guided by fear: renters worry about higher house prices whereas owners worry about
lower prices. As a result, renters respond more to news about high prices that are bad
for them, which leads to high forecasts, whereas owners incorporate gloomy information
into gloomy forecasts. If the effect is moreover stronger for more risk averse households,
this is consistent with a larger gap between renters and owner for that group.

To further investigate the "fear hypothesis", we consider a second measure of risk aver-
sion that more directly asks households about the risk-return tradeoff in an investment
context: If savings or investment decisions are made in your household: Which of the statements
on list 5.9 best describes the attitude toward risk? Try to characterize the household as a whole,
even if it is not always easy. Households are asked to select one out of the five statements:
"We take significant risks and want to generate high returns.", "We take above-average
risks and want to generate above-average returns", "We take average risks and want to
generate average returns", "We are not ready to take any financial risks". We again split
households into two bins at the median.

Column (4) reruns the regression with this second measure, labeled "Financial risk aver-
sion". Coefficients are now small and not significant. The two measures thus appear to
measure different concepts. The result is puzzling since the coefficient on the first, generic
risk aversion measure is significant only for owners, so the role of risk aversion appears
to be more relevant for owners, who make investment decisions ­ not simple goods pur-
chase decisions ­ in the housing market. One would thus expect to find some effect also
for considerations of the risk-return tradeoff picked up by the second measure. Relatedly,
we show in Section 4.3 below that owners' price growth forecasts do not depend on the


                                               17
            Table 2: Interactions with Age, Risk Aversion, and Financial Literacy

                                  (1)            (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
   Tenure
   Renter                         2.087      2.372           2.800     2.212     2.153     3.277
                                 (0.378)    (0.402)         (0.448)   (0.470)   (0.371)   (0.543)
   Tenure × Age
   Renter ×  70                             -0.988                                        -1.139
                                            (0.632)                                       (0.637)
   Owner ×  70                               0.275                                         0.292
                                            (0.453)                                       (0.453)
   Tenure × Risk Aversion
   Renter × Below Median                                    -0.820                        -0.905
                                                            (0.501)                       (0.503)
   Owner × Below Median                                      0.961                         1.106
                                                            (0.297)                       (0.309)
   Tenure × Financial Risk Aversion
   Renter × Below Median                                              -0.352              -0.183
                                                                      (0.511)             (0.502)
   Owner × Below Median                                               -0.074              -0.262
                                                                      (0.277)             (0.284)
   Tenure × Financial Literacy
   Renter × Very Low                                                             0.766     0.782
                                                                                (1.179)   (1.161)
   Owner × Very Low                                                              3.829     3.910
                                                                                (2.741)   (2.753)
   Growth Region
   Low                         -1.559 -1.558 -1.556 -1.571 -1.538 -1.536
                               (0.427) (0.426) (0.427) (0.427) (0.421) (0.419)
   Medium Low                  -1.450 -1.437 -1.470 -1.442 -1.423 -1.433
                               (0.434) (0.433) (0.432) (0.434) (0.432) (0.430)
   High                           1.019      1.001           1.012     1.000     1.044     1.022
                                 (0.399)    (0.399)         (0.395)   (0.400)   (0.398)   (0.395)
   Controls                       Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes
   Number of Cases               3598        3598            3598      3594     3598       3594
   R-Square                      0.142       0.143           0.147     0.142    0.143      0.152
   Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01



time owners plan to remain in their current residence; if answers were guided by fear,
then owners who plan to sell sooner should worry more about low price growth. In sum,
we note that while there is some interesting interaction between risk attitude and tenure,
the results are not strong enough to assign a special role for risk attitude in our modeling
exercise.



                                                       18
Column (5) shows that forecast differences between owners and renters are driven by
households who are reasonably financially literate. We observe a stark discrepancy in
forecasts between households who did not answer any of the three test questions cor-
rectly, labeled "very low literacy".6 Illiterate owners have average price growth forecasts
that are 3.9pp higher than for other owners, while illiterate renters have forecasts that
are only 0.9pp lower than illiterate owners. Financially illiterate households as a whole
thus have unusually high growth expectations regardless of tenure. This result suggests
that the difference between owners and renters cannot be attributed entirely to unsophis-
ticated reasoning. Instead, the mechanism behind it must also apply to the most literate
households.


3.3   The distribution of forecasts by growth region

In this section, we take a closer look at distributions ­ mean and dispersion ­ of renter
and owner forecasts by growth region. The figures here interact the key predictor of
forecasts established in the previous sections. They also provide us with targets that our
quantitative model below will be required to match.

Figure 5 shows mean forecasts by region and how they compare to realized price growth.
The wide red bars in the left panel are average renter forecasts in the four regions; whiskers
indicate the 95 percent confidence interval. Narrow bars represent realized price growth
in the respective growth region. Any differences in the height of bars for a region reflect
forecast errors made by the average renter in 2014. The right panel repeats the exercise
for owners, whose average forecasts are wide yellow bars; the narrow bars represent the
same realizations as in the left panel.

The figure summarizes three robust patterns. First, households generally underpredict
house price growth. With the exception of renters in the lowest growth region, all price
growth forecasts lie below realized price growth, and most of them are significantly dif-
ferent from realized growth. Second, households' forecasts are consistent with regional
differences in the sense that forecasts in low growth regions are lower than those in high
growth regions, regardless of tenure status. Third, within each of the different growth
regions, we find that renters make higher forecasts than owners.

Figure 6 considers the cross sectional mean squared error in households' forecasts. Again
the left panel shows renters and the right panel shows owners, each with four bars for the
four growth regions. An individual household's forecast error is defined as the squared
difference between realized growth ­ common to all individuals in the region ­ and the
individual forecast. The mean squared forecast error for a group of households can there-

  6 Note   that such households only constitute 3.9 percent of our total sample.


                                                      19
fore be decomposed into two parts: the squared average forecast error ­ indicated by
light colors in the figure ­ and the (cross sectional) variance of the forecasts. The squared
average forecast error reflects the mistake made by the average owner or renter, as shown
already in Figure 5. The variances reflect differences of opinions within the groups of
renters and owners.

In all growth regions, renters exhibit a larger mean squared forecast error than owners.
The result is entirely driven by the wide dispersion in renters' individual forecasts. As we
have seen above, renters' average forecast is in fact closer to the actual growth realization
everywhere. At first sight, the finding might speak against an informational explanation
for the forecast differences ­ indeed, in a simple model where agents predict an unknown
parameter from noisy signals, the unconditional mean squared error of a better-informed
agent (that is, an agent with a more precise signal) is always below that of a less-informed
agent. However, the result here is about errors conditional on a particular realization.
Renters, even though their information is more noisy, can thus be "in the right place at
the right time" during a boom that featured strong rent growth. Our model below formal-
izes this point and shows how learning from different information can jointly rationalize
means and dispersions of forecasts.

As a final point, we describe how we aggregate findings by region into single numbers
for Germany as whole. We find this useful because the patterns on differences between
renters and owners we have shown in this section ­ as well as others that follow below
­ are qualitatively very similar across growth regions. We can thus streamline the expo-
sition by presenting summary numbers at the national level, rather than always showing
each region separately. However, aggregation must take into account that forecasts reflect
regional growth, and renters and owners are not equally distributed across Germany.


                                           Figure 5: House Price Growth Forecasts by Tenure and Growth Region in 2014
                                                        Renter                                                                                 Owner
                                      10                                                                                        10
 House Price Growth Forecast (in %)




                                                                                           House Price Growth Forecast (in %)




                                       9                                                                                         9
                                       8                                                                                         8
                                       7                                                                                         7
                                       6                                                                                         6
                                       5                                                                                         5
                                       4                                                                                         4
                                       3                                                                                         3
                                       2                                                                                         2
                                       1                                                                                         1
                                       0                                                                                         0
                                             Low    Medium Low   Medium High   High                                                  Low   Medium Low   Medium High   High


                                                   Source: Own calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG and PHF.



                                                                                      20
                                      Figure 6: Cross sectional MSE of House Price Growth Forecasts in 2014
                                                      Renter                                                                                     Owner
                               45                                                                                             45
                                          Variance of forecasts
                               40         Squared average forecast error                                                      40
 Decomposition of MSE (in %)




                                                                                                Decomposition of MSE (in %)
                               35                                                                                             35

                               30                                                                                             30

                               25                                                                                             25

                               20                                                                                             20

                               15                                                                                             15

                               10                                                                                             10

                                5                                                                                              5

                                0                                                                                              0
                                    Low         Medium Low       Medium High        High                                           Low       Medium Low   Medium High   High


                                               Source: Own calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG and PHF.



The first two columns of Table 3 show the distribution of households across growth re-
gions by tenure type using our sample weights: renters are relatively more likely to live
in cities where house price growth has been high and that therefore belong to the higher
growth regions. Even if owners and renters in each region made the exact same forecasts,
but differed by region, a simple average would therefore show relatively higher forecasts
from renters. We do not want this composition effect to inflate national level forecast
differences.

                                                 Table 3: Distribution across growth regions by tenure type

                                                                                                                                                  Reweighted for
                                                                               PHF Sample Weights                                                Composition Effect
                                          Growth Region                        Renter      Owner                                     Total      Renter      Owner
                                          Low Growth                           16.52       21.34                                     18.84       18.84       18.84
                                          Medium Low Growth                    20.42       27.62                                     23.88       23.88       23.88
                                          Medium High Growth                   25.17       29.07                                     27.04       27.04       27.04
                                          High Growth                          37.89       21.97                                     30.24       30.24       30.24
                                          Sample Share                         51.95       48.05                                    100.00       51.95       48.05




We aggregate forecasts across growth regions by reweighting: we scale the sample weights
for households in a tenure cell and growth region so that the distribution of households
across growth regions becomes the same for renters and owners. In particular, both dis-
tributions become equal to the distribution of all households across regions shown in the
third column; since the construction of regions did not weigh counties by populations, the
high growth region that contains larger cities is more populated. To get from the original


                                                                                           21
to the reweighted distribution, involves, for example, reducing (increasing) the sample
weight of renters (owners) in the top region.

The reweighted distribution does not generate the above composition effect: if all renters
and owners in each region made the same forecast but differed by region, then the average
forecast for Germany would also be equal. Figure 7 reports the full sample averages of
house price growth forecasts by tenure status using both the original sample weights as
well as the weights that control for household composition. We find a relatively small
difference between the two weighting schemes; nevertheless we employ our reweighting
scheme in what follows to guard against composition effects.


                   Figure 7: House Price Growth Forecasts by Tenure

                                                        6
                                                                                               Reweighted for
                                                                Original Weights
                   House Price Growth Forecast (in %)




                                                                                             Composition Effect
                                                        5


                                                        4


                                                        3


                                                        2


                                                        1


                                                        0
                                                              Renter       Owner            Renter       Owner


                                                            Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF.




3.4   Expectations of renters and owners over time

So far, we only looked at results from wave 2 of the PHF in 2014. Yet, there are additional
data available that allow us to track the differences between households of different hous-
ing tenure over time. Wave 3 of the PHF asked households the same forecasting questions
in the year 2017, where the house price boom had already arrived in all German regions.
In addition, we can draw on data from the Bundesbank Online Survey - Households (BOP-
HH), a pilot survey that was initiated by the Deutsche Bundesbank in 2019. This repre-
sentative survey again asks respondents about their forecasts of regional price growth,




                                                                                   22
collects their tenure status and can be matched to our local house price growth database.7

Figure 8 shows the average house price growth forecasts of renters and owners over time.
The first thing we see is that price forecasts increase especially in the group of owners,
but also in the group of renters. As house prices grow for an extended period of time,
households seem to adapt their expectations about the future accordingly. While the gap
between forecasts of renters and owners narrows a bit between 2014 and 2017, there is
still a sizable difference of more than one percentage point left in 2017 and 2019. Hence,
the fact that renters make significantly higher price growth forecasts than owners persists
over time and across different surveys. In Appendix C we provide additional data and
sensitivity checks for this result. Most importantly, we clarify that the forecast difference
between renters and owners is not driven by few extreme observations. Summing up,
this section leaves us with the robust stylized fact that across regions of different house
price growth and across time, renters make significantly higher price growth forecasts
than owners.

               Figure 8: House Price Growth Forecasts by Tenure Over Time

                                                           8
                                                                   2014             2017             2019
                      House Price Growth Forecast (in %)




                                                           7

                                                           6

                                                           5

                                                           4

                                                           3

                                                           2

                                                           1

                                                           0
                                                               Renter   Owner   Renter   Owner   Renter   Owner


                    Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF and BOP-HH.




4      Learning about housing cost: direct evidence

The facts presented in the previous sections lead us to explore differences in information
sets as a possible explanation. In particular, our theory postulates that renters have better

    7 The
       survey has much less details compared to the PHF when it comes to household characteristics,
income and wealth. The questions about house price expectations, however, were framed in exactly the
same way. We process the data so that it is comparable to the PHF. Details can be found in Appendix C.


                                                                                   23
information about housing dividends than owners. We now use additional Bundesbank
data to provide more direct evidence on information sets. These facts guide specific as-
sumptions we make in our model below. We proceed in five steps. Section 4.1 shows
that housing differs from equity in the ability of non-owners of the asset to form an opin-
ion about its price. Section 4.2 provides evidence that owners are well aware of current
house price growth, but with large confidence bounds. Section 4.3 shows that plans to
trade do not matter for differences of opinion between owners and renters; their forecasts
do not depend on whether they plan to buy or sell in the future, or whether they plan
to move. Because of this evidence, our model does not feature endogenous information
acquisition. Section 4.4 provides evidence that real estate investors make forecasts that
are comparable to renter forecasts. Finally, section 4.5 provides evidence on how house-
holds get their information about housing, emphasizing the role of direct price and rent
observations.


4.1   Opinions about future prices: real estate vs. equity

The premise of our theory is that the housing market is special among asset markets in
that even agents who do not participate ­ that is, renters ­ have information about divi-
dends. We now show that this feature indeed differentiates housing from the other major
long term assets in modern economies, equity. We make use of the two part structure of
the PHF expectations questions: for the question on housing described in Section 3, the
first part gives households the option of responding "don't know" if they do not want
to voice any opinion on the direction of the housing market. An analogous question is
available for the stock market.

Housing is a special asset with regard to the share of non-owners who feel confident
forming an opinion about price movements. In fact, the vast majority of renters can make
a forecast of future house prices. This stands in stark contrast to equity, where we see
that a large fraction of non-owners is not capable of making stock price forecasts, which
suggests that obtaining signals about house prices is relatively cheap for renters. Figure 9
shows the fraction of opinionated households ­ who do not answer "don't know" by par-
ticipation status for both asset markets. The top panel provides results based on the 2014
survey, while the bottom panel uses the 2017 survey. For equity, "investors" comprise not
only households who directly invest in stocks but also those who invest only indirectly
via mutual funds or pension funds.

In 2014, the overwhelming majority of the survey population ­ on average about 90 per-
cent ­ is willing to provide a qualitative forecast of future house prices. This number
is substantially larger than the 70% who opine on equity. The difference is particularly
striking among non-participants: about 85% of renters have developed a view about the

                                            24
housing market, whereas less than 60% of households who do not hold stocks have a view
about the stock market. The bottom panel of Figure 9 shows that the same pattern was
present in 2017, although the differences between non-owners and owners shrink. Like
most countries, Germany has been experiencing an extended period of zero interest rates.
Being traditionally mostly active in the risk-free savings market, German households now
have to search for investment alternatives, which raises the incentives for non-owners of
real estate or equity to familiarize with those assets.


             Figure 9: Opinion formation about prices: real estate vs. equity

                                                                        2014
                                                 Real Estate                               Equity
              Share With Opinion




                                   1
                                   .9
                                   .8
                                   .7
                                   .6
                                   .5
                                        Renter                 Owner           Non-Owner            Investor


                                                                        2017
                                                 Real Estate                               Equity
              Share With Opinion




                                   1
                                   .9
                                   .8
                                   .7
                                   .6
                                   .5
                                        Renter                 Owner           Non-Owner            Investor


                                          Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF.




4.2   Do owners keep track of house prices?

A possible explanation for owners' forecasting mistakes during the boom is that they
simply do not pay attention to prices. We can shed some light on this possibility by
checking owners' perceptions of the value of their own residence over time. Indeed, a
subset of the PHF survey is organized as a panel, following households across waves
from 2011 to 2014 and again from 2014 to 2017. In each wave, households are asked to
estimate the hypothetical sales price of their current main residence. We match those
price estimates for all panel households who did not move between two survey waves.
This allows us to calculate a perceived home price growth rate for all owners over both the
years 2011-2014 and 2014-2017.

Figure 10 compares annualized mean perceived home price growth with realized growth


                                                                       25
                 Figure 10: Information quality of opinionated owners

                                                8
                                                           2011-2014                     2014-2017
                                                7


                    House Price Growth (in %)
                                                6

                                                5

                                                4

                                                3

                                                2

                                                1

                                                0
                                                     Perceived    Realized         Perceived    Realized


                                                    Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF.



rates in the owner's region over the same time span. The left panel shows 2011-14 and the
right panel shows 2014-17; in both cases, whiskers on the left hand yellow bars indicate
95% confidence intervals for the mean perceived home price growth rate. Confidence
intervals are large, consistent with imperfect information on the part of owners. At the
same time, for both time spans, the realized growth rate lies within or at least very close
to the confidence band of the mean perceived growth rate. We thus take away that the
average owner is aware of local housing market conditions, and that an explanation for
differences between owners and renters should not rely on owners simply receiving no
market signals.


4.3   Forecasts and plans to buy, sell or move

Our theory assumes that renters obtain better information about rents because they ob-
serve their own rent as well as that of related properties, and use this information to
reason about prices. An interesting alternative hypothesis is that households pay atten-
tion to prices in an illiquid market only rarely, namely when they buy or sell. If this were
the case, there would be nothing special about tenure per se, but tenure would be an
imperfect proxy for incentives to trade.

The PHF includes three questions that speak to this hypothesis. First, it asks renters "Do
you intend to buy or build a house or flat for your own accommodation?". Second, owners are
asked about the date they moved into their current residence. Third, in the 2017 wave
both renters and owners were asked how long they plan to remain in their current resi-


                                                                             26
dence. If information improves when households trade, we should expect more accurate
forecasts from renters who plan to buy, from owners who have recently bought, as well
as from owners or renters who plan to move in the near future.


                                                                   Figure 11: Price forecasts and incentives

                                                             6
                        House Price Growth Forecast (in %)



                                                             5


                                                             4


                                                             3


                                                             2


                                                             1


                                                             0
                                                                 Renter no plans   Renter plans   Owner < 5yrs   Owner > 5yrs


                                                                 Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF.



Figure 11 shows average price forecasts for four types of households: renters with and
without plans to buy, as well as owners who moved less than or more than five years
ago. The differences among the two renter types are negligible: the high accurate forecast
we observe by the average renter is not driven by renters who are planning to buy. For
owners, there is a small and borderline significant difference: recent owners make slightly
higher forecasts. However, the difference between owner types is small relative to the
overall difference between owners and renters.

Figure 12 compares average forecasts for owners and renters in the full sample to average
forecasts for those households who plan to move within five years as well as those who
plan to remain in their current residence longer. Among renters, there is some qualita-
tive support for the idea that agents who plan to shop for a new place soon make higher
(and hence more accurate) forecasts. However, for both renters and owners, differences
across groups are small and insignificant. Overall, we take away that incentives to trade
are not a major factor in driving price forecasts. Our model thus focuses on informa-
tion advantages that simply reflect tenure, and does not feature endogenous information
acquisition.8

  8 The  results of Figure 12 also speak to the hypothesis that households report forecasts of what they fear.
If this were the case, we would expect renters who plan to move soon to make higher price growth forecasts,
as they fear price or rent increases, whereas owners who plan to move soon should forecast particularly
low prices. We do not see relevant differences in the figure.


                                                                                            27
                                             Figure 12: Forecasts and expected time to move

                                                        6
                                                                                 Move Out in        Stay Longer
                                                              Full Sample



                   House Price Growth Forecast (in %)
                                                                              Less Than 5 years    Than 5 years
                                                        5


                                                        4


                                                        3


                                                        2


                                                        1


                                                        0
                                                             Renter   Owner    Renter   Owner     Renter   Owner


                                                            Source: Own calculations based on data from PHF.



4.4   Forecasts by real estate investors

Our model assumes that renters receive better information about rents than owners. Now,
households who own their main residence may also own other real estate that they rent
out. While these households are owners, they have more information about rents than
other owners, similar to renters. From the perspective of our model, the forecasts for
these owner-landlords should be higher than owner forecasts and comparable to renter
forecasts. In this subsection, we present evidence that supports these predictions from
the model.

It is not obvious how to best identify owner-landlords in the survey. Some households
who own their main residence also own a vacation home that they rent out occasionally.
Other households own property that they leave vacant, or they only rent out to family
members at below market rents. We therefore define owner-landlords to be those house-
holds who own their primary residence, own at least one additional property (apartment,
single-family home, or townhouse), and receive some minimal rental income (more than
650 Euros per month). Below, we use alternative definitions that try to identify more
serious real estate investors.

Column (1) in Table 4 repeats our baseline finding from Table 1 about the importance of
tenure and region for the cross section of forecasts. To save space, we omit the estimated
coefficients on the growth region dummies in Table 4. Column (2) in Table 4 shows that
owner-landlords indeed make higher house price growth forecasts (by 0.42 percentage
points) than other owners. However, the coefficient is not precisely estimated. One issue


                                                                                  28
is that there are not many households who own their main residence and also other real
estate. In the survey, only 12 percent of households are owner-landlords.

To identify serious real estate investors, we consider the following alternatives. Column
(3) defines investors as owner-landlords who have an above median loan-to-value ratio
on their investment property. The estimated coefficient is comparable to the coefficient
on the renter dummy, but again standard errors are high. We find that for other owners,
a high loan-to-value ratio leads to a negative coefficient, which is also imprecisely esti-
mated. Column (4) shows that owner-landlords who have more than one rental property
also make higher forecasts. Columns (5), (6) and (7) isolate owner-landlords for whom the
rental income is an increasing share of total household income, ranging from at least 30,
40 to 50 percent. Investors with higher rental income shares make higher forecasts. More-
over, the estimated coefficients for investors with a rental income share above 40 percent
are comparable to those of renters, and also significant. We conclude that forecasts for
serious real estate investors are quantitatively in the same ballpark as renter forecasts.


                               Table 4: Forecasts by real estate investors

                        (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)
Tenure
  Renter               2.087       2.107            2.125        2.109     2.099     2.097     2.095
                      (0.378)     (0.380)          (0.381)      (0.380)   (0.381)   (0.380)   (0.380)
Is Owner-Landlord
  Yes                              0.422            0.021        0.115     0.092    -0.053    -0.256
                                  (0.523)          (0.585)      (0.533)   (0.403)   (0.386)   (0.415)
Is Owner-Landlord × Has above median LTV on other property
  Yes × Yes                                         1.893
                                                   (1.253)
Is Owner-Landlord × Has more than one rental property
  Yes × Yes                                                      0.958
                                                                (1.214)
Is Owner-Landlord × Rental income share
  Yes ×  0.3                                                               1.096
                                                                          (1.410)
  Yes ×  0.4                                                                         1.963
                                                                                    (1.667)
  Yes ×  0.5                                                                                   3.586
                                                                                              (1.693)
Controls               Yes          Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes
Number of Cases        3598        3598             3598         3598     3598       3598      3598
R-Square               0.142       0.142            0.142        0.142    0.142      0.143     0.144

Robust standard errors in parentheses.      :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                                           29
4.5   Sources of information

To find out more directly how households acquire information about housing markets, we
draw on a new question we proposed for the Bundesbank's Online Survey ­ Households
(BOP-HH). The BOP-HH was fielded in spring 2019; it elicits less detail on household
income and balance sheet, but instead focuses on expectation formation. Question 306 of
the BOP-HH survey reads:


      How important are each of the following sources of information for you to evaluate
      future house prices?


Respondents are presented the following seven potential information sources:

  1. Relatives, friends and neighbors

  2. Classical media (newspapers, tv, etc.)

  3. Social media (like Facebook and Twitter)

  4. Online real estate platforms

  5. Financial consultants

  6. Direct observations of rents in your neighborhood

  7. Direct observations of house prices in your neighborhood

For each candidate source, households can check one of four intensities, "Not important
at all", "Somewhat important", "Quite important", and "Very important". To summarize
average choices by a single numerical score, we code these intensities as 0, 33, 66, and
100, respectively. Table 5 lists the seven answers in order of importance, measured by
the fraction of all respondents who labeled an answer either "Quite important" or "Very
important", reported in the first column. The second and third columns report the aver-
age score of the information source among renters and owners, respectively, and the final
column measures the difference.

The primary source of information for households to forecast house price growth is the
direct observation of prices. In fact, more than 80 percent of households look to rents
and almost 80 percent to house prices. Online real estate portals, friends, advisors and
especially social media are much less important sources of information. The magnitude
of the scores for the seven sources are broadly similar across renters and owners. There
are however two significant differences. First, while all households rely on direct obser-
vations, renters look more at rents, whereas owners look more at prices. Second, renters

                                              30
rely more on social media, online real estate portals and especially family and friends
when gathering information. We view the results as broadly supportive of an approach
that emphasizes different information sets that relate to current market experience.


                           Table 5: Sources of information by tenure

                                      Perceived          Coded average
      Source                         Important by      Renters    Owners    Difference
      Direct observation of rents       83.34           72.02      69.25      -2.773
                                                                              (1.061)
      Direct observation of prices      78.24           66.04      69.83        3.785
                                                                               (1.148)
      Classical Media                   73.53           60.32      60.37        0.057
                                                                               (0.993)
      Online Real Estate Portals        66.76           57.72      55.29      -2.432
                                                                              (1.108)
      Family & Friends                  52.50           52.62      48.11      -4.508
                                                                              (1.101)
      Financial Advisors                46.39           44.68      45.47        0.791
                                                                               (1.158)
      Social Media                      12.26           23.81      20.86      -2.963
                                                                              (0.943)




5    A model of learning about housing cost

In this section, we develop a simple model that describes the joint distribution of prices,
rents, and household forecasts. Its goal is to show how learning with different informa-
tion sets can naturally lead to the large differences in forecast distributions that we see
in the data. We do not explicitly model household decisions, but only specify the infor-
mation sets of owners and renters and compute their conditional expectations. We do
impose one piece of structure: there is a connection between rents and prices because
a developer sector arbitrages between rental and owner occupied houses. Appendix D
derives the equations below.


Asset pricing. We consider the valuation of houses in a region. Developers can sell hous-
ing units at a price Pt or rent them out at the rental price Rt , both denominated in Euros.
Prices and rents should be thought of as regional averages, as in our data presented above.
At any date t, developers are indifferent between selling a house at date t today or hold-
ing it for one period and receiving rent as "dividend". The equilibrium house price Pt


                                                  31
thus satisfies a standard intertemporal Euler equation

                                       ~ t+1 ( Pt+1 + Rt+1 ) ,
                               Pt = Et M                                                    (1)

                                                     ~ t+1 is the stochastic discount factor
where Et is the conditional expectation operator and M
of the developer.

We emphasize that the Euler equation (1) allows for a wide range of frictions and behavior
by developers (or investors in developer firms). The special case where M    ~ t+1 is perfectly
foreseen one period in advance is the familiar "user cost model" for frictionless housing
markets under rational expectations, Mt := Et M       ~ t+1 is the one-period ahead nominal
bond price. More generally, the stochastic discount factor may capture (i ) risk attitude
of developers, (ii ) financial frictions that affect the developer's cost of capital, or (iii )
differences in beliefs between developers who value houses and outside observers who
know the current price and rent. Large literatures have documented the relevance of time
variation in (i ) - (iii ) on many asset prices. We do not take a stand on what force is most
important; all that matters below is that households evaluate the Euler equation with
expectations Et conditional on their time-t information, and they contemplate movements
in M~ t+1 as a source of price volatility.

To deal with trends, it is helpful to work with rent growth and price-rent ratios. We
denote the gross growth rate of rents by Gt = Rt / Rt-1 and define the price-rent ratio as
Vt = Pt / Rt . We can then rewrite (1) as

                                      ~ t+1 (Vt+1 + 1) Gt+1 .
                              Vt = Et M                                                     (2)

We follow standard practice in assuming that M  ~ t and Gt are jointly stationary, and focus
on stationary solutions Vt to the difference equation (2). In other words, rents and prices
follow a stochastic trend, but they are cointegrated so the price-rent ratio is stationary.
Movements in the stochastic discount factor or the growth rate may therefore lead to
divergence of price and rent growth in the short or medium run, but not in the very long
run.

To implement our learning model, we use a log-linear approximation of (2) around its
deterministic steady state. Suppose that the mean stochastic discount factor is M and
the mean growth rate is G, with MG < 1. The steady state price-rent ratio is then V =
MG / (1 - MG ). Denoting logarithms by small letters, the steady state log growth rate is
g = log G and the log price-rent ratio is v = log V . Denoting log deviations from steady
state by hats, we obtain the linear difference equation

                               ^t = m
                               v    ^ t + Et [ MG v
                                                  ^ t +1 + g
                                                           ^ t +1 ] ,                       (3)



                                                32
where mt = Et [m~ t+1 ] is the predictable component of the log discount factor and m
                                                                                    ^ t is its
deviation from steady state. Appendix D.1 contains a detailed derivation of this equation.


The dynamics of prices and rents. We choose functional forms for the stochastic discount
factor and growth rate that capture key features of the data presented in Section 2 but
at the same time allow for easy application of Bayes' rule. In particular, deviations from
the mean in both the growth rate of rents and the predictable component of the discount
factor are described by Gaussian AR(1) processes

                                                        g
                                     ^t = g g
                                     g      ^ t -1 +  t ,
                                             ^ t -1 +  m
                                     ^ t = m m
                                     m                 t .                                 (4)

                   g
The innovations  t and m t are serially as well as mutually uncorrelated and normally
distributed with mean zero. Both processes are persistent but stationary,  g , m < 1. The
distribution of rent growth can be directly estimated from the data. Persistence in the
growth rate allows in particular for an acceleration of rent growth that pushes rents to a
permanently higher level.

The role of the persistent discount factor shock m t is to allow for "excess volatility" in
house prices: the price-rent ratio can move even if there is no news about current or
future rents (that is, no "cash flow news"). To see this, we solve (3) by the method of
undetermined coefficients to obtain the stationary solution:

                                     ^t =  m m
                                     v       ^ t + g g
                                                     ^t ,                                  (5)

where  m = 1/ (1 - m MG ) and  g =  g / 1 -  g MG are positive coefficients. Prices
are high relative to rents when developers either (i ) discount the future at a lower rate
or (ii ) expect unusually high growth in rents. Since both types of fluctuations are mean-
reverting, their impact on prices depends on their persistence relative to the duration of
houses, captured by MG.

Putting together the trend and fluctuations around it, we now summarize the joint dy-
namics of (log) rents and prices in the region by

                                                   ^t ,
                                     pt = v + rt + v
                                                        ^t .
                                     r t = g + r t -1 + g                                  (6)

Both prices and rents grow on average at the rate g. Movements in g    ^ t induce transitory
deviations from trends in both variables. In contrast, movements in m    ^ t can drive prices
to move above or below trend even if rents simply grow at the trend growth rate. The
model thus allows for two types of booms discussed in the literature: swings in m  ^ t capture

                                              33
                                                                                      ^t
changes in interest rates, credit conditions or investor sentiment, whereas swings in g
capture changes in actual rent growth.

To study household learning, it is helpful to have concise vector notation for the dynamics
of prices and rents. We thus define a state vector xt = (m   ^ t, g
                                                                  ^ t , rt , 1) that contains the
predictable component of the discount factor as well as the stochastic components of rents
and the growth rate. We can then represent the distribution of rents and prices as

                                 pt
                                       = Bxt ;     xt = Axt-1 + C  t ,                           (7)
                                 rt

for some matrices A, B and C, where  t is a 2 × 1 vector of iid standard normal innovations
see Appendix D for a detailed description of the state space system.


Information structure and forecasts. Consider now owner and renter households who an-
swer survey questions. We want to capture the idea that they sample the rents and prices
of a few individual dwellings and hear about others from friends or neighbors. We thus
assume that an individual household i who is either an owner (type h = o) or a renter
(type h = r) observes a vector of noisy signals of the current average (log) price and rent
in the region
                                          pt
                               si ,h
                                t =              + wit,h ,   h = r, o.                           (8)
                                          rt

Here wi  ,h
        t is a 2 × 1 vector of idiosyncratic Gaussian shocks with mean zero that are mutu-
ally uncorrelated and iid in the cross section of individual households. Their covariance
matrix W h depends on the household type h: for example, owners may receive less pre-
cise (or more noisy) signals about rents relative to prices, and vice versa for renters.

We assume that households know the distribution of our average price and rent data
( pt , rt ) and their own signals sit,h . We identify an individual's survey forecast with the
conditional expectation of average price growth given that individual's history of signals
                                                                                          i,h
and their initial view of the state. Household i believes that the initial state is x0        . This
initial nowcast is drawn from a normal distribution that depends on the household type
h through its mean x        h (the average initial nowcast of type h agents) and the covariance
                           ¯0
matrix 0      h (their cross sectional dispersion). The price growth forecast at date t is then



                              f ti,h = E  pt+1 |si ,h i,h      i,h i,h
                                                 t , st-1 , ..s1 , x0  .                         (9)

Since the data, signals and the initial belief are all jointly normally distributed per (4)-(8),
subsequent beliefs are also normally distributed and forecasts can be computed via the
Kalman filter.


                                                  34
Given the structure of the system (7), we can choose the variance 0    h of the initial nowcast
             i,h
error x0 - x0    such that the forecast error variance of type h households is time invariant.
Intuitively, this works because households track a persistent hidden state by observing
noisy signals. Every signal contains information that lowers uncertainty about the state,
but also adds additional noise. When the two forces balance, uncertainty about the state
as well as forecast error variances are constant. Standard results further imply that this
choice of initial variance is what one would obtain if agents had seen an infinite sequence
of past signals. We make this choice throughout in our quantitative application below ­ it
captures in a parsimonious way the idea that agents are uncertain even at the beginning
of our sample.


Characterizing the distribution of nowcasts and forecasts. Given an initial cross sectional dis-
                                                                           i,h
tribution of beliefs about the state ­ that is, a cross section of x0          s ­ as well as a realization
of the data ( pt , rt ), our model generates a panel of forecasts that we can match to our
survey data. The key to understanding the dynamics of forecasts is the evolution of indi-
                                                            i,h
vidual "nowcasts" of the current state, denoted xt              : = E x t | si ,h i,h      i,h i,h
                                                                             t , st-1 , ..s1 , x0 . Indeed,
(7) implies that this nowcast is a sufficient statistic for forecasting future prices given
an agent's past information. In particular, up to a constant, the price growth forecast is
f ti,h = B1· ( A - I ) xt
                        i,h
                            , where B1· is the first row of the matrix B.

The law of motion of the nowcast takes the standard form

                                 i,h     i,h
                                xt   = Axt -1 + 
                                                 h
                                                   si ,h   i,h
                                                    t - BAxt-1 ,                                      (10)

where the "gain matrix" h is constant because of our choice of initial conditions. Now-
casts ­ and hence forecasts ­ are updated according to a time invariant rule. To arrive
                                                                                     i,h
at a nowcast for date t, agents start from the date t - 1 forecast of the state Axt   -1 . Upon
receiving signals, they make an adjustment depending on the last forecast error, the term
in parentheses. We note that errors occur not only because of the new realization of the
data ( pt , rt ) that is common to all agents, but also because of the noise in agents' signals.

What is the average forecast made by agents of type h? Since forecasts are linear in now-
                                                           ¯t
casts, they depend on the evolution of the average nowcast x h of type h agents. By the law

of large numbers, the noise in type-h signals washes out in the average, and we obtain a
recursion for the average type-h nowcast:


                               h      h      h           pt          h
                             ¯t
                             x      ¯t
                                 = Ax  -1 +                   - BA x
                                                                   ¯t -1 .                            (11)
                                                         rt

                                 ¯0
Given an initial average nowcast x h for type h, the current average nowcasts ­ and hence




                                                    35
also current rent and price growth forecasts ­ are deterministic functions of the data
( pt , rt ). This is the relationship we use below to link observed average forecasts to the
observed house price and realizations.

What is the cross sectional dispersion of nowcasts? Suppose the date t - 1 cross sectional
                        i,h
                         -1 is t-1 . From (10), the date t variance is then
variance of nowcasts xt         h



                      h
                      t = I - h B At
                                   h
                                     -1 A                I - h B     + h W h h .                      (12)

The first term reflects the adjustment of nowcasts due to the information conveyed by
prices and rents. Since the same data realizations affect all agents, this tends to reduce
the dispersion of nowcasts. The second term reflects new date t noise which increases
dispersion. We can choose as our initial dispersion 0    h the fixed point of (12) at which

the two forces balance. As a result, the dispersion of nowcasts (and hence forecasts) is
constant over time.9 The idea is to parsimoniously capture disagreement about nowcasts
among individuals at the beginning of our sample, much like our initial variance for
individual beliefs captures uncertainty initially perceived by an individual.


Information in prices and rents. Why do renters make higher price growth forecasts in the
current German housing boom? To see how learning accounts for this fact, consider price
growth under the subjective belief of household i of type h. We can decompose it into a
                                                        i,h
forecast ­ based on elements of the nowcast vector xt       ­ as well as an orthogonal forecast
error
                                  m - 1          ( g )2 (1 - MG ) i,h
                  p t +1 = g +          m^i ,h
                                               +                    ^ t + ui
                                                                    g        ,h
                                                                            t +1 .
                                1 - m MG t         1 -  g MG
Here the forecast error reflects both the nowcast error due to imperfect learning up to date
t and the new innovations that affect actual prices and rents at date t + 1.

The two forces that can generate housing booms in our model thus affect price growth
forecasts in opposite directions. Indeed, the coefficient on the nowcast of the discount
factor m^i ,h
         t is negative: when agents perceive a housing slump due to financial frictions,
say, they expect mean reversion and hence forecast high price growth. At the same time,
                                     i,h
the coefficient on the growth rate g^t   is positive: agents also predict high price growth
when they perceive rents to be rising. Averaging across agents, we have that renters have
higher price growth forecasts than owners if they perceive higher rent growth or a lower
discount factor.

Now consider an owner at the end of the financial crisis, who initially believes the dis-

  9 The resulting cross sectional variance of nowcasts is lower than the posterior variance of any individ-
ual's nowcast. This is because the latter incorporates uncertainty about the time series evolution of the
hidden state, whereas the former reflects only noise in signals.


                                                    36
count factor and the growth rate of rents are both below average, so both forces contribute
to a low price-rent ratio by (5). The owner thus expects prices to rebound from the crisis.
For concreteness, suppose further that the owner perfectly observes prices, but not rents.
He thus initially sees a recovery with low price growth. As a result, he adjusts his nowcast
in the direction dictated by the forecast error ­ towards lower rent growth and a higher
discount factor which both imply a lower price forecast. Contrast this with a renter who
also observes rent. As he sees strong rent growth, he attributes the sluggish movement in
prices to a low discount factor. Both high rent growth and a low discount factor lead the
renter to forecast higher price growth.

What changes with noise? The argument so far has only used average responses to price
and rent realizations. A version of it will thus go through when agents observe rents
and prices with error; all that changes is that average responses to signals are weaker
when signals are less precise. The new feature with noise is that the model can also
speak to dispersion of forecasts. There are two opposing forces here: less precise signals
make responses weaker, but noise also makes signals more dispersed. Higher noise can
therefore make forecasts more or less dispersed. In fact, at the extremes of perfect and
completely uninformative signals, forecast dispersion is zero, whereas it is positive at
intermediate dispersion.

We also want to understand how renters make more accurate forecasts on average even
though as group they make larger mean squared forecasts errors. The forecast error dif-
fers from (minus) the forecast only by a constant common to all agents, namely the new
price growth realization. The mean squared error can therefore be decomposed into the
dispersion of forecasts and the squared bias, that is, the average forecast error:

                                                                                   2
        h
     MSEt ( pt+1 ) = B1· ( A - I ) h ( A - I ) B1· +  pt+1 - B1· ( A - I ) x
                                                                           ¯th
                                                                                       ,   (13)

where h is the posterior variance of nowcasts, the fixed point of (12). The first term
depends on the information structure only. The second term, in contrast, depends on the
specific realization of the two factors driving prices and rents. In particular, if the boom is
driven by rent growth that is better observed by renters, then it is possible for the average
renter to be closer to the actual realizations, even though he has less precise signals about
prices.


Quantitative analysis. We now explore whether the mechanism sketched above can quan-
titatively account for the mean and variance of the cross section of price growth forecasts
in the 2014 survey. We focus on learning in the top growth region, which represents the
biggest challenge for our model. We use the data going back to the 1970s on 28 German
cities in the top growth region for which we have prices and rents available, see the dis-


                                              37
cussion in Section 2.4. Based on the time series in Figure 4, we estimate the distribution of
price-rent ratios and rent growth. For the recent house price boom, we use our high qual-
ity price and rent data ( pt , rt ) from bulwiengesa AG to construct prices and rents for these
cities. Our focus on the top growth region has the advantage that its boom was leading
the rest of Germany, so the assumption that households learn from local prices and rents
is appropriate. In other regions, there may also be regional spillovers in learning.

We pick parameters for the agents' perceived distribution of prices and rents as well as
for their information sets in two steps. A first set of parameters can be fixed up front. The
model period is a year and we focus on the early boom years starting at the onset in 2010
up to 2014, where the first expectations data is available. We set the average (gross) rent
growth rate to G = 1.033, the long-run average computed from the data on the top growth
region in Figure 4. We then choose the average discount factor M = 0.932 to obtain the
average price-rent ratio in the data of 25.8. Estimating an AR(1) process for rent growth in
the top German cities delivers an AR(1) parameter  g = 0.72 and an innovation volatility
of 2.58%. We thus impose in particular that agents correctly perceive the unconditional
volatility of rent growth in the data which is 3.72%. Furthermore, we assume that agents
have identical beliefs about the persistence of shocks to rents and shocks to the discount
factor m =  g . Therefore, the process for the price-to-rent ratio is also AR(1) with an
autoregression parameter of 0.72. With these parameter choices, the coefficient on rent
growth in (5) is pinned down at  g = 2.36 and the coefficient on discount factor shocks is
 m = 3.27. As a result, households' beliefs are consistent with the stylized fact of "excess
volatility" of house prices.

We select a second set of parameters by matching a set of target moments. For beliefs,
we need to choose noise variances as well as a distribution of priors for each household
type. To discipline our model, we make two assumptions. First, we assume priors at
the beginning of the year 2010 are such that average households of both types (i) agree
on the nowcast of the rent growth rate and (ii) correctly nowcast the beginning of 2010
price-rent ratio. The assumption that the means x  h are identical across types h implies that
                                                  ¯0
any average disagreement between types observed in 2014 must be explained by learning
over the boom years 2010 to 2014, and not by disagreement at the beginning. Second, our
baseline specification assumes that renters observe rent without noise, and that owners
do not observe rents at all. In other words, the noise variances on rent for renters and
owners are zero and infinity, respectively. This leaves two noise variances for house price
observations of owners and renters, respectively.

Parameters and targets for the moment matching exercise are collected in Table 6. In ad-
dition to the parameter values for the prior and noise ­ the last three lines ­ we need to
find the innovation volatility for the discount factor m. We match the average forecasts
and the cross sectional dispersion of forecasts in 2014 of all sample households living in


                                              38
the 28 cities in the top growth region from which we calculate prices and rents. Conse-
quently, renters make higher forecasts than owners while at the same time their forecast
volatility is higher. The most subtle point perhaps is how forecast moments help identify
the perceived volatility of the discount factor. The argument here is that observed signals
can only lead to sufficient disagreement if they carry enough news about the future. This
leads the calibration to a perceived discount factor that has relatively large innovations at
about 12%.

                                         Table 6: Model Results

                 Parameters                    Baseline values        Targets          data = model
   volatility of discount innovations mt +1         0.121        avg forecast renter      5.27%
   initial average rent growth nowcast g  ¯0        0.009        avg forecast owner       3.47%
           noise volatility for renter              0.217        vol forecast renter      4.83%
           noise volatility for owner               0.205        vol forecast owner       3.68%




Consider the calibrated parameter values that speak to the information set. The initial
average nowcast of rent growth is low, 0.9%. In order for the average agent to correctly
nowcast an initial price-rent ratio that is almost 20% below steady state requires an aver-
age nowcast m   ¯ 0 of the discount factor of -4.3%. The coefficient on the discount factor in
(5) is 3.27 so the discount factor does most of the work in rationalizing low prices. Renters
obtain slightly more noisy signals than owners, although both deal with substantial noise
of 21.7% and 20.5%, respectively.

Figure 13 illustrates the belief dynamics that lead the model to account for the data. The
color coding is red for renters and yellow for owners. The left panel shows both types'
average nowcasts of rent growth (dotted line) and the discount factor (solid line), starting
from their common initial condition in 2010. The right panel shows both types' forecasts
for rent growth (dotted line) and price growth (solid line) as well as the subsequent actual
realizations (in blue), aligned so the realized forecast error is the vertical distance. We
thus obtain a quantitative version of the narrative described above. The initial common
forecast is based mostly on the common belief that the discount factor coming out of the
financial crisis is very low. As the boom starts to develop, opinions diverge: owners
perceive a quick rebound of the discount factor, whereas renters take into account rent
growth and believe that the rebound of the discount factor is sluggish. Price growth
forecasts thus decline, but substantially more so for owners. In 2014, both types make
forecasts that are too conservative, with owners about 1.8 percentage points below renters
on average, as in the data.

Overall, our calibration strategy is guided by the stated goal of this section: to illustrate
that learning about housing cost can lead to large divergence of expectations. The stark


                                                    39
                                               Figure 13: Model Results

                 nowcasts of state variables                                           growth realizations and forecasts
                                                                                12                                  actual rent
          4
                                                                                                                    actual price
                                                                                                                    renter price
                                                                                                                    owner price
          2                                                                     10



          0                                                                      8
percent




                                                                      percent
          -2
                                                                                 6


          -4
                                                                                 4

          -6
                                        renter discount
                                        renter growth
                                                                                 2
                                        owner discount
          -8                            owner growth
                                                                                 0
          2010   2011       2012        2013              2014                  2010     2011        2012        2013          2014




difference in information sets in our baseline serves to make our mechanism more pow-
erful. At the same time, assuming initial agreement between average owners and renters
also asks it to deliver a lot. An alternative strategy might introduce more or less noise
in the rent observations of renters and owners, respectively, and might also allow for
some initial disagreement between the average renter and the average owner ­ after all,
it is plausible that the information frictions we emphasize were in place also before the
financial crisis. Since we do not have direct evidence on beliefs in this early period, we
cannot provide accurate detail here. The quantitative insight we take away is that our
mechanism can have first order effects on beliefs.




                                                                 40
References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, "Perception of House Price
 Risk and Homeownership," NBER Working Paper, 2018, 25090.

Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar, "Home Price Expectations and Be-
  haviour: Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment," Review of Economic
  Studies, 2019, 86 (4), 1371­1410.

Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, "The Economic
  Effects of Social Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2018, 126 (6), 2224­2276.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
  Future Dividends and Discount Factors," Review of Financial Studies, 1988, 1 (3), 195­
  228.

Campbell, Sean, Morris Davis, Joshua Gallin, and Robert F. Martin, "What Moves
  Housing Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio," Journal of Ur-
  ban Economics, 2009, 66 (2), 90­102.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller, "The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family
  Homes.," American Economic Review, 1989, 79 (1), 125­137.

  and , "Is there a bubble in the housing market," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  2003, 2, 299­362.

  , , and Anne Thompson, "What have they been thinking? Home buyer behavior in
  hot and cold markets," National Bureau of Economic Research No., 2012, w18400.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent, "The market price of risk and the equity pre-
 mium: A legacy of the Great Depression?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55,
 454­476.

Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Speculative Dynam-
 ics," Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (3), 529­546.

De la O, Ricardo and Sean Myers, "Subjective Cash Flow and Discount Rate Expecta-
 tions," 2019. Working Paper, Stanford.

DeFusco, Anthony A., Charles G. Nathanson, and Eric Zwick, "Speculative Dynamics
 of Prices and Volume," 2018. Working Paper, Kellogg.

Favara, Giovanni and Zheng Song, "House price dynamics with dispersed information,"
  Journal of Economic Theory, 2014, 149, 350­382.

Gao, Zhenyu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong, "Learning about the Neighborhood,"
 2020. Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Gelain, Paolo and Kevin J. Lansing, "House prices, expectations, and time-varying fun-
 damentals," Journal of Empirical Finance, 2014, 29, 3­25.


                                           41
Glaeser, Edward L. and Charles G Nathanson, "Housing Bubbles," in Gilles Duranton,
 J. Vernon Henderson, and William C. Strange, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Eco-
 nomics, Vol. 5 Elsevier 2015, pp. 701­751.

  , Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G. Nathanson, "Housing dynamics:
  An urban approach," Journal of Urban Economics, 2014, 81, 45­56.

Glaeser, Edwards L. and Charles G. Nathanson, "An Extrapolative Model of House Price
 Dynamics," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 126 (1), 147­170.

Guren, Adam M., "House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity," Journal of
 Political Economy, 2018, 126 (3), 1172­1218.

Head, Allen, Huw Lloyd-Ellis, and Hongfei Sun, "Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics
 of House Prices and Construction," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1172­1210.

Kaas, Leo, Georgi Kocharkov, Edgar Preugschat, and Nawid Siassi, "Low homeown-
 ership in Germany ­ a quantitative exploration," forthcoming: Journal of the European
 Economic Association, 2020.

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Gianluca Violante, "The Housing Boom and Bust:
 Model Meets Evidence," 2020. Forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.

Kuchler, Theresa and Basit Zafar, "Personal Experiences and Expectations about Aggre-
 gate Outcomes," Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (5), 2491­2542.

Landvoigt, Tim, "Housing Demand during the Boom: The Role of Expectations and
  Credit Constraints," Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (6), 1865­1902.

Leombroni, Matteo, Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider, and Ciaran Rogers, "Inflation
  and the Price of Real Assets," NBER Working Papers, 2020, 26740.

Lewellen, Jonathan and Jay Shanken, "Learning, Asset Pricing Tests, and Market Effi-
  ciency," Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (3), 1113­1145.

Ludwig, Alexander, Jochen Mankart, Jorge Quintana, Nate Vellekoop, and Mirko
  Wiederholt, "House Price Expectatons and Housing Choice," 2020. Working Paper,
  University of Frankfurt.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Alexandra Steiny, "Rent or Buy? Inflation Experiences and
 Homeownership within and across Countries," 2021. Working paper, Berkeley.

   and Stefan Nagel, "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk
  Taking?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 376­416.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, in John Y. Campbell, ed., Inflation Illusion,
  Credit, and Asset Pricing, Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL 2008, pp. 147­181.

  and , "Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey Evidence and a Search
  Model," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 406­411.




                                          42
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, "Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does "Irrationality"
  Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions," NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual, 2003.

Weber, Jan Philip and Gabe Lee, "On the Measure of Private Rental Market Regulation
 Index and Its Effects on Housing Rents: Cross-Country Evidence," IREBS Beiträge zur
 Immobilienwirtschaft, Heft 21 2018.




                                         1
A       House Price Data

A.1      Constructing house price and rent indices for Germany

The detailed house price and rent dataset from bulwiengesa A we use to construct price
indices since the year 2005 contains the following price series for houses in all 401 German
counties:

    ·   single-family homes
    ·   apartments (newly built, "Erstbezug")
    ·   apartments (already existing, "Wiederbezug")
    ·   town houses (not available for all counties)

As only 7.5 percent of households in the PHF live in town houses and the price series is
not available for all German counties, we ignore these building types when constructing
our house price index.

We merge the two price series on apartments assuming that about 15 percent of apart-
ments are new and 85 are already existing. This is the official number used by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, and it is based on estimates of the German Federal Statistical Of-
fice. This leaves us with two price series: one for single-family homes and the other one
for apartments. We combine the two series to one using data from the PHF. For each
growth region, we calculate the share of households living in single-family homes out of
the share of households that live in either single-family homes or apartments (more than
90 percent of the population). The respective data is shown in Table A.1. Not surprisingly,
single-family homes are less common in high growth regions, as the high growth region
contains a lot of cities.

                  Table A.1: Types of housing in different growth regions

                                                       Growth Region
                                    Low         Medium Low     Medium High   High
          Single-Family Home        49.50           43.21          41.22      16.12
          Apartment                 50.50           56.79          58.78      83.88




As for rents, there are two series available:

    · apartments (newly built, "Erstbezug")
    · apartments (already existing, "Wiederbezug")

According to the PHF, more than 80 percent of renters are living in apartments. A rental
market, especially for single-family homes, hardly exists. As a result, data on rented

                                                2
houses is scarce. To construct the series for rent prices, we again combine the two price
series assuming that about 15 percent of apartments are new.


A.2                                         Long-run Data on House Price and Rents

The Bundesbank provided us with the following data for the time span between 1976 and
2020 collected by bulwiengesa AG:

                                     · Purchase prices of apartments (newly built, "Erstbezug")
                                     · Rents of apartments (newly built, "Erstbezug")
                                     · Rents of apartments (already existing, "Wiederbezug")

The data is available for a total of 50 (West German) cities. The series for West-Berlin is
discontinued in 1990. We select from the remaining 49 cities those, who are in the highest
growth region in the period between 2010 and 2020. This leaves us with a total of 28 cities.


Leveling house price data For the long house price series, we only know the purchase
price of newly built apartments, which is consistently higher than the average purchase
price of a house in the highest growth region. To make the long price series comparable
with the 2005-2020 bulwiengesa data, we re-level the data as shown in the left panel of
Figure A.1. The dash-dotted line shows the original long price series for newly built


                                                                    Figure A.1: Leveling of house price data


                                     6000                                                                                            250
                                                 Original Series                                                                                28 Cities (long run)
 Average House Price (Euros / sqm)




                                                                                                 Average House Price (Euros / sqm)




                                                 Adjusted Series                                                                                Bundesbank
                                     5000        Detailed data since 2005                                                                       OECD
                                                                                                                                     200        BIS

                                     4000
                                                                                                                                     150
                                     3000

                                                                                                                                     100
                                     2000


                                     1000                                                                                             50
                                         1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                                              1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020




apartments. The gray series with black dots is the price series determined for exactly the
same 28 cities/counties from the detailed bulwiengesa data we have available since 2005.
For the time frame in which both series are available, they move in parallel, but newly
built apartments are just more expensive. To compensate for this effects, we calculate the

                                                                                             3
mean ratio between the two price series at any date in between 2005 and 2020. We then
normalize the original series by this ratio. The solid line in the left panel of Figure A.1
shows the resulting adjusted time series which is hardly distinguishable from the detailed
data series between 2005 and 2020. This makes us confident that we can use the newly
built apartment price series to extrapolate the evolution of prices backward in time until
1976.

In the right panel of Figure A.1, we compare the long-run price series with publicly avail-
able time series data for house prices in Germany from the Deutsche Bundesbank, the
OECD and the BIS. In the 1970s to early 1990s, all of these data are based on the same
common data source that also underlies our price series. The Deutsche Bundesbank uses
data on the purchase prices of newly built apartments for all 50 cities, not the 28 we se-
lected, but the price dynamics seem to be fairly similar. With German reunification, the
official sample of the Bundesbank was extended to a total of 100 cities and in 1995 to 125
cities, also covering East Germany. This is the first time where our series departs from
official sources as we want to provide data for one set of counties over time, while the
Bundesbank seeks to approximate house price dynamics all over Germany. The second
structural break in the official data series is in 2005, when the detailed bulwiengesa data
starts. From this point onward, the Bundesbank uses data covering all German coun-
ties from different data sources. As we have seen before, the house price boom is much
stronger in the highest growth region than in Germany as a whole. Not surprisingly, our
price series then departs from official ones at the onset of the German house price boom.


Rents Turning to rent prices, the long-run data contains exactly the same information as
the detailed bulwiengesa data. Hence, when applying the same weighting as described
in the previous section, we obtain the same price series from 2005 onwards, see the right
panel of Figure 3. When combining the rent and the price series, we obtain the time series
for the price-rent ratio shown in Figure 4.



B    Documentation of Variables and Sample Selection

While we already provide detailed information on both the house price and rent data as
well as on the assessment of households' price expectations in the main text of the paper,
this appendix documents all other survey variables we used in the regressions and figures
reported in this paper as well as our sample selection procedure.




                                            4
B.1     Explanatory Variables Used in Regressions

The following variables are used as explanatory variables in regressions. We use data
from multiple waves of the Panel on Household Finances (PHF) as well as the Online
Survey ­ Households. As variable names might differ across those surveys, but the sur-
vey methodology is the same, we only provide the variable name for our baseline survey,
the second wave (2014) of the Panel on Household Finances. A full set of variable names
and Stata codes are available upon request.


B.1.1   Demographics, Income, Wealth

Age (ra0300): Age refers to the age of the household head. The household head is the "Fi-
     nancially knowledgeable person" of the interview, i.e. the person that knows best
     about the households' finances and answers the household questionnaire including
     all details on wealth holdings for the entire household.

Number of Household Members (anzhhm): Number of all household members currently
   living in the household, including the household head.

Net Wealth (constructed from several variables): We sum up all safe assets (bonds,
     pension accounts, life insurances), equity (stocks, mutual funds, businesses), real
     estate investments and non-interest bearing assets (cash, vehicles, private assets) at
     the household level and subtract any outstanding debts for the entire household.

Net Household Income (dhi0600): Household heads are asked for the total net dispos-
     able household income, consisting of wages, salary, income from self-employment,
     retirement benefits or pensions, income from public aid, income from renting, in-
     come from leasing, housing allowance, child benefits, and other income.

Education (pa0200): This variable describes the highest education level the household
    head has achieved. Low education refers to having no school degree or at most a
    lower level secondary school degree (corresponding to the German "Realschule"),
    Upper Secondary education comprises all upper secondary level degrees ("Abitur",
    "Fachhochschulreife") and tertiary education refers to university or equivalent de-
    grees.


B.1.2   Behavioral Traits

Financial Literacy (dhnm0100, dhnm0200, dhnm0300): Household heads are asked three
     questions in the areas of interest rate compounding, inflation and diversification,
     which we use to measure their financial literacy. In particular, those questions are:

                                            5
          Question 1: "Let us assume you have a balance of 100 euros in your savings
          account. This balance bears interest at an annual rate of 2%, and you leave
          it there for 5 years. What do you think: How high is your balance after 5
          years?"
          Possible answers: 1 ­ Higher than 102 euros / 2 ­ Exactly 102 euros /
          3 ­ Lower than 102 euros / -1 ­ Don't know / -2 ­ No answer

          Question 2: "Let us assume that the interest paid on your savings account
          is 1% per year and the inflation rate is 2% per year. What do you think:
          After a year, will you be able to buy just as much, more or less than today
          with the balance in your savings account?"
          Possible answers: 1 ­ More / 2 ­ Just as much / 3 ­ Less than today /
          -1 ­ Don't know / -2 ­ No answer

          Question 3: "Do you agree with the following statement: "The investment
          in the stock of a single company is less risky than investing in a fund with
          stock in similar companies?"
          Possible answers: 1 ­ I agree / 2 ­ I do not agree / -1 ­ Don't know /
          -2 ­ No answer

     We form a literacy index out of the answers to these three questions. Literacy is
     "Very Low" in case the household head gives a wrong or no answer to all three
     questions; it is "Low" if the respondent was able to answer exactly one question
     correctly; it is "Medium" if the respondent was able to answer exactly two questions
     correctly; it is "High" if the respondent gave correct answers to all three questions.

Patience (zi105): The patience measure comes from a Likert scale where respondents are
     asked to assess their level of patience. The exact wording of the question is: "How
     do you view yourself personally: Are you in general a person who is patient or do
     you tend to be impatient?" Answers can be given on a scale from 0 to 10 where zero
     refers to being "Very patient" and 10 to "Very impatient". We form three categories
     for our variable of patience with "High patience" including all respondents who
     answered at most three on the scale, "Average patience" between 4 and 6 of the
     scale and "No patience" if respondents rated their patience to be between 7 and 10
     on the scale. We chose the division into three groups according to the frequency of
     answers. Consequently, each of the three groups is populated approximately by an
     equal share of households.

Risk aversion (zi103): The survey assesses risk aversion in the same way as patience.
     Households are asked about how risk averse they view themselves. They can again
     provide a score on a scale from 0 to 10. We split the sample in two groups of about
     equal size, those "Below Median" and those "Above Median" risk aversion.

                                            6
Financial risk aversion (hd1800, dhd2800): An alternative measure of risk aversion ­ fi-
     nancial risk aversion ­ asks about the household's investment behavior. The exact
     wording of the question we use is: "If savings or investment decisions are made in
     your household: Which of the statements best describes the attitude toward risk?"
        Possible answers:
         1­   We take significant risks and want to generate high returns.
         2­   We take above-average risks and want to generate above average returns.
         3­   We take average risks and want to generate average returns.
         4­   We are not ready to take any financial risks.
         5­   No uniform classification is possible for the household as a whole.
        If the household head chooses answer 5, he or she is asked what investment be-
        haviour he/she has for him-/herself. We again split the sample in two groups of
        about equal size, those "Below Median" and those "Above Median" risk aversion.


B.1.3    Tenure and Growth Region

Tenure (dhb0200a, dhb0200b, hb0500): We say a household is an "Owner" if the house-
    hold owns at least 50 percent of the property the household members are living in,
    the so-called primary residence. All other households are classified as "Renters".

Growth Region: Our house price data set is based on German counties (Kreise and kreis-
    freie Staedte). There are 401 such counties in Germany, out of which approximately
    one half is covered by the Panel on Household Finances. To define growth regions,
    we take the 401 counties and calculate their "trend growth" over the course of the
    past 10 years, i.e. starting from the beginning of the house price boom in 2011 to
    the last year available in the data (2020). To this end, we regress the log of the
    house price in each county on a year variable. The regression coefficient is our trend
    growth variable. We divide the 401 counties into four quartiles with respect to trend
    growth. This leaves us with four growth regions, i.e. those with Low, Medium Low,
    Medium High and High trend growth in between 2011 and 2020.


B.1.4    Housing/Regional Characteristics

Time Household has been Living in Current Residence (intjahr, dhb0120): Number of
    years since household has moved into their current primary residence (measured at
    the time of the interview).

Size of the Local Community (bikgk10): While the county ("Kreis") a household is liv-
     ing in is the unit on which we measure house prices, this is an even finer descrip-

                                              7
     tion of the size of the local municipality. The official community size measure in
     Germany is the so-called "BIK Scale" that classifies community sizes along ten cat-
     egories:
      1­    < 2,000 inhabitants
      2­    2,000 to 4,999 inhabitants
      3­    5,000 to 19,999 inhabitants
      4­    20,000 to 49,999 inhabitants
      5­    50,000 to 99,999 inhabitants and BIK structure type 2 (city region) /
            3 (second tier towns) / 4 (third tier towns)
      6­    50,000 to 99,999 inhabitants and BIK structure type 1 (metropolitan area)
      7­    100,000 to 499,999 inhabitants and BIK structure type 2/3/4
      8­    100,000 to 499,999 inhabitants and BIK structure type 1
      9­     500,000 inhabitants and BIK structure type 2/3/4
     10 ­    500,000 inhabitants and BIK structure type 1

Building in Which Household Lives Needs Renovation (sc0400): After each interview,
     the interviewer is asked to fill out a questionnaire on the interview with the house-
     hold, including questions about the atmosphere, the willingness of the respondent
     to answer, the living conditions and the state of the house. From these para-data
     we take the following question to assess the quality of the building that households
     live in: "Please describe the condition of the building."
     Possible answers:
      1­    Clean and well maintained
      2­    A few small cracks in the facade, and isolated cases of peeling paint
      3­    Badly in need of renovation
      4­    Dilapidated
     Our indicator of renovation needs refers to all answer categories greater than 1.




                                              8
Quality of the Household's Residence (sc0200): The interviewer is also asked to give a
     rating of the house. The exact wording of the question is: "Please rate the building."
      Possible answers:
       1­   Exclusive
       2­   Very good
       3­   Satisfactory
       4­   Simple
       5­   Very simple

Size of Households Residence (hb0100): This is a simple measure of the square meter
     size of the household's residence. This sqm number refers to the living space of the
     house or the apartment, not the size of the full property.


B.2    Variables Used in Figures

The following variables are used as explanatory variables in figures.


Equity Investors (constructed from several variables): We say a household is an eq-
     uity investor, if the household's portfolio contains any of the following assets: di-
     rectly held shares, certificates, other securities, mutual funds and private pensions
     primarily invested in stocks, hedge funds, other risky assets, silent partnerships as
     well as managed accounts. In our definition, equity also contains the value of self-
     employment business.

Perceived House Price Growth (hb0900): We can match a subsample of households (the
     panel households) across the 2011 and 2014 waves as well as the 2014 and 2017
     waves of the PHF, respectively. To construct a household's perceived house price
     growth (see Figure 10), we look at those households who were owners of the same
     residence in two consecutive waves. For these households, the PHF asks household
     heads for a price quote of their current primary residence in both waves. Using
     these price quotes, we calculate each household's perceived annualized house price
     growth rate and contrast it with the average house price growth rate in the county
     the household is living in.

Renters with Plans to Buy a House (dhb3000): Renters in the PHF are asked about their
     intention to buy a property. The exact working of the question is: "Does your house-
     hold intend to buy or build a house or flat for your own accommodation?". The
     possible answers are "Yes", "No" and "Don't Know".



                                            9
Owner's Tenure Time (hb0700): Owners are asked about the year in which they became
   owner of the property they currently live in. Note that this date doesn't have to
   coincide with the date the household moved into the property. We subtract the date
   the household became owner of the property from the date of the interview to get
   to the household's tenure time.

Intentions to Move (dhb0125): In wave 3 of the PHF, all respondent households are asked
     about their intentions to stay in their current primary residence. The exact working
     of the question is: "How long do you expect you/at least one member of the house-
     hold will continue to live in your primary residence?" The answer is given on a
     numerical scale indicating "At least another . . . years". Alternatively the household
     can choose "Forever" or "Don't Know".


B.3       Sample Preparation and Sample Selection in the PHF

In this section, we describe our sample preparation and selection procedure for the PHF,
our primary dataset. We proceed in a similar way with the Online Survey ­ Households.
Yet, since the BOP-HH is less rich, the sample preparation and selection is much simpler.
A description is available upon request.

In the PHF, we use only the first implicate of the full dataset for simplicity. Since hardly
any of the variables we use in this paper are imputed variables, this doesn't play very
much of a role. We then proceed as follows to prepare the sample:

  1. Matching between PHF and house price data: We first match households to their
     specific county. This is done via the "Kreiskennziffer", a unique identifier for each
     of the 401 German counties. Note that the scientific use files of the PHF do not
     contain this information, neither do they provide any house price or rent price data
     on the county level. Users who wish to get access to this data should get in contact
     with the Research Data and Service Center of the Deutsche Bundesbank.10

  2. Classification of Household Portfolios: We classify household portfolios according
     to the following schedule:
           · Safe Assets: This category contains deposits, directly held bonds as well as mu-
             tual funds and private pensions consisting predominantly of money market
             investments and/or bonds. We subtract from this mortgages as well as any
             unbacked bank credit.
           · Real Estate: This category contains mutual funds and private pensions consist-
             ing predominantly of real estate investment, the value of the household's main
 10 See   https://www.bundesbank.de/en/bundesbank/research/rdsc for further details.

                                                  10
          residence as well as of all secondary residences, all direct real estate invest-
          ments made for the purpose of renting them out to others or keeping them
          empty to enjoy capital gains, as well as all business related real estate.
        · Equity: This category contains mutual funds and private pensions consisting
          predominantly of stocks, hedge funds or any other risky investments, silent
          partnerships, managed accounts, directly held shares, certificates and other
          securities as well as other financial assets. We also include the value of self-
          employment business in this category.
        · Non Interest-Bearing: This category contains money other households owe to
          the observed household, cash, vehicles and valuables. We subtract from this
          all money the observed household owes to any other household.
     The sum of safe assets, real estate, equity and non interest-bearing assets yields
     total household net wealth. We derive portfolio shares for the four asset categories
     by dividing their sum on the household balance sheet by net wealth.

  3. Household Expectations: The PHF asks households about their expectations to-
     wards (i) the deposit rate one year ahead of the time of the interview, (ii) house
     price growth over the next 12 months, (iii) the growth in equity price as measured
     by the German Stock Market Index (DAX) as well as (iv) growth in the general price
     level. Except for the question about the expected deposit rate, all expectation ques-
     tions are asked in the two-step format discussed in section 3. After having coded all
     households' numerical expectations, we cut off the top and the bottom 1 percent of
     reported expectations by "missing" them to missing. This is done in order to deal
     with outliers.


With the full sample at hand, we clean the sample and identify outliers as follows:


   · We drop all households who report a non-positive net wealth balance in their port-
     folio. The majority of those households holds no or only a tiny amount of real estate
     and equity, but typically has a lot of unbacked consumer credit and credit card debt.

   · We then look at portfolio shares. The left panel of Figure B.2 shows a scatter plot
     of portfolio shares of households. We drop all observations represented by a red
     dot in the figure, which are rather extreme. This means that we drop households
     with a more than 300 percent equity share or a 3000 percent real estate share in their
     portfolio with the understanding that this most likely represents coding or data
     collection errors. The right panel of Figure B.2 shows the resulting distribution of
     portfolio shares across households.




                                            11
                              Figure B.2: Portfolio Shares and Outlier Identification
      15




                                                                                3
      12




                                                                                      2
Share Equity




                                                                          Share Equity
 6      9




                                                                         1
      3
      0




                                                                                0




               0   50   100   150   200     250   300   350   400                         0   5   10       15        20   25   30
                              Share Real Estate                                                     Share Real Estate




                                                                    12
C     Additional Datawork

The aim of this appendix is twofold. On the one hand, we provide the full regression
tables for the regressions present in short in Tables 1 and 2. On the other hand, we provide
additional robustness checks using alternative explanatory variables as well as data from
the 2017 version of the PHF.


C.1   The Cross Section of House Price Forecasts in 2014

Table 1 conveyed as simple but important message for our paper: In a linear regression
setting, only two variables are relevant for explaining households' forecasts: tenure and
location. While this table only listed variables that were significantly different from zero
in at least one regression, Table C.2 shows the entire regression results.




       Table C.2: The Cross Section of House Price Forecasts in 2014 (see Table 1)

                                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)

          D EMOGRAPHICS , I NCOME , W EALTH
          Age
          < 30                         1.159     1.125     0.701     0.530     0.092
                                      (0.707)   (0.692)   (0.695)   (0.663)   (0.676)
          30 - 39                      1.365     1.315     0.957     0.711     0.371
                                      (0.591)   (0.587)   (0.578)   (0.566)   (0.582)
          40 - 49                    -0.227     -0.245    -0.227    -0.224    -0.296
                                     (0.451)    (0.450)   (0.451)   (0.432)   (0.443)
          60 - 69                      0.337     0.329     0.377     0.424     0.354
                                      (0.467)   (0.467)   (0.462)   (0.453)   (0.474)
           70                        -0.171     -0.221    -0.153    -0.198    -0.213
                                     (0.418)    (0.429)   (0.427)   (0.420)   (0.424)
          Number of Household Members
          1                            0.576     0.540     0.253    -0.070    -0.475
                                      (0.434)   (0.434)   (0.437)   (0.425)   (0.435)
          3                            0.314     0.293     0.456     0.337     0.325
                                      (0.479)   (0.481)   (0.470)   (0.456)   (0.457)
          4                            0.371     0.301     0.506     0.425     0.336
                                      (0.665)   (0.655)   (0.655)   (0.647)   (0.611)
          5                            0.186     0.203     0.599     0.625     0.731
                                      (0.551)   (0.548)   (0.547)   (0.555)   (0.580)
          Net Wealth Quartiles
          1st Quartile                 1.931     1.930     0.135     0.073    -0.266
                                      (0.478)   (0.522)   (0.683)   (0.629)   (0.572)
          2nd Quartile                 0.939     0.980    -0.197    -0.149    -0.159
                                      (0.448)   (0.441)   (0.467)   (0.454)   (0.459)
          4th Quartile                 0.279     0.296     0.547     0.099     0.059
                                      (0.292)   (0.296)   (0.300)   (0.295)   (0.311)




                                                 13
Net Household Income Quartiles
1st Quartile                  0.107          0.125         0.302     0.404     0.623
                             (0.560)        (0.559)       (0.559)   (0.547)   (0.554)
2nd Quartile                  0.030          0.050         0.074     0.165     0.138
                             (0.438)        (0.437)       (0.439)   (0.430)   (0.422)
4th Quartile                 -0.208        -0.226        -0.331     -0.381    -0.491
                             (0.320)       (0.324)       (0.320)    (0.310)   (0.302)
Education
Low                          -0.249        -0.256        -0.398     -0.383    -0.426
                             (0.566)       (0.569)       (0.564)    (0.562)   (0.567)
Tertiary                      0.394          0.402         0.270     0.134     0.062
                             (0.305)        (0.315)       (0.311)   (0.301)   (0.302)

B EHAVIORAL T RAITS
Financial Literacy
Very Low                                     1.619         1.659     1.690     2.070
                                            (1.351)       (1.397)   (1.334)   (1.435)
Low                                        -0.680        -0.755     -0.883    -0.752
                                           (0.741)       (0.731)    (0.739)   (0.776)
Medium                                     -0.163        -0.127     -0.294    -0.212
                                           (0.345)       (0.343)    (0.338)   (0.351)
Patience
Not Patient                                  0.350         0.279     0.287     0.415
                                            (0.385)       (0.384)   (0.370)   (0.364)
Very Patient                                 0.118         0.055     0.026     0.011
                                            (0.338)       (0.336)   (0.330)   (0.325)
Risk Aversion
Below Median                               -0.062        -0.120     -0.001     0.112
                                           (0.300)       (0.299)    (0.294)   (0.296)

T ENURE AND L OCATION
Tenure
Renter                                                     2.438     2.342     2.087
                                                          (0.382)   (0.371)   (0.378)
Growth Region
Low                                                                 -2.063    -1.559
                                                                    (0.439)   (0.427)
Medium Low                                                          -1.578    -1.450
                                                                    (0.433)   (0.434)
High                                                                 1.368     1.019
                                                                    (0.416)   (0.399)

H OUSING /R EGIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Time Household has been Living in Current Residence (Years)
t<5                                                                            0.293
                                                                              (0.456)
5  t < 10                                                                      0.573
                                                                              (0.445)
10  t < 15                                                                     0.191
                                                                              (0.525)




                                             14
Size of the Local Community (Inhabitants)
2k < 5k                                                                               -1.591
                                                                                      (1.303)
5k < 20k                                                                              -0.129
                                                                                      (0.795)
20k < 50k                                                                             -0.117
                                                                                      (0.764)
50k < 100k, periphery                                                                  0.680
                                                                                      (0.981)
50k < 100k, center                                                                     0.884
                                                                                      (0.984)
100k < 500k, periphery                                                                 0.706
                                                                                      (0.745)
100k < 500k, center                                                                    0.607
                                                                                      (0.767)
 500k, periphery                                                                       1.112
                                                                                      (0.828)
 500k, center                                                                          1.762
                                                                                      (0.720)
Building in Which Household Lives Needs Renovation
Yes                                                                                   -0.421
                                                                                      (0.389)
Quality of the Household's Residence (Interviewer Rating)
Exclusive                                                                             -0.028
                                                                                      (0.625)
Satisfactory                                                                          -0.338
                                                                                      (0.387)
Simple                                                                                -0.448
                                                                                      (0.566)
Very simple                                                                           -0.084
                                                                                      (1.008)
Size of Households Residence
Sqm size/100                                                                          -1.619
                                                                                      (0.617)
Sqm size/100 squared                                                                   0.423
                                                                                      (0.127)
Constant                        1.749               1.708          1.366     2.102     2.903
                               (0.473)             (0.540)        (0.542)   (0.663)   (1.159)
Number of Cases                 3647               3646           3646      3646       3598
R-Square                        0.038              0.042          0.063     0.119      0.142
Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                                    15
C.2   Clustered standard errors

The standard errors in Table 1 are not clustered. To check whether clustering affects our
results, we divided households into 30 clusters according to local house price growth
over the last decade, with a reasonable number of households in each cluster (> 100).
Our results do not change much; tenure and region dummies are still highly significant.
We also clustered by Bundesland but do not report results here; they are also consistent
with those in Table C.3.




   Table C.3: Regressions from Table 1 with 30 clusters by house price growth region

                                                      (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
      Demographics, Income, Wealth
      Age Group 30­39                                1.365           1.315     0.957     0.711     0.371
                                                    (0.458)         (0.460)   (0.455)   (0.448)   (0.449)
      1st Net Wealth Quartile                        1.903           1.906     0.132     0.024    -0.274
                                                    (0.531)         (0.550)   (0.588)   (0.567)   (0.562)
      2nd Net Wealth Quartile                        0.939           0.980    -0.197    -0.149    -0.159
                                                    (0.474)         (0.468)   (0.473)   (0.443)   (0.415)
      Behavioral Traits                                              yes        yes       yes       yes
      Tenure
      Renter                                                                   2.438     2.342     2.087
                                                                              (0.455)   (0.416)   (0.362)
      Growth Region
      Low                                                                               -2.063    -1.559
                                                                                        (0.402)   (0.248)
      Medium Low                                                                        -1.578    -1.450
                                                                                        (0.440)   (0.396)
      High                                                                               1.368     1.019
                                                                                        (0.463)   (0.400)
      Housing/Regional Characteristics
      City Center  500k Inh.                                                                       1.762
                                                                                                  (0.952)
      Sqm size/100                                                                                -1.619
                                                                                                  (0.505)
      (Sqm size/100)2                                                                              0.423
                                                                                                  (0.119)
      Number of Cases                                3647           3646       3646      3646      3598
      R2                                             0.038          0.042      0.063     0.119     0.142
      Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                                               16
C.3   Growth Region Controls vs. Past House Price Growth Experience

In the regression presented in Table 1 ­ and in more detail in Table C.2 ­ we use "Growth
Region" as a control for the evolution of the regional housing market a survey respondent
is living in. We constructed this variable by dividing all 401 counties for which we have
house price data available into four groups, according to their trend house price growth
over the period 2011 to 2020. Pooling about 100 counties into one group is convenient
for the data work shown in this paper, as it creates consistency between regressions and
figures. Yet, one concern is that this approach is too coarse in the sense that the four
controls for regional housing market performance (Low, Medium Low, Medium High and
High) do not adequately reflect households' actual regional housing market experience.

To test the robustness of our results with respect to this concern, we use more granular
controls for a survey respondent's regional house price growth experience. In particular,
we calculate house price growth on the county level over the last year (2013-2014), the last
three years (annualized between 2011-2014) and the last five years (annualized between
2009-2014). We then use these variables instead of the "Growth Region" to control for a
household's regional housing market experience in columns (2), (3) and (4) of Table C.4.

Controlling for a more fine-grained house price growth experience delivers the same core
result we already saw in Table 1: In a linear regression setting, only two variables are
relevant for explaining households' forecasts: tenure and location, or in this case the re-
gional housing market performance. This is true for almost all measures of past house
price growth on the county level. Only the one-year measure is not significant at the five
percent level, but on the edge. All other variables, and especially the dummy variable for
tenure, are of equal size and significance, regardless of the growth experience measure we
use. The same is true for the R-square value. Overall, these findings show that controlling
for regional housing market performance on a four region scale is enough and does not
bias our results into a particular direction.




                                            17
Table C.4: Growth Region Controls vs. Past House Price Growth Experience

                                        (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)

        T ENURE , L OCATION AND PAST H OUSE P RICE G ROWTH E XPERIENCE
        Tenure
        Renter                         2.087          1.929      1.915     1.984
                                      (0.389)        (0.360)    (0.429)   (0.432)
        Growth Region
        Low                           -1.559
                                      (0.211)
        Medium Low                    -1.450
                                      (0.180)
        High                           1.019
                                      (0.074)
        Past House Price Growth Experience
        Last Year                                     0.213
                                                     (0.085)
        Three Year Back Average                                  0.394
                                                                (0.015)
        Five Year Back Average                                             0.463
                                                                          (0.039)

        D EMOGRAPHICS , I NCOME , W EALTH
        Age
        < 30                           0.092          0.208      0.157     0.105
                                      (0.363)        (0.328)    (0.354)   (0.353)
        30 - 39                        0.371          0.545      0.436     0.414
                                      (0.153)        (0.208)    (0.210)   (0.193)
        40 - 49                       -0.296         -0.350     -0.306    -0.332
                                      (0.412)        (0.361)    (0.410)   (0.409)
        60 - 69                        0.354          0.359      0.373     0.321
                                      (0.582)        (0.536)    (0.558)   (0.560)
         70                           -0.213         -0.246     -0.184    -0.211
                                      (0.340)        (0.326)    (0.318)   (0.315)
        Number of Household Members
        1                             -0.475         -0.485     -0.512    -0.569
                                      (0.504)        (0.513)    (0.546)   (0.546)
        3                              0.325          0.333      0.296     0.306
                                      (0.546)        (0.519)    (0.538)   (0.503)
        4                              0.336          0.449      0.340     0.363
                                      (0.588)        (0.493)    (0.568)   (0.575)
        5                              0.731          0.771      0.640     0.634
                                      (0.780)        (0.750)    (0.772)   (0.723)
        Net Wealth Quartiles
        1st Quartile                  -0.274         -0.187     -0.194    -0.337
                                      (0.640)        (0.671)    (0.677)   (0.665)
        2nd Quartile                  -0.159         -0.119     -0.109    -0.197
                                      (0.483)        (0.441)    (0.446)   (0.445)
        4th Quartile                   0.059          0.149      0.037     0.037
                                      (0.327)        (0.310)    (0.374)   (0.341)




                                                18
Net Household Income Quartiles
1st Quartile                    0.623          0.749           0.636     0.671
                               (0.478)        (0.527)         (0.559)   (0.584)
2nd Quartile                    0.138          0.159           0.115     0.146
                               (0.200)        (0.310)         (0.324)   (0.332)
4th Quartile                  -0.491          -0.490          -0.446    -0.433
                              (0.351)         (0.322)         (0.336)   (0.373)
Education
Low                           -0.426          -0.512          -0.480    -0.455
                              (0.620)         (0.565)         (0.617)   (0.594)
Tertiary                        0.062          0.066           0.032     0.044
                               (0.126)        (0.132)         (0.129)   (0.135)

B EHAVIORAL T RAITS
Financial Literacy
Very Low                        2.070          1.998           2.012     2.161
                               (0.559)        (0.603)         (0.362)   (0.396)
Low                           -0.752          -0.713          -0.724    -0.631
                              (0.325)         (0.444)         (0.417)   (0.381)
Medium                        -0.212          -0.165          -0.252    -0.176
                              (0.327)         (0.269)         (0.277)   (0.280)
Patience
Not Patient                     0.415          0.390           0.364     0.385
                               (0.343)        (0.354)         (0.381)   (0.368)
Very Patient                    0.011          0.038           0.033     0.044
                               (0.261)        (0.220)         (0.234)   (0.245)
Risk Aversion
Below Median                    0.112          0.013           0.005     0.016
                               (0.202)        (0.183)         (0.214)   (0.224)

H OUSING /R EGIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Time Household has been Living in Current Residence (Years)
t<5                             0.293          0.281           0.303     0.315
                               (0.404)        (0.429)         (0.402)   (0.366)
5  t < 10                       0.573          0.616           0.624     0.665
                               (0.645)        (0.663)         (0.607)   (0.552)
10  t < 15                      0.191          0.219           0.268     0.246
                               (0.462)        (0.485)         (0.511)   (0.521)




                                         19
Size of the Local Community (Inhabitants)
2k < 5k                         -1.591              -0.425        -0.538        -0.052
                                (0.626)             (0.523)       (0.508)       (0.572)
5k < 20k                        -0.129               0.750             0.296     0.614
                                (0.532)             (0.675)           (0.636)   (0.637)
20k < 50k                       -0.117               0.387        -0.007         0.158
                                (0.631)             (0.731)       (0.623)       (0.689)
50k < 100k, periphery             0.680              0.855             0.624     1.256
                                 (0.726)            (0.805)           (0.671)   (0.806)
50k < 100k, center                0.884              0.998             0.557     0.910
                                 (0.697)            (0.676)           (0.875)   (0.966)
100k < 500k, periphery            0.706              1.571             1.181     1.761
                                 (0.481)            (0.458)           (0.398)   (0.439)
100k < 500k, center               0.607              1.535             0.754     1.168
                                 (0.983)            (0.811)           (0.886)   (0.871)
 500k, periphery                  1.112              1.983             1.352     1.826
                                 (1.147)            (1.022)           (1.046)   (1.228)
 500k, center                     1.762              3.008             1.846     2.247
                                 (0.345)            (0.305)           (0.310)   (0.350)
Building in Which Household Lives Needs Renovation?
Yes                             -0.421              -0.330        -0.336        -0.309
                                (0.429)             (0.400)       (0.453)       (0.445)
Quality of the Household's Residence (Interviewer Rating)
Exclusive                       -0.028               0.133             0.010     0.022
                                (0.646)             (0.706)           (0.586)   (0.575)
Satisfactory                    -0.338              -0.366        -0.363        -0.353
                                (0.453)             (0.454)       (0.481)       (0.472)
Simple                          -0.448              -0.647        -0.575        -0.611
                                (0.448)             (0.480)       (0.575)       (0.519)
Very simple                     -0.084              -0.276        -0.613        -0.543
                                (1.228)             (1.293)       (1.071)       (1.157)
Size of Households Residence
Sqm size/100                    -1.619              -1.929        -1.829        -1.843
                                (0.258)             (0.234)       (0.210)       (0.231)
Sqm size/100 squared              0.423              0.483             0.460     0.468
                                 (0.059)            (0.038)           (0.037)   (0.048)
Constant                          2.903              0.947             1.173     1.186
                                 (0.661)            (0.655)           (0.776)   (0.862)
Number of Cases                   3598               3598             3598       3598
R-Square                          0.142              0.130            0.144      0.140
Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                              20
C.4   The cross section of house price forecasts in 2017

In Table C.5 we test whether we can also replicate the results from Table 1 in the 2017
wave of the PHF. Using the 2017 data, we obtain the same picture as in our baseline re-
gression: tenure and location are the single most important determinants of households'
house price forecasts. Yet, there are also some differences. As we already showed in Fig-
ure 8, the difference in forecasts of renters and owners shrinks over time. Consequently,
the coefficient on the "Renter" dummy variable is smaller in 2017 than in our baseline
regression. In addition, it seems that controlling for community size becomes more im-
portant, which might reflect the divergence of local housing market performance over the
course of the German house price boom. Last but not least, the R-squared value is smaller
than in our baseline regression.




                 Table C.5: The cross section of house price forecasts in 2017

                                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)

          D EMOGRAPHICS , I NCOME , W EALTH
          Age
          < 30                       -0.737     -0.819    -1.013    -0.970    -1.233
                                     (0.478)    (0.518)   (0.508)   (0.510)   (0.529)
          30 - 39                      0.174     0.139    -0.043    -0.115    -0.396
                                      (0.379)   (0.406)   (0.448)   (0.470)   (0.474)
          40 - 49                    -0.258     -0.307    -0.327    -0.324    -0.491
                                     (0.099)    (0.128)   (0.128)   (0.131)   (0.057)
          60 - 69                      0.388     0.376     0.370     0.424        0.475
                                      (0.042)   (0.049)   (0.041)   (0.053)      (0.112)
           70                          0.177     0.218     0.160     0.161        0.363
                                      (0.208)   (0.214)   (0.187)   (0.188)      (0.173)
          Number of Household Members
          1                            0.785     0.818     0.714     0.516        0.273
                                      (0.108)   (0.113)   (0.149)   (0.153)      (0.144)
          3                            0.418     0.412     0.493     0.505        0.578
                                      (0.413)   (0.365)   (0.369)   (0.352)      (0.413)
          4                            0.156     0.181     0.320     0.402        0.313
                                      (0.476)   (0.538)   (0.539)   (0.555)      (0.529)
          5                            0.587     0.667     0.840     0.901        1.150
                                      (0.497)   (0.492)   (0.506)   (0.543)      (0.491)
          Net Wealth Quartiles
          1st Quartile                 0.827     0.743    -0.316    -0.397    -0.681
                                      (0.643)   (0.678)   (0.516)   (0.525)   (0.607)
          2nd Quartile                 0.571     0.546    -0.264    -0.198    -0.249
                                      (0.411)   (0.388)   (0.377)   (0.400)   (0.431)
          4th Quartile               -0.085     -0.145     0.105    -0.137        0.085
                                     (0.185)    (0.207)   (0.233)   (0.276)      (0.414)




                                                 21
Net Household Income Quartiles
1st Quartile                 -0.220        -0.213        -0.182     -0.108    -0.079
                             (0.204)       (0.208)       (0.231)    (0.244)   (0.279)
2nd Quartile                 -0.213        -0.220        -0.194     -0.155    -0.116
                             (0.470)       (0.474)       (0.454)    (0.455)   (0.454)
4th Quartile                 -0.297        -0.290        -0.391     -0.424    -0.482
                             (0.193)       (0.191)       (0.164)    (0.186)   (0.129)
Education
Low                          -0.095        -0.143        -0.262     -0.308    -0.532
                             (0.800)       (0.810)       (0.848)    (0.835)   (0.617)
Tertiary                      0.523          0.544         0.500     0.308     0.283
                             (0.430)        (0.423)       (0.424)   (0.362)   (0.304)

B EHAVIORAL T RAITS
Financial Literacy
Very Low                                   -0.181        -0.033      0.074    -0.204
                                           (0.682)       (0.681)    (0.779)   (1.113)
Low                                          0.709         0.710     0.714     0.639
                                            (0.248)       (0.262)   (0.240)   (0.378)
Medium                                     -0.074        -0.005      0.030     0.039
                                           (0.434)       (0.432)    (0.455)   (0.485)
Patience
Not Patient                                  0.604         0.543     0.524     0.529
                                            (0.392)       (0.414)   (0.407)   (0.303)
Very Patient                               -0.064        -0.105     -0.120    -0.173
                                           (0.320)       (0.317)    (0.316)   (0.248)
Risk Aversion
Below Median                                 0.191         0.134     0.109     0.070
                                            (0.297)       (0.310)   (0.325)   (0.202)

T ENURE AND L OCATION
Tenure
Renter                                                     1.492     1.388     1.028
                                                          (0.229)   (0.241)   (0.180)
Growth Region
Low                                                                 -0.679    -0.388
                                                                    (0.045)   (0.169)
Medium Low                                                          -0.185    -0.214
                                                                    (0.051)   (0.165)
High                                                                 1.103     0.906
                                                                    (0.061)   (0.036)

H OUSING /R EGIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Time Household has been Living in Current Residence (Years)
t<5                                                                            0.877
                                                                              (0.300)
5  t < 10                                                                      0.668
                                                                              (0.634)
10  t < 15                                                                     0.256
                                                                              (0.284)




                                             22
Size of the Local Community (Inhabitants)
2k < 5k                                                                                0.492
                                                                                      (1.021)
5k < 20k                                                                               0.941
                                                                                      (0.801)
20k < 50k                                                                              1.137
                                                                                      (0.299)
50k < 100k, periphery                                                                  1.927
                                                                                      (0.660)
50k < 100k, center                                                                     1.045
                                                                                      (0.885)
100k < 500k, periphery                                                                 2.410
                                                                                      (0.500)
100k < 500k, center                                                                    1.291
                                                                                      (0.603)
 500k, periphery                                                                       1.759
                                                                                      (0.267)
 500k, center                                                                          1.934
                                                                                      (0.458)
Building in Which Household Lives Needs Renovation?)
Yes                                                                                   -0.178
                                                                                      (0.213)
Quality of the Household's Residence (Interviewer Rating))
Exclusive                                                                             -0.383
                                                                                      (0.487)
Satisfactory                                                                          -0.046
                                                                                      (0.267)
Simple                                                                                 0.578
                                                                                      (0.308)
Very simple                                                                            0.256
                                                                                      (0.587)
Size of Households Residence)
Sqm size/100                                                                          -1.044
                                                                                      (0.544)
Sqm size/100 squared                                                                   0.144
                                                                                      (0.076)
Constant                         3.014              2.793          2.561     2.629     1.903
                                (0.404)            (0.586)        (0.523)   (0.386)   (0.502)
Number of Cases                 4249               4247           4247      4247       4124
R-Square                        0.020              0.027          0.039     0.061      0.087
Robust standard errors in parentheses.    :   p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                                    23
C.5     Interactions with Age, Risk Aversion, and Financial Literacy

In Table 2 we only presented selected regression coefficients for the interaction of tenure
with age, risk aversion and financial literacy. Table C.6 therefore shows the full set of
regression coefficients.




  Table C.6: Interactions with Age, Risk Aversion, and Financial Literacy (see Table 2)

                                         (1)     (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
      Tenure
      Renter                         2.087      2.372          2.800     2.212     2.153     3.277
                                    (0.378)    (0.402)        (0.448)   (0.470)   (0.371)   (0.543)
      Tenure × Age
      Renter ×  70                             -0.988                                       -1.139
                                               (0.632)                                      (0.637)
      Owner ×  70                               0.275                                        0.292
                                               (0.453)                                      (0.453)
      Tenure × Risk Aversion
      Renter × Below Median                                   -0.820                        -0.905
                                                              (0.501)                       (0.503)
      Owner × Below Median                                     0.961                         1.106
                                                              (0.297)                       (0.309)
      Tenure × Financial Risk Aversion
      Renter × Below Median                                             -0.352              -0.183
                                                                        (0.511)             (0.502)
      Owner × Below Median                                              -0.074              -0.262
                                                                        (0.277)             (0.284)
      Tenure × Financial Literacy
      Renter × Very Low                                                            0.766     0.782
                                                                                  (1.179)   (1.161)
      Owner × Very Low                                                             3.829     3.910
                                                                                  (2.741)   (2.753)
      Growth Region
      Low                           -1.559     -1.558         -1.556    -1.571    -1.538    -1.536
                                    (0.427)    (0.426)        (0.427)   (0.427)   (0.421)   (0.419)
      Medium Low                    -1.450     -1.437         -1.470    -1.442    -1.423    -1.433
                                    (0.434)    (0.433)        (0.432)   (0.434)   (0.432)   (0.430)
      High                           1.019      1.001          1.012     1.000     1.044     1.022
                                    (0.399)    (0.399)        (0.395)   (0.400)   (0.398)   (0.395)




                                                         24
D EMOGRAPHICS , I NCOME , W EALTH
Age
< 30                          0.092    -0.062          0.190     0.148     0.106     0.069
                             (0.676)   (0.683)        (0.677)   (0.684)   (0.675)   (0.685)
30 - 39                       0.371     0.269          0.463     0.414     0.393     0.400
                             (0.582)   (0.589)        (0.580)   (0.590)   (0.579)   (0.586)
40 - 49                     -0.296     -0.324         -0.257    -0.296    -0.287    -0.279
                            (0.443)    (0.443)        (0.439)   (0.442)   (0.443)   (0.438)
60 - 69                       0.354     0.365          0.361     0.322     0.382     0.384
                             (0.474)   (0.474)        (0.468)   (0.474)   (0.471)   (0.465)
 70                         -0.213                    -0.246    -0.260    -0.192
                            (0.424)                   (0.419)   (0.429)   (0.421)
Number of Household Members
1                           -0.475     -0.456         -0.392    -0.432    -0.445    -0.301
                            (0.435)    (0.435)        (0.428)   (0.436)   (0.434)   (0.428)
3                             0.325     0.364          0.338     0.322     0.322     0.392
                             (0.457)   (0.456)        (0.454)   (0.458)   (0.456)   (0.454)
4                             0.336     0.385          0.394     0.315     0.336     0.463
                             (0.611)   (0.612)        (0.607)   (0.613)   (0.604)   (0.599)
5                             0.731     0.779          0.766     0.741     0.740     0.831
                             (0.580)   (0.580)        (0.586)   (0.586)   (0.579)   (0.586)
Net Wealth Quartiles
1st Quartile                -0.274     -0.224         -0.310    -0.350    -0.216    -0.234
                            (0.553)    (0.554)        (0.551)   (0.558)   (0.557)   (0.563)
2nd Quartile                -0.159     -0.152         -0.183    -0.190    -0.169    -0.215
                            (0.459)    (0.459)        (0.458)   (0.459)   (0.454)   (0.454)
4th Quartile                  0.059     0.020         -0.015     0.077     0.058    -0.043
                             (0.311)   (0.311)        (0.306)   (0.308)   (0.311)   (0.304)
Net Household Income Quartiles
1st Quartile                  0.623     0.600          0.598     0.601     0.578     0.524
                             (0.554)   (0.554)        (0.547)   (0.553)   (0.551)   (0.542)
2nd Quartile                  0.138     0.106          0.197     0.141     0.117     0.150
                             (0.422)   (0.421)        (0.420)   (0.423)   (0.415)   (0.412)
4th Quartile                -0.491     -0.452         -0.485    -0.474    -0.479    -0.403
                            (0.302)    (0.302)        (0.302)   (0.301)   (0.301)   (0.301)
Education
Low                         -0.426     -0.377         -0.462    -0.437    -0.396    -0.388
                            (0.567)    (0.566)        (0.564)   (0.566)   (0.561)   (0.559)
Tertiary                      0.062     0.072          0.035     0.081     0.072     0.071
                             (0.302)   (0.302)        (0.301)   (0.302)   (0.303)   (0.301)

B EHAVIORAL T RAITS
Financial Literacy
Very Low                      2.070     2.154          2.043     2.022
                             (1.435)   (1.437)        (1.431)   (1.439)
Low                         -0.752     -0.811         -0.803    -0.764    -0.766    -0.908
                            (0.776)    (0.769)        (0.765)   (0.778)   (0.775)   (0.760)
Medium                      -0.212     -0.201         -0.163    -0.222    -0.220    -0.167
                            (0.351)    (0.351)        (0.346)   (0.353)   (0.350)   (0.345)




                                                 25
Patience
Not Patient                     0.415          0.445           0.389     0.429     0.445     0.465
                               (0.364)        (0.365)         (0.360)   (0.367)   (0.368)   (0.364)
Very Patient                    0.011          0.038         -0.008      0.010     0.037     0.058
                               (0.325)        (0.327)        (0.322)    (0.327)   (0.324)   (0.325)
Risk Aversion
Below Median                    0.112          0.094                               0.114
                               (0.296)        (0.295)                             (0.294)

H OUSING /R EGIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Time Household has been Living in Current Residence (Years)
t<5                             0.293          0.263           0.238     0.286     0.242     0.131
                               (0.456)        (0.458)         (0.449)   (0.455)   (0.456)   (0.453)
5  t < 10                       0.573          0.582           0.494     0.562     0.527     0.435
                               (0.445)        (0.444)         (0.442)   (0.445)   (0.448)   (0.445)
10  t < 15                      0.191          0.179           0.132     0.189     0.159     0.083
                               (0.525)        (0.524)         (0.517)   (0.524)   (0.527)   (0.515)
Size of the Local Community (Inhabitants)
2k < 5k                       -1.591         -1.592          -1.511     -1.588    -1.562    -1.513
                              (1.303)        (1.298)         (1.303)    (1.300)   (1.262)   (1.267)
5k < 20k                      -0.129         -0.148          -0.125     -0.162    -0.015    -0.062
                              (0.795)        (0.790)         (0.774)    (0.800)   (0.779)   (0.761)
20k < 50k                     -0.117         -0.151          -0.094     -0.165     0.035    -0.029
                              (0.764)        (0.758)         (0.749)    (0.777)   (0.744)   (0.738)
50k < 100k, periphery           0.680          0.614           0.710     0.680     0.809     0.758
                               (0.981)        (0.978)         (0.964)   (0.967)   (0.968)   (0.941)
50k < 100k, center              0.884          0.815           0.918     0.874     0.956     0.891
                               (0.984)        (0.984)         (0.967)   (0.984)   (0.968)   (0.956)
100k < 500k, periphery          0.706          0.679           0.765     0.689     0.801     0.807
                               (0.745)        (0.741)         (0.730)   (0.745)   (0.724)   (0.708)
100k < 500k, center             0.607          0.540           0.701     0.589     0.699     0.694
                               (0.767)        (0.760)         (0.749)   (0.778)   (0.754)   (0.737)
 500k, periphery                1.112          1.069           1.188     1.096     1.226     1.241
                               (0.828)        (0.826)         (0.816)   (0.836)   (0.810)   (0.801)
 500k, center                   1.762          1.733           1.790     1.749     1.845     1.821
                               (0.720)        (0.715)         (0.702)   (0.726)   (0.707)   (0.690)
Building in Which Household Lives Needs Renovation
Yes                           -0.421         -0.415          -0.441     -0.398    -0.400    -0.404
                              (0.389)        (0.390)         (0.385)    (0.387)   (0.389)   (0.382)
Quality of the Household's Residence (Interviewer Rating)
Exclusive                     -0.028         -0.018            0.013    -0.026    -0.017     0.037
                              (0.625)        (0.627)          (0.615)   (0.627)   (0.625)   (0.617)
Satisfactory                  -0.338         -0.383          -0.355     -0.353    -0.370    -0.456
                              (0.387)        (0.388)         (0.382)    (0.382)   (0.385)   (0.379)
Simple                        -0.448         -0.483          -0.420     -0.475    -0.479    -0.513
                              (0.566)        (0.568)         (0.559)    (0.569)   (0.556)   (0.555)
Very simple                   -0.084         -0.083          -0.248     -0.150    -0.011    -0.263
                              (1.008)        (0.994)         (1.038)    (1.015)   (0.985)   (1.007)




                                                        26
Size of Households Residence
Sqm size/100                    -1.619          -1.579             -1.635    -1.629    -1.659    -1.632
                                (0.617)         (0.609)            (0.609)   (0.619)   (0.609)   (0.587)
Sqm size/100 squared              0.423           0.410             0.415     0.426     0.427     0.402
                                 (0.127)         (0.124)           (0.123)   (0.127)   (0.126)   (0.116)
Constant                          2.903           2.810             2.600     2.997     2.781     2.413
                                 (1.159)         (1.153)           (1.129)   (1.180)   (1.161)   (1.132)
Number of Cases                   3598           3598               3598      3594      3598      3594
R-Square                          0.142          0.143              0.147     0.142     0.143     0.152
Standard errors clustered on growth region level in parentheses.
 : p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01




                                                           27
D      Derivations of model equations

This appendix provides derivations for all the formulas presented in the paper.


D.1     The log-linearized first order condition

We first log-linearize the developer's first order condition to derive the linear stochastic
difference equation (3) for the log price-rent ratio. The first order condition (2) is

                                        ~ t+1 (Vt+1 + 1) Gt+1 .
                                Vt = Et M

This equation has a positive and finite steady state at

                                                                 MG
                           V = MG (V + 1)                V=                                   (D.1)
                                                               1 - MG

in case 0 < MG < 1.

An alternative way to write the first order condition is

                            ~ t+1 (Vt+1 + 1) Gt+1 = Et M
                     1 = Et M                          ~ t +1 S t +1 ,                        (D.2)
                                        Vt

where St+1 is the return on housing investment for the developer:

                                      Pt+1 + Rt+1  (V + 1) Gt+1
                           S t +1 =               = t +1        .                             (D.3)
                                           Pt            Vt

For any variable Xt , small letters denote logs and hats the deviation from steady state X

                   xt = log( Xt )     and   ^ t = log( Xt ) - log( X ) = xt - x.
                                            x

Taking logs of the return identity (D.3), we obtain

                           st+1 = log (1 + exp(vt+1 )) + gt+1 - vt .


In the spirit of a Campbell-Shiller decomposition, we approximate the logarithmic term
linearly in vt+1 around its steady state value v = log(V ). This yields

                                                       exp(v)                         V
      log (1 + exp(vt+1 ))  log (1 + exp(v)) +                  ( v t +1 - v ) = k +     v t +1
                                                     1 + exp(v)                      1+V

                           V                                             V
with k = log (1 + V ) -   1+V   log (V ). Using the identity MG =       1+V   from equation (D.1),


                                                28
we then obtain

                                 st+1  k + MGvt+1 + gt+1 - vt .

Acknowledging that this equation also needs to hold in the steady state, we can write the
return identity in log-deviations from the steady state as

                                  ^t+1  MG v
                                  s                 ^ t +1 - v
                                           ^ t +1 + g        ^t .                               (D.4)


Next, we turn to the first order condition (D.2)

                               ~ t+1 St+1 = Et [exp(m
                        1 = Et M                    ~ t+1 + st+1 )] .

              ~ t+1 and st+1 are jointly conditionally normally distributed, we obtain
Assuming that m

               ~ t+1 + st+1 )]
   1 = Et [exp(m
                                        1
               ~ t+1 ] + Et [st+1 ] +
     = exp Et [m                                 ~ t+1 ) + Vart (st+1 ) + 2Covt (m
                                          [Vart (m                               ~ t+1 , st+1 )] .
                                        2
   ~ t+1 and st+1 are homoskedastic, we can subsume the conditional variances and co-
If m
variances in a constant term
                      1               1
                             ~ t+1 ) + Vart (st+1 ) + Covt (m
                   D = Vart (m                              ~ t +1 , s t +1 ) .
                      2               2

                                            ~ t+1 ] for the predictable component of the
Taking logs and using our notation mt = Et [m
log stochastic discount factor, we obtain

                                     mt + Et [st+1 ] + D = 0,

or in terms of log-deviations from the steady state

                                         ^ t + Et [s
                                         m         ^t+1 ] = 0.

Substituting the approximate return identity (D.4), we can write

                                  ^ t + Et [ MG v
                                  m                      ^ t +1 - v
                                                ^ t +1 + g        ^t ]  0
                            v
                            ^t  m
                                ^ t + Et [ MG v
                                              ^ t +1 + g
                                                       ^ t +1 ] ,

which is the linear stochastic difference equation (3).




                                                  29
D.2    The solution for the log price-rent ratio

Suppose that m ^ t and g^ t follow the Gaussian AR(1) dynamics (4). Our conjecture is that
the solution to the linear stochastic difference equation (3) is

                                       ^t =  m m
                                       v       ^ t + g g
                                                       ^t .                           (D.5)

We plug this conjecture into equation (3)

                   ^ t + g g
                 m m       ^t = m
                                ^ t + Et MG  m m
                                               ^ t +1 +  g g
                                                           ^ t +1 + g
                                                                    ^ t +1
                                  ^ t + MG  m m m
                                 =m             ^ t +  g g g
                                                           ^t + g g
                                                                  ^t
                                                  ^ t +  g + MG  g  g g
                                 = [1 + MG  m m ] m                   ^t ,

                                   g
where we used Et m
                 t+1 = Et  t+1 = 0.

Comparing coefficients on both sides of the equation, we have

                                                                 1
                       m = 1 + MG  m m                  m =
                                                             1 - m MG
                                                                 g
                        g =  g + MG  g  g                g =           .
                                                             1 -  g MG


D.3    Aggregate state space system

We start from the definitions of the log price-rent ratio and rent growth, log ( Pt / Rt ) =
                ^ t and rt = rt - rt-1 = g + g
log (Vt ) = v + v                            ^ t . Combined with the solution (D.5) and the
dynamics (4), we can write

                                        ^ t = rt + v +  m m
                          pt = rt + v + v                 ^ t + g g
                                                                  ^t ,
                                                                           g
                                          ^ t = r t -1 + g +  g g
                       r t = r t -1 + g + g                     ^ t -1 +  t .


To track the evolution of prices and rents within a state space system, the state vector xt
has to contain the current realizations of both AR(1) processes as well as the current rent
level rt (owing to the unit root nature of rents). In addition, we need to add a constant to
the state vector. We can write the aggregate state space system as

                            pt
                                   = Bxt    and      xt = Axt-1 + C  t                (D.6)
                            rt




                                                30
with
                                                                              
                                                                      m^
                                                                       t
                                    m  g 1 v                           ^t 
                                                                      g   
                           B=                             and    xt =                              (D.7)
                                    0    0   1 0                       rt 
                                                                       
                                                                       1

as well as
                                                       
             m   0   0 0                     m     0
                                                   
     0           g 0 0                0          g                               0       1 0
   A=                           ,   C=                     and        t = N          ,         .   (D.8)
                                                   
                                                   
     
     0            g 1 g
                                      0
                                                 g                               0       0 1
      0          0   0 1               0         0


D.4    Characterizing the distribution of nowcasts and forecasts

On the level of the individual, the state space system reads

                                        si ,h       i,h
                                         t = Bxt + wt           and
                                        xt = Axt-1 + C  t ,                                        (D.9)

where wi   ,h
          t is a 2 × 1 vector of idiosyncratic Gaussian shocks that are uncorrelated across
agents and time, wi  ,h            h
                    t  N 0, W . The covariance matrix depends on the type h of agent
i. This state space system has the same state vector xt and matrices as in (D.7) and (D.8).
If we leave out the individual noise vector wi  ,t
                                               t , we again obtain the aggregate state space
system (D.6). Our computations thus work with separate systems for each type. To ease
                                                      i,h
notation, we suppress the dependence of si,h and xt       on type h in what follows.

Forecasts and posterior variance. To compute conditional expectations for the system (D.9),
we apply the Kalman filter and thus proceed recursively. Agent i of type h computes his
conditional expectation or nowcast xt   i of x given the history of his observables si . It can
                                              t                                      t
be represented as
                                                i
                                          xt = xt + uit ,

where the nowcast error ui                                    i i
                             t is orthogonal to the history st , st-1 , ... and has conditional co-
variance matrix t  h . The initial nowcast x i of agent i is drawn from a normal distribution
                                            0
with mean x  h and a (cross sectional) variance  h . The mean and variance depend on the
            ¯0                                      0
type h of agent i. Standard results on updating with normal distributions imply that xt         i is

also normally distributed.

Note that all agents share the same view on the state space system and use the same now-


                                                   31
and forecasting rules. The only elements that are allowed to depend on type h are the
             ¯0
initial mean x h and variance  h as well as the variance W h of the signals. As a result, the
                              0
covariance matrix t of nowcast errors is identical across individuals of the same type h,
                     h

but may differ between owners and renters.

For an individual with a signal history si       i                                      i
                                          t-1 , st-2 , ... and a corresponding nowcast xt-1 , the
conditional joint distribution of si
                                   t and xt one period ahead is


                          si
                           t      i
                                                i
                                         = B A xt        i               i
                                                  -1 + u t -1 + C  t + w t
                                 xt -1
                                              i        i
                          xt | xi        = A xt -1 + u t -1 + C  t .
                                  t -1



The vector si
            t , xt        i
                                  is therefore conditionally normally distributed with known
                         xt -1
variance covariance matrix

                  B At
                     h A + CC
                       -1                          B + W h B At
                                                              h A + CC
                                                                -1
                                                                               .
                        At
                         h A + CC
                           -1                       B          At
                                                                h A + CC
                                                                  -1


We define the gain matrix

                                                                                   -1
           h    h                                      h
           t = At -1 A + CC                    B    B At -1 A + CC      B + Wh          .

The gain again depends on the agent's type h via the noise variance W h and its effect on
the posterior, because agents only differ in their information set.

We can then write updating of the posterior mean vector and covariance matrix as

                                  i     i      h  i      i
                                 xt = Axt -1 + t st - BAxt-1 ,                              (D.10)
                               h         h     h           T
                               t = ( I - t B) At -1 A + CC   .                              (D.11)

Equation (D.10) is the stochastic difference equation (10) for the conditional mean xt   i . Av-

eraging across agents delivers (D.11) which is the covariance matrix (11). For stationary
si
 t , it has a stationary solution ­ this is the conditional expectation given the infinite his-
tory of signals. The second equation is a matrix Ricatti difference equation. Its positive
definite fixed point is the posterior variance given an infinite history of signals. Once we
know this fixed point, we also have a time invariant gain matrix h that summarizes how
agents alter their estimates of hidden states in response to observations.

Distribution of forecasts and forecast errors. Prices and rents at date t + 1 are Bxt+1 and their




                                                        32
growth rates are

                         gt = Bxt+1 - Bxt = B ( A - I ) xt + BC  t+1 .

An individual agent's forecast of rent and price based on date t information is therefore
BAxt i and forecasts of growth in price and rent are f i = B ( A - I ) x i . An individual agent's
                                                      t                  t
forecast error is

                           gt - f ti = B ( A - I ) xt - xt
                                                         i
                                                           + BC  t+1 .

Forecast errors arise when either (i ) agents are surprised by the innovation C  t+1 or (ii )
agents have a mistaken nowcast of the hidden state based on their date t information.

To understand the cross sectional distribution of forecasts, we consider the evolution of
nowcasts. We can write

                     i       h     i       h i
                    xt = I - t B Axt -1 +  t s t ,
                             h     i      h                      h i
                       = I - t B Axt -1 + t B ( Axt-1 + C  t ) + t wt ,                    (D.12)

We note that the first and third term vary in the cross section, but are orthogonal, whereas
the middle term is aggregate and does not vary across individual agents.

To compute average forecasts, we use the fact that signals in equation (D.12) are unbiased.
The cross sectional mean of nowcasts x h for agents of type h thus evolves according to
                                      ¯t

                          h       h      h     h
                        ¯t
                        x   = I - t    ¯t
                                    B Ax  -1 + t B ( Axt-1 + C  t ) .


Agent types have different nowcast paths if they respond differently to the same news
due to their using of different gain matrices.

The cross sectional distribution of forecasts (or forecast errors) depends only on the cross
sectional distribution of the nowcasts (or nowcast errors). The cross sections of forecasts
and forecasts errors differ only by a constant.

Denote by t  h the cross sectional variance of the nowcast for type h at date t. From (D.12),

it evolves according to

                    h       h    h                      h         h
                    t = I - t B At -1 A             I - t B     + t W h t
                                                                        h
                                                                          ,

a Lyapunov-style difference equation. If we substitute the time invariant gain matrix h
derived above, we can find a fixed point h that describes the cross sectional variance of
nowcasts after an infinite sequence of signals.


                                               33
Finally, let's turn back to forecasts errors. The average forecast error is

                                  gt - f¯th = B( A - I )( xt - x
                                                               ¯th
                                                                   ) + BC  t+1 .

For the cross sectional variance of forecasts we obtain

        Et ( f ti - f¯th )( f ti - f¯th )                     i
                                            = Et B( A - I )( xt -x
                                                                 ¯th     i
                                                                     )( xt -x
                                                                            ¯th
                                                                                ) (A - I) B
                                            = B ( A - I ) h ( A - I ) B .

Consequently, we can write the mean squared error of forecasts as

     h
  MSEt = Et ( gt - f ti )( gt - f ti )
          = B ( A - I ) h ( A - I ) B
             cross sectional variance of forecasts
                                              h                                          h
                         + B( A - I )( xt - x
                                            ¯t  ) + BC  t+1           B( A - I )( xt - x
                                                                                       ¯t  ) + BC  t+1   .
                                                      squared average forecast error




                                                       34
