                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES

                                        Juan M. Morelli
                                        Pablo Ottonello
                                         Diego J. Perez

                                      Working Paper 28892
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28892


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Mark Aguiar, Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, Luigi Bocola, Francesco Caselli, Kyle
Dempsey, Alessandro Dovis, Mark Gertler, Patrick Kehoe, Nobu Kiyotaki, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Hanno Lustig, Matteo Maggiori, Fabrizio Perri, Martin Schneider, Adrien
Verdelhan, and participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Yueling
Huang, Maria Aristizabal-Ramirez, Kevin Lu, Christian Feiler, and Daniel Motoc provided
excellent research assistance. Disclaimer: The views expressed here are our own and should not
be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or
of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Juan M. Morelli, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego J. Perez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Banks and Systemic Debt Crises
Juan M. Morelli, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego J. Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 28892
June 2021
JEL No. E3,F3,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the role of global financial intermediaries in international lending. We construct a
model of the world economy, in which heterogeneous borrowers issue risky securities purchased
by financial intermediaries. Aggregate shocks transmit internationally through financial
intermediaries' net worth. The strength of this transmission is governed by the degree of frictions
intermediaries face in financing their risky investments. We provide direct empirical evidence on
this mechanism showing that around Lehman Brothers' collapse, emerging-market bonds held by
more distressed global banks experienced larger price contractions. A quantitative analysis of the
model shows that global financial intermediaries play a relevant role in driving borrowing-cost
and consumption fluctuations in emerging-market economies, during both debt crises and regular
business cycles. The portfolio of financial intermediaries and the distribution of bond holdings in
the world economy are key to determine aggregate dynamics.

Juan M. Morelli                                  Diego J. Perez
Federal Reserve Board                            Department of Economics
juan.m.morellileizagoyen@frb.gov                 New York University
                                                 19 West 4th Street
Pablo Ottonello                                  New York, NY 10012
Department of Economics                          and NBER
University of Michigan                           diego.perez@nyu.edu
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
pottonel@umich.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28892
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                   1

                                       1. Introduction

  Debt crises in emerging-market economies are global in nature, affecting multiple economies
in a synchronized fashion and involving the stability of global financial intermediaries. Salient
examples of these events include the Latin American debt crises of the 1980s, linked to major
U.S. banks; the Russian/East Asian crises in the late 1990s, linked to the collapse of the
LTCM fund; and the recent global financial crisis, linked to U.S. and European banks and
affecting most emerging-market economies. Based on the recurrent nature of these episodes, a
commonly held view in policy circles is that global banks (i.e., financial intermediaries operating
in the world economy) play an important role in shaping systemic debt crises.
  In this paper, we reassess this long-held view in policy circles by studying the role of global
financial intermediaries in international lending. We do so by developing a heterogeneous-
agent model of the world economy with risky lending, and provide new empirical evidence on
the relationship between global financial intermediaries and emerging-market debt prices. In
the model, borrowers issue risky securities purchased by financial intermediaries, and aggregate
shocks transmit internationally through financial intermediaries' net worth. The strength of
this mechanism is governed by the degree of financial frictions that intermediaries face in
financing their risky investments. We then provide empirical evidence on this mechanism,
showing that well-identified shocks to financial intermediaries' net worth affect bond prices in
emerging-market economies. We exploit variation in the prices of emerging-market bonds with
similar observed characteristics during a short window around Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy,
and document larger price drops in bonds held by more affected financial intermediaries.
Finally, we conduct a quantitative analysis of the model, which uses the empirical evidence
as well as other key data, and show that global financial intermediaries play a relevant role
in driving fluctuations of borrowing costs and consumption in emerging-market economies,
during both debt crises and regular business cycles.
  We begin by laying out a model of risky international lending. We model a world economy
composed of a set of heterogeneous emerging economies that face systemic and idiosyncratic
income shocks and borrow from developed economies without commitment. Global financial
firms intermediate in this lending process, but face financial frictions in linking investments in
risky securities to their net worth. The model, while rich enough to be quantified and mapped
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                 2

to the data, hinges on critical forces that can be characterized in a stylized way. Required
returns on emerging-economy debt are determined endogenously, and include an intermedia-
tion premium and a default-risk component. The intermediation premium is determined to
equate global supply and demand of funds for risky assets. In this way, negative aggregate
shocks lower financial intermediaries' net worth, contract the supply of funds, and increase the
intermediation premium. The strength of this mechanism is governed by the financial frictions
faced by intermediaries, which determine their marginal costs of external finance. When these
marginal costs are large, shocks that affect intermediaries' net worth lead to large effects on
emerging-market bond prices, since they require higher returns to be willing to raise external
finance and purchase risky securities. In fact, in the opposite extreme case, when intermedi-
aries face no financial frictions, debt prices do not respond to changes in intermediaries' net
worth.
  Motivated by the model's predictions, we analyze the empirical relationship between emerging-
market bond prices and financial institutions' net worth. In the aggregate, these two variables
are strongly negatively correlated, with periods such as the recent global financial crisis being
characterized by spikes in emerging-market spreads. However, the main empirical challenge
for drawing conclusions about this relationship is that changes in financial institutions' net
worth can be linked to other factors that drive emerging-market default risk. Therefore, we
propose an empirical strategy that builds on the empirical finance literature and exploits
high-frequency variation in individual bond prices. We identify the effect of changes in global
financial intermediaries' net worth on emerging-market bond prices by relating the average
contraction in the net worth of the institutions holding a particular bond in a narrow win-
dow around the Lehman-bankruptcy episode to its subsequent price drop. The main idea of
this empirical strategy is that bonds of a given country­sector with comparable observable
characteristics have similar default and liquidity risk, but are held by financial intermediaries
differentially affected during the Lehman-bankruptcy episode. To measure the average con-
traction in the net worth of the financial intermediaries holding a particular bond, we collect
data on each financial intermediary's holdings of each individual bond, as well as data on the
stock-price drop of each publicly traded financial intermediary. We document that bonds held
by more severely affected banks during this episode experienced more severe price drops in the
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                   3

two subsequent months. The estimated elasticity is quantitatively large: Bonds whose holders
suffered a contraction in net worth one standard deviation higher than the mean experienced
a price contraction 50% larger than that of the average bond.
  We then use a quantitative version of the model, disciplined by our empirical estimates as
well as other key data, to assess the relevance of global financial intermediaries in international
lending. The model, solved with a combination of global methods and an approximation of
the distribution of assets in the world economy, is consistent with important comovements of
international asset prices, as well as with individual emerging-economy business cycles. Our
first main quantitative result is that global banks play a central role in the emerging economies'
borrowing costs and consumption dynamics, during both debt crises and in regular business
cycles. In debt crises, we show that a contraction in the net worth of global financial in-
termediaries similar to that observed during 2007­2009 can explain more than two-thirds of
the increase in borrowing costs and more than one-third of the consumption adjustment, or
"sudden stop," observed in emerging economies during this period. Moreover, global financial
intermediaries are also relevant in regular business cycles, accounting for 40% of the fluctua-
tions in emerging economies' borrowing costs, with the remainder explained by fluctuations
in the default risk.
  We then conduct a set of exercises that highlight the value of modeling risky lending and
borrowing in the global economy, relative to assuming an exogenous stochastic discount fac-
tor in an otherwise standard model of sovereign debt, which is a common practice in the
literature. First, we identify elements that matter for the transmission and amplification of
aggregate shocks: the exposure of global financial intermediaries to emerging economies and
the distribution of debt in the world economy. With the current observed exposure (around
10% of risky assets), global financial intermediaries mostly play a role in transmitting shocks
that originate in developed economies. However, when this exposure is higher, around the
levels observed in the 1980s (three times the current levels), global financial intermediaries
also amplify shocks that originate in emerging economies, through a feedback effect between
the supply of funds and emerging economies' default rates. In this case, the distribution of
debt shapes the feedback effect, with more dispersion in debt positions leading to higher de-
fault rates for a given negative output shock. Second, we assess the effects of global policies
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                     4

of liquidity provision to financial intermediaries on emerging economies' borrowing costs and
consumption dynamics during debt crises. We show that policies that reduce funding rates
for global banks during recessions in developed economies attenuate the transmission of the
shock to emerging economies, with borrowing costs increasing by half of what they would in
the absence of these policies.

Related literature
  Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. First, a growing body of re-
search on financial intermediaries and asset prices argues that financial intermediaries are
likely to be the marginal investor in several asset markets, and links asset-price dynamics
to frictions in financial intermediation. For examples of theories, see Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010); He and Krishnamurthy (2011, 2013); Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014); for exam-
ples of empirical evidence, see Adrian et al. (2014); He et al. (2017); Du et al. (2019); see also
He and Krishnamurthy (2018) for a recent survey.1 The closest papers on the role of finan-
cial intermediaries in international asset prices are Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and Maggiori
(2017), who study exchange-rate determination in imperfect financial markets. Our contribu-
tion to this literature is twofold. First, our empirical analysis provides direct evidence on the
intermediary-based asset pricing channel for emerging-market debt. Second, the analysis of
our world-economy model shows that the wealth dynamics of global financial intermediaries
are central in determining aggregate emerging-market borrowing and consumption dynamics.
  Second, our paper is related to the literature on sovereign debt and default. This literature
argues that default risk is an important driver of the dynamics of external borrowing and
consumption in emerging economies (see, for example, Aguiar and Gopinath, 2006; Arellano,
2008). In a recent survey, Aguiar et al. (2016) suggest the relevance of enriching the lender side
in sovereign-debt models. To date, this has been done by introducing more flexible stochastic
discount factors in the pricing of debt (see, for example, Borri and Verdelhan, 2011; Lizarazo,
2013; Tourre, 2017; Bianchi et al., 2018; Bocola and Dovis, 2019; Bai et al., 2019) and analyzing
amplification and contagion through lenders (see Park, 2014; Bocola, 2016; Arellano et al.,
2019). Our paper contributes to this literature by quantifying a theory that links the balance

  1Other   related papers study intermediaries-driven fire sales in the context of CDS and corporate bonds
(Coval and Stafford, 2007; Mitchell et al., 2007; Siriwardane, 2019).
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         5

sheets of global financial intermediaries to the behavior of asset prices and risky borrowing in
the world economy.
  Third, the paper is related to the literature on international capital flows and the global
financial cycle. This literature has documented a large comovement in debt and equity prices
across countries (see, for example, Forbes and Rigobon, 2002; Longstaff et al., 2011; Borri
and Verdelhan, 2011) and a strong link between international capital flows, domestic lending,
and the occurrence of "sudden stops" in emerging economies (examples include Calvo, 1998;
Mendoza, 2010; Bruno and Shin, 2015b; Rey, 2015; Baskaya et al., 2017).2 Our paper shows
that global financial intermediaries can play a central role in these patterns. In this sense,
our results provide a micro foundation for exogenous fluctuations in external borrowing costs,
which have been identified as important drivers of consumption, output, and exchange-rate
dynamics (see Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Garc´
                                            ia-Cicco et al., 2010).
  Finally, our paper is related to the growing body of research that studies the role of agents'
heterogeneity in the transmission of aggregate shocks. Most of the advances in this literature
occurred in the context of closed economies (prominent examples include Krusell and Smith,
1998; Khan and Thomas, 2008; Kaplan et al., 2018). We contribute to this literature by
analyzing the role of agent heterogeneity and the composition of financial intermediaries'
balance sheets in the the transmission of international shocks. Methodologically, our work is
related to a set of papers that use microlevel moments to discipline macro theories (see the
work surveyed in Nakamura and Steinsson 2018 and Arellano et al. (2019) for examples in the
context of sovereign debt).



  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model and discusses the
channels through which global banks amplify and transmit shocks in the risky-debt market.
Section 3 presents the empirical evidence. Section 4 presents the calibration and performs the
main quantitative exercises, and Section 5 concludes.



  2Other   related papers include Devereux and Yetman (2010); Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011); Avdjiev et al.
(2018); Cao et al. (2020) and Correa et al. (2020), who study the role of financial intermediaries in capital
flows.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                           6

                         2. A Model of the Global Debt Market

  We construct a framework to study the role of financial intermediaries in global lending
markets. The world economy consists of a set of emerging-market economies (EMs) and a set
of developed-market economies (DMs). Households in these two types of economies differ in
their preferences, which gives rise to international lending. EM households are risk-averse and
impatient, while DM households are risk-neutral and patient. Households in EMs are endowed
with a stochastic stream of tradable goods with systemic and idiosyncratic components that
lead to heterogeneity across EMs. We interpret household borrowing in a broad sense and
capture direct international borrowing, sovereign borrowing, and borrowing through other
agents (e.g., local banks). EMs lack commitment to repay their debt and can default.
  The model's key feature is that international lending is mediated by financial intermediaries
(global banks ). DM households provide finance to global banks using a risk-free bond (deposits )
and equity. Intermediaries face frictions in their intermediation activity that limit their ability
to raise funds from DMs. They lend these funds to EM households using risky bonds or invest
them in risky DM technologies. Figure 1 graphically represents the global economy.



                                   Figure 1. The World Economy


                     Emerging-Market                                       Developed-Market
                     Economies (EMs)                                       Economies (DMs)
                ·   Risk-averse/impatient,                           ·     Risk-neutral/patient,
                ·   Borrow without commitment,                       ·     Save in risk-free bonds,
                ·   Tradable endowment                               ·     Tradable endowment + production

                                                 Global Banks               Financing
                       Risky
                       Lending         ·   Financed with risk-free bonds
                                           + costly equity,                             Risky
                                       ·   Invest in risky securities                   Lending




2.1. Emerging Economies
  There is a continuum of mass µem of heterogeneous emerging economies, indexed by i 
[0, µem ]. Each emerging economy is populated by a unit mass of identical households with
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                          7

preferences described by the lifetime utility
                                                   
                                                         t
                                              E0         em u(cit ),                                      (1)
                                                   t=0

where u(·) is increasing and concave, cit denotes consumption of the representative EM house-
hold i in period t, and em  (0, 1) is the EM household's subjective discount factor. Each
period, EM households receive a stochastic endowment of tradable goods, with a systemic
component yemt , common across all EMs, and an idiosyncratic component zit . After observ-
ing the realization of their endowment, households choose to repay the debt they inherited
from the previous period (it = 1) or default (it = 0). Defaulting households lose access
to external credit markets and reenter when the random variable it  Bernoulli() equals
one. This implies that households remain in financial autarky for a stochastic number of
periods. Households that have access to external credit markets can issue long-term bonds
with a deterministic decay rate. In particular, by issuing one unit of the bond in period t, the
government promises to repay one unit of goods in period t + 1,  in period t + 2,  2 in period
                                            i                              3
t + 3, and so on, and in exchange receives qemt units of goods in period t. Denoting by bt

the amount of coupons to be paid in period t, the law of motion of these coupons is given by
bt+1 = bt + it , where it denotes the period t issuance of new bonds. Households' sequential
budget constraint in periods with access to international markets is then

                                                     i
                                 cit = yemt + zit + qem t (bit+1 - bit ) - bit .                          (2)

Households excluded from global capital markets simply consume their endowments cit =
H(yemt + zit ), where H(x)  x captures the output losses associated with the default decision.
The household problem in recursive form is detailed in Appendix A. As is standard in default
                     i
problems, the price qem t depends on the aggregate and individual states of the households as

well as on their borrowing choices, bit+1 .
  In partial equilibrium, this problem is equivalent to a standard borrowing problem in a small
open economy with default (e.g., Aguiar and Gopinath, 2006; Arellano, 2008). However, the
bond-price schedule faced by EM households in this economy will be affected by the interaction
  3The   convenience of this type of contract, frequently used in the sovereign-debt and corporate finance
literature, is its recursive structure. The case of  = 0 corresponds to short-term debt, and as  increases, so
does the maturity of the bond.
                            GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       8

between global banks, the distribution of debt positions across EMs, and systemic variables
introduced by our framework.

2.2. Developed Economies
Households. The representative DM household has preferences described by the lifetime ex-
pected utility

                                                 
                                                       t
                                            E0         dm cdmt ,                                      (3)
                                                 t=0


where cdmt denotes consumption and dm  (em , 1) the DM household's subjective discount
factor. Each period, households receive an endowment of tradable goods ydm and time to work
h.4 They can save in risk-free bonds issued by global banks (i.e., deposits) that pay a return
Rdt for every unit of deposit in t + 1. Their sequential budget constraint is given by


                               cdmt = ydm + wt h + Rdt dt - dt+1 + t ,                                (4)


where wt denotes wages in period t, dt+1 denotes the amount of deposits in t to be repaid in
t + 1, and t denotes net payouts from global banks.
  The DM household's problem is to choose state-contingent plans {cdmt , dt+1 }t=0 to maximize

(3) subject to (4), taking as given prices {Rdt , wt }                      
                                                      t=0 and transfers {t }t=0 . Households'
                                                                               -1
optimization delivers a constant equilibrium interest rate for deposits, Rdt = dm  Rd .


Nonfinancial firms. DM economies are also populated by representative nonfinancial firms
with access to technologies to produce tradable goods yft and accumulate capital kt+1 :

                                                           (1-)
                                         yft = (t kt ) ht          ,                                  (5)

                                       kt+1 = t (1 -  ) kt + it ,                                     (6)


  4We   introduce the endowment ydm to make explicit that our framework can accommodate production
sectors in DMs that are not financed by global banks--for instance, small firms financed by regional U.S.
banks. Due to the risk-neutrality of DM households, making this process stochastic would not play any role
in equilibrium.
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                             9

with ,   (0, 1), where ht are hours of work, it is firm investment, and t is an aggregate
shock to the capital quality with a bounded support.5 The shock to DM firms is potentially
correlated with the aggregate shock to EMs, yem , with the correlation between the two shocks
given by the parameter em,dm  [-1, 1]. Nonfinancial DM firms are owned by global banks,
which we describe next.

2.3. Global Banks
  Global banks--financial firms owned by DM households--engage in financial intermedia-
tion in the world economy. Their objective is to maximize the lifetime discounted payouts
transferred to DM households,
                                                       
                                                            s-t
                                            max Et          dm  jt+s ,                                         (7)
                                                      s=0

where jt denotes the net payments of bank j to households in period t. Each bank can invest
in two types of risky securities: claims on nonfinancial firms from DM economies, admjt , and
bonds issued by EMs, {ai
                       emjt }iIt , where i indexes a particular EM economy and It the set of

EMs that issue bonds in period t. The amount of final goods each bank obtains from these
investments, or net worth, is given by

                                    i     i      i
                  njt =            Rem t qemt-1 aemjt-1 di + Rdmt qdmt-1 admjt-1 - Rd djt-1 ,                  (8)
                           iIt-1

        i
where {Rem t }iIt-1 is the set of returns of EM bonds in period t, Rdmt is the return of the

claims of nonfinancial firms in DM economies in period t, and qdmt is its price. Banks use their
net worth, as well as risk-free deposits from DM households, to finance investments in risky
securities and dividend payments, divjt :

                                                   i    i
                            njt + djt =           qemt aemjt di + qdmt admjt + divjt .                         (9)
                                            iIt

Banks face frictions in financing their investments. First, they face a borrowing constraint
that links their deposits to their net worth,

                                                    djt  njt ,                                               (10)
  5Shocks   to the quality of capital are frequently used in the macrofinance literature (see, for example,
Bernanke et al., 1999; Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010) as a stylized disturbance that can generate realistic variations
in investment returns.
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                          10

where  > 0.6 In addition, although banks can raise equity to finance the purchase of their
risky assets (i.e., divjt < 0), we assume that raising equity is a costly source of financing, entail-
                                                                                                  -div
ing a cost of C (-divjt , njt ) units of final goods per unit raised, with C (div, n) =            n
                                                                                                         . Fol-
lowing the quantitative corporate finance literature (e.g., Gomes, 2001; Hennessy and Whited,
2007), these costs are designed to capture flotation costs and adverse-selection premia associ-
ated with raising external equity. We interpret  in a broad sense, as capturing the marginal
cost of raising external finance, which includes outside equity and other sources of external
finance such as issuing costly risky debt or expanding the customer base in the case of asset
managers.
  The net payouts to DM households in a given period are then given by



                                  jt = divjt (1 + Idivjt <0 C (divjt , njt )).                            (11)



Finally, to ensure that banks do not outgrow their financial frictions, we assume that they exit
with an exogenous i.i.d. probability (1 -  ) (see, for example, Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010).
Each period, a mass of (1 -  ) new banks enter the economy, so that the total mass of global
banks is always fixed at one. New banks are endowed with net worth n.
  The bank's problem is to choose state-contingent plans {{ai
                                                            emjt }, admjt , djt , divjt } to max-

imize (7) subject to (8), (9), (10), and (11). Appendix A shows the bank's recursive prob-
lem, which is linear in its net worth. Define the expected risk-adjusted returns on EM
                                e                   i         e
and DM assets, and deposits as Rem it  Et [dm vt+1 Remt+1 ], Rdmt  Et [dm vt+1 Rdmt+1 ],
 e
Rdt = E [dm vt+1 ] Rd , where vt is the marginal value of net worth for global banks, formally
defined in Appendix A; and let t  0 be the Lagrange multiplier associated to the borrow-
ing constraint. Focusing on an equilibrium in which banks always issue equity and invest in
all securities, the solution of the bank's portfolio problem is characterized by the following



  6This   borrowing constraint can emerge from an agency friction by which the banker can use the funds
raised from deposits to start a new franchise. Alternatively, the constraint can be interpreted as the presence
of regulatory capital requirements.
                                  GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                            11

equations:

                                     e       e     e
                                    Remit = Rdmt  RAt ,                                                         (12)
                                                   divjt           e         e
                                     1 - 2                      = Rdt + jt  RjXt ,                              (13)
                                                    njt
                                     e     e
                                    RAt = RjXt ,                                                                (14)

and the complementary slackness condition t (njt - djt ) = 0, for i  It and j  [0, 1]. Equa-
tion (12) implies that the global bank equates expected returns across asset classes. Equation
(13) implies equal marginal costs of the two sources of finance: the bank equates its marginal
cost of equity to its shadow marginal cost of deposits. Finally, equation (14) equates its mar-
                        e                                              e
ginal cost of finance, RjXt , to the expected return on risky assets, RAt . Equations (12)-(14)
also imply that there exists a global banks' stochastic discount factor mt+1 that prices risky
                         i                                                                                   dm t+1
EM assets, i.e., E mt+1 Rem t+1 = 1 for all i. This discount factor is given by mt+1 =                       1+2xt
                                                                                                                    ,
             -divjt
where xt      njt
                       is the banks' optimal equity issuance relative to their net worth, which is
the same for all banks j . This indicates that states with a higher marginal cost of external
finance are associated with a lower stochastic discount factor, all else equal.

2.4. Equilibrium
  Appendix A defines a competitive equilibrium in the global economy. In equilibrium, the
clearing of asset markets implies that global banks' investment in each risky security traded
in the global economy equalizes the amount of that type of security issued:

         Ai
          emt 
                                 i
                                qem    i          i
                                    t aemjt dj = qemt bit+1 ,         Admt               admjt dj = kt+1 .
                      j [0,1]                                                  j [0,1]

This equation implicitly normalizes the aggregate amount of DM securities to the aggregate
capital stock. A consequence of this normalization is that the equilibrium price of DM secu-
                                                                 i        it+1 (1+qEM
                                                                                    i
                                                                                      t+1 )
rities is one, qdmt = 1. The returns of securities are given by Rem t+1 =        qi
                                                                                            and
                                                                                                     EM t
                 -1
Rdmt+1 =   t+1 Admt         +1- .

2.5. The Role of Global Banks in International Lending
  We now discuss the main channels through which global banks affect EM debt by considering
an economy without aggregate uncertainty and studying the effects of fully unanticipated
aggregate shocks. These channels are the main driving forces in the quantitative analysis of the
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         12

model with aggregate shocks, which we study in Section 4. The equilibrium determination of
EM required returns and borrowing can be illustrated with a demand­supply-of-funds scheme.
On the lender side, combining optimal portfolio and financing choices across banks, we obtain
                                                                              e
a positive relationship between the generic required returns on any EM bond, Rem t , and the

aggregate EM bonds acquired by global banks, which we label aggregate supply of funds to
EMs:

                  As   e                            e                  e
                   t (Remt , Nt ) = Nt (1 + ) + X (Remt , )Nt - Admt (Remt , ),                           (15)
                                       Net worth       Equity issuance      Investment in DM firms
                                     +New deposits

where As   e
       t (Remt , Nt )        iIt
                                          q i ai dj di; Nt  j [0,1] njt dj is banks' aggregate net
                                   j [0,1] emt emjt
                e                        -divjt
worth at t; X (Rdm t , )       j [0,1]    njt
                                                dj = xt denotes the aggregate equity raised by banks
per unit of net worth, which, as indicated in the last equality, is the same for all banks; and
       e                                                      7
Admt (Rem t , )  Admt denotes banks' investments in DM firms.   This relationship between
                                                                   As
funds supplied and required returns is increasing (i.e.,            e
                                                                   Rem
                                                                      t
                                                                            > 0). To increase the amount of
                                                                        t

funds supplied when banks are borrowing-constrained, banks must either issue more equity
or decrease their DM investments, both of which require higher EM returns. Issuing more
equity is costly due to its increasing marginal costs, and decreasing investments in DM firms
is costly because it depresses the aggregate level of capital and increases its marginal product.
Note that equation (15) assumes a binding borrowing constraint. If the borrowing constraint
does not bind, equations (13) and (14) imply a perfectly elastic supply curve, in which banks
are willing to supply any amount of funds to EMs at the deposit rate.
  The supply elasticity is governed by two key parameters: the marginal cost of raising
external finance, governed by , and the degree of decreasing returns in DM firms, . Figure
2 graphically represents the aggregate supply of funds for high and low costs of raising equity.
  7This   supply is obtained by aggregating the supply of funds of each global bank to each EM economy. The
analysis allows for aggregation at the banks' level because global banks' optimal portfolio allocation implies
                                                                                    e       e      e
policies that are linear in their net worth. We also use the equilibrium condition Rem it  Remt = Rdmt ; hence,

the supply of funds depicts the relationship between funds allocated to EMs and required returns on all EM
                                e                                                            e
and DM assets. The function X (Rdm t , ) can be obtained from (12)-(14). The function Admt (Remt , ) can be

obtained by combining banks' optimality condition (12) and the definition of return Rdmt . Solving for Admt
                                              1
                   e                     -1
                      t - (1 -  )] (t+1 )
                                              -1
yields Admt =    [Rem                              . Finally, equation (15) also assumes a binding borrowing
constraint.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                13

Lower marginal costs of issuing equity yield greater sensitivity of the supply of funds to changes
in required returns. When the marginal costs of equity are low, an increase in required returns
not only attracts more funds that were initially allocated to the DM productive sector, but also
increases the desired level of capitalization of the aggregate banking system. In the extreme
case in which equity costs become negligible (  0), the aggregate supply curve becomes
                           e
flat in the plane (Aemt , Rem t ).


            Figure 2. Intermediaries' Financial Frictions and the EM Debt Market

        (a) High Costs of Equity Issuance                (b) Low Costs of Equity Issuance

      REM                                              REM
                  Demand                                           Demand
                  of Funds


                                       Supply
                                      of Funds
       1
      REM                                                                             Supply
                                                        1
                                                       REM                           of Funds
       0                                                0
      REM                                              REM




                                       AEM                                             AEM
               N (1 + )                                          N (1 + )


  On the borrower side, aggregating borrowing policies across EMs for given required re-
turns, we obtain a relationship between required returns and borrowing by EMs, which we
                                                      1
label aggregate demand of funds: Ad   e
                                  t (Remt ) =         e
                                                 iIt Rem
                                                          it+1        i
                                                                 1 + qEM t+1 bit+1 di. The aggre-
                                                        t

gate demand is also depicted in Figure 2 with a decreasing relationship between returns and
quantities. Although the slope of the aggregate demand cannot be signed analytically, we
focus here on a case in which it is negative, as it will be in our quantitative model, reflecting
the fact that higher required returns reduce borrowing and render repayment less likely.
  Figure 2 depicts the equilibrium aggregate borrowing and required returns as the inter-
section between aggregate demand and supply of funds. This analysis takes as given other
equilibrium variables, particularly global banks' net worth. Aggregate net worth can be ob-
tained by integrating the evolution of net worth (8) across banks:
                                  i     i
      Nt =                it 1 + qEM t Aemt-1 di + Rdmt Admt-1 - Rd Dt-1 + (1 -  )n.            (16)
                  iIt-1
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                   14

  Consider the effect of an unexpected negative shock to the return of the DM security,
t , which implies a low return on DM investments and negatively affects global banks' net
worth. The strength of the impact on net worth depends on global banks' exposure to DM
investments. Under binding borrowing constraints, a lower net worth reduces the amount
of deposits banks can rollover. This implies that banks have fewer resources available to
purchase securities, which reduces the aggregate supply of funds for a given required return--
as depicted by the dotted line in Figure 2a--and increases the equilibrium required return.8
                                   i                                   dm t+1
The asset pricing equation E mt+1 Remt+1 = 1, with mt+1 =              1+2xt
                                                                              ,   offers an alternative
interpretation of the equilibrium effects on expected returns of EM debt. A lower net worth
increases the marginal cost of issuing equity 1 + 2xt , which decreases the discount factor
mt+1 , and increases the required returns on EM debt.
  Next, consider the effect of an unexpected negative shock to the systemic component of
EM endowments, yemt . This shock affects aggregate demand through the effect of lower
endowments on desired individual borrowing decisions by each EM. Additionally, this shock
negatively affects the aggregate supply of funds and the net worth of global banks through
an increase in default risk that lowers EM debt prices and decreases returns. The strength
of the impact on net worth depends on global banks' exposure to EM investment and also
on the debt's distribution across EMs. If a larger fraction of EMs have high levels of debt,
the increase in default risk is higher and so is the effect on banks' net worth. In Section 4,
we study the quantitative role of banks' exposure to EM debt and debt distribution in the
amplification of shocks to yemt .
  Finally, how EM returns respond to shocks to Nt , originating from shocks to either t or
yemt , depends on the banks' ability to recapitalize. In the model, this depends on the parameter
, which determines the marginal cost of issuing external finance. Consider an economy with
high costs of equity issuance (high ). In this economy, the excess supply of funds is steep
because banks require a significant increase in returns to issue equity to finance purchases of
additional risky securities. As shown in Figure 2a, a shock to Nt will have an associated large
drop in prices and a large increase in required returns to induce equity issuance to purchase

  8When   borrowing constraints are not binding, banks offset the negative net worth shock by capturing
deposits without affecting the required returns of EM debt.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                        15

a given stock of securities. Next, consider an economy with low . In this economy, it is less
costly for banks to recapitalize, and therefore prices and returns need to respond less to a
shock to Nt of the same magnitude in order to induce equity issuance to restore equilibrium
(Figure 2b). In the extreme case in which banks can recapitalize costlessly, the excess supply
becomes perfectly elastic, and Nt would have no effect on prices. Proposition 1 formalizes this
result.

Proposition 1. If global banks face no financial frictions (i.e.,  = 0), EM debt prices are
          i                     i
given by qemt = Et DM it+1 1 + qemt+1 .


                                                 e                 1                (it+1 +qEM
                                                                                            i
                                                                                               t+1 )
Proof. If  = 0, (12)-(14) and the definition of Rem t imply that   dm
                                                                        = Et vt+1         i
                                                                                         qEM
                                                                                                        .
                                                                                             t

From banks' recursive problem (detailed in Appendix A), it follows that vt = 1 for all t,
leading to the stated result.

  Therefore, when global financial intermediaries can frictionlessly finance their investments
in risky securities, the equilibrium for each individual economy is isomorphic to one in which
debt is priced by DM households. A corollary of this result is that if, in addition, aggregate
EM and DM shocks are orthogonal (em,dm = 0), then shocks to DMs t are uncorrelated with
EM prices:

                                                  i
Corollary 1. If  = 0 and em,dm = 0, then cov(t , qemt ) = 0 for all t and i.


  This analysis suggests that the degree of price drops in response to DM shocks (if unrelated
to EM shocks) are highly informative of the degree of financial frictions faced by global insti-
tutions that price EM securities. The next section analyzes the empirical evidence linked to
this relationship.

                                  3. Empirical Evidence

3.1. Background: Aggregate Patterns
  EM debt prices have a strong common component that has a tight link with global factors
(Longstaff et al., 2011). We illustrate this in Figure 3a, which shows fluctuations of different
percentiles of the distribution of EM-bond spreads and their correlation with U.S. corporate
spreads. The average correlation between the spread of an individual EM economy and the
                                                GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                                                                           16


                           Figure 3. Aggregate Patterns in the Global Debt Market

         (a) Comovement of Bond Spreads                                                  (b) EM Spreads and U.S. Banks' Net Worth

                                                            Lehman
                                                            Bankruptcy
                                                                                          16                                                                               2
    18      Russian/LTCM Crisis                                                                                                                 Lehman
                                                                                                  Russian/LTCM Crisis          Beginning of the
                                                                           Greek Debt                                                           Bankruptcy
                                         Beginning of the                                                                      Great Recession               Greek Debt
                                                                           Haircut        14                                                                               1.5
    16                                   Great Recession                                                                                                     Haircut


    14                                                                                    12                                                                               1

    12                                                                                    10                                                                               0.5

    10
                                                                                           8                                                                               0
     8
                                                                                           6                                                                               -0.5
     6
                                                                                           4                                                                               -1
     4
                                                                                           2                                                                               -1.5
     2

     0                                                                                     0                                                                               -2
         1998   2000    2002      2004     2006     2008      2010         2012   2014         1998   2000    2002      2004    2006     2008     2010       2012   2014

                         EM Spreads (Mean)        EM Spreads (75 pct)
                         EM Spreads (25 pct)      U.S. High Yield Spread




Notes: Panel (A) shows the mean and 25th and 75th percentiles of country EM sovereign bond spreads and
U.S. high-yield corporate bonds, expressed in percentages. Panel (B) shows EM sovereign and corporate bond
spreads and U.S. banks' net worth (expressed as percentages relative to a log-linear trend). For details on the
data sources, see Appendix B1.


average EM-bond spread is 69%. Additionally, the correlation between average EM-bond
spreads and U.S. corporate spreads is 50%. Furthermore, EM bond spreads comove negatively
with global banks' net worth over recent decades, as shown in Figure 3b. The correlation
between average EM-bond spreads and U.S. global banks' aggregate net worth is -55%.
Spikes in bond spreads, such as the Russian and East Asian crises of the late 1990s or around
Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy in 2008, tend to mark periods of declines in U.S. banks' net
worth. These patterns are also consistent with the concept of the "global financial cycle"
(Gourinchas and Rey, 2007; Rey, 2015).
  In principle, these aggregate patterns can be informative of underlying frictions in the
intermediation of risky EM debt. However, retrieving the degree of financial frictions faced
by intermediaries out of aggregate data would be challenging, due to the potential presence
of common factors that drive both spreads and intermediaries' net worth. Based on this
concern, in the next subsections, we propose an empirical strategy that isolates the role of
shocks that affect EM returns through their effect on global financial intermediaries' net worth.
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                           17

This strategy is based on exploiting cross-sectional price differences in bonds held by global
financial institutions differentially hit by a negative aggregate shock.9 Our main analysis
focuses on a narrow window around Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy on September 15, 2008,
which constituted a large shock that affected financial institutions differentially and that, as we
show below, was followed by dispersion in the yields of EM bonds with similar characteristics
(default risk, maturity, liquidity). We next describe the data used in the empirical analysis,
the empirical model, and results. As an additional exercise, we perform the same empirical
analysis in a narrow window around Russia's default in August 1998.

3.2. Data and Descriptive Statistics
  This section summarizes the data sets used in the empirical analysis and describes our
construction of the main variables of interest for our main episode of analysis, which centers
on Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy. Further details on our description of the data can be found
in Appendix B.

EM bond prices. We collect data on daily prices for risky sovereign and corporate bonds issued
by countries that at some point were part of the EMBI. To capture risky bonds in our sample,
we focus on the set of 30 countries whose sovereign credit rating (from Standard & Poor's)
is below A. We restrict attention to bonds issued in international markets, for which global
financial intermediaries are more likely to be the marginal investor (see Maggiori et al., 2017;
Coppola et al., 2020). The data sources are Bloomberg and Datastream, from which we obtain
a sample of over 600 EM bonds (identified with different CUSIPs) with available daily price
data. For each bond, we have information on its issuer, currency of denomination, maturity,
bid­ask spread, seniority, and whether the bond is subject to collective action clauses. We
use these variables in the empirical analysis to compare the prices of bonds with similar

  9Note   that the source of variation in this empirical analysis is across bonds with different holders. In
our model, which features aggregation across intermediaries, we abstract from such sources of variation to
highlight the aggregate mechanism. We refer the interested reader to Supplementary Material A, in which we
enrich our model to allow for the same source of variation as in the data by introducing secondary markets
and heterogeneous banks. In this model, the cross-sectional variation of EM bond prices in response to a DM
shock that differentially affects intermediaries is also informative of the degree of financial frictions faced by
intermediaries.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       18

characteristics. We compute the yield to maturities of bond prices using information on the
coupons and maturities of each individual bond. Around half of the bonds in our sample are
sovereign bonds and half are corporate bonds, which span different sectors. In Appendix B,
we report descriptive statistics of our sample of bonds per country and sector.
  Our variable of interest is the change in yield to maturity in EM bonds following the
Lehman episode. Appendix Figure C1a shows that EM bond yields experienced average daily
increases in the 2 months after the Lehman episode, leading to a peak cumulative increase of 4
percentage points 40 days after the episode. Importantly, these daily increases in yields were
heterogeneous across bonds with similar characteristics. In particular, Appendix Figure C1b
shows the dispersion across daily changes in yields to maturity for bonds issued in the same
country and sector, denominated in the same currency, and with a similar maturity, bid­ask
spread, and credit worthiness proxied by initial yields. The dispersion of changes in yield to
maturity before the Lehman episode was relatively small (below 0.5%), and tripled following
the Lehman episode.
Shares of EM bond holdings by global financial intermediaries. The most novel part of our
data is that for each bond in our sample, we collect data from Bloomberg on holdings by
financial institutions prior to the Lehman episode. These data contain, for each individual
bond (at the CUSIP level), the share held by each reporting financial institution, including
banks, asset managers, holding companies, insurance companies, pension funds, and other
financial institutions. We denote by ij the share of bond i held by financial institution j as
of 2008.q2.10 Within these holders, we focus on financial institutions publicly traded on DM
stock exchanges, which thus contain data on their stock prices. Sixty-four institutions meet
our selection criteria. These institutions constitute our empirical measure of global banks.
Appendix B lists these institutions and reports descriptive statistics for those with the largest
EM bond holdings in our sample. As shown in the first column of Table 1, the global financial
intermediaries included in our sample held, on average, 50% of reported bond holdings at the
end of 2008.q2, prior to the Lehman episode.


  10Data   on bond holdings are available at quarterly frequency. Our baseline exercise uses the holdings of
2008.q2. For additional analysis regarding the persistence of intermediaries' bond holdings, we also collect
data for the remaining quarters of 2008.
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                          19


      Table 1. Intermediaries' Net Worth During the 2008 Crisis: Summary Statistics

                           Bank coverage  Stock price  Stock price  Stock price
                               per bond          bank level         bond level        residualized
       Mean                      50%                -11%               -13%                0%
       Median                    48%                 -6%               -10%                0%
       Std Deviation             29%                 30%               18%                 7%
       5th percentile             0%                -41%               -33%               -8%
       95th percentile           100%                12%                3%                 8%
       Num. Obs.                  615                 64                579                531

Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for the change in global financial intermediaries' (GFIs) market
value of net worth around Lehman's bankruptcy. The first column reports summary statistics for the shares
held by GFIs for the bonds included in the sample; the second column shows statistics for the change in GFIs'
log stock prices with reported holdings; and the last two columns report statistics for the change in GFIs'
average net worth at the bond level with and without residualizing by the bond covariates of the empirical
model (17). For further details on the data, sample, and sources, see Section 3.2 and Appendix B1.



Change in global financial intermediaries' net worth per bond. We collect data on daily stock
prices for each of the financial institutions and compute the change in stock prices in a window
around Lehman's bankruptcy. These data were obtained from Bloomberg and Datastream.
ej denotes financial institution j 's change in log stock price 10 days before and 3 days
after September 15, 2008, the day Lehman Brothers' went bankrupt. The second column
of Table 1 provides summary statistics of ej , showing an average contraction in global
financial intermediaries' net worth in the narrow window around the Lehman episode of 11%.
Importantly, the cross-sectional standard deviation of this variable is 30%, suggesting enough
variation in how global financial institutions were affected by the Lehman episode.
  With data on bond holdings and stock prices, we compute a measure of the change in
bond holders' average net worth around the Lehman episode, defined as ei =                        j J   ij ej ,
where J denotes the set of global financial institutions with available data. This variable also
displays significant cross-sectional variation, even after residualizing from all bond covariates
used in the regressions. This is the variation we exploit in the empirical analysis.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                    20

3.3. Identification and Empirical Model
  Our identification strategy for measuring the effect of global financial institutions' net worth
on EM bond spreads is based on exploiting price differences across bonds with similar default
risk, maturity, and liquidity, but held by different financial institutions. We do so by estimating
the set of regressions


                           h yi = ksh + ch + h ei + h Xi + hi ,                               (17)


where h yi denotes the change in the log gross yield to maturity or price of bond i issued
by country k in sector s between 10 days before the Lehman episode and h days after the
episode; ksh denotes country (k ) by sector (s) fixed effects; ch denotes currency fixed effects;
Xi is a vector of controls at the bond level, which includes the total reported share       j J   ij ,
the bond's residual maturity, its bid­ask spread, a categorical variable reflecting the bond's
seniority, a dummy variable on whether the bond is subject to collective action clauses, and
the average yield to maturity in the 2 months prior to the Lehman episode. The coefficient of
interest, h , measures the elasticity of bond prices to changes in holders' net worth at horizon
h. We estimate a separate regression for each horizon h to estimate the dynamic effects of
global financial intermediaries' net worth on bond yields using Jorda's 2005 local projections.
  Our identifying assumption is that within the EM bonds of a given country and sector and
with a similar maturity, liquidity, initial yield, and other characteristics, no relevant factors
that drive changes in EM bond yields are correlated with the net worth of global financial
intermediaries holding that bond. The last column of Table 1 shows that our variable of
interest, the change in bond holders' average net worth around the Lehman episode ei ,
exhibits considerable cross-sectional variation once it has been residualized by the entire set
of covariates used in the empirical model.
  In this sense, focusing our analysis on a short window during the Lehman episode is useful
for three reasons. First, during this episode, global financial intermediaries experienced dif-
ferential changes in their net worth that were primarily driven by factors related to events in
developed markets (see, for example, Chodorow-Reich, 2013). Second, by focusing on a nar-
row window, we can exploit the price differences that arise for bonds of similar characteristics,
as shown in Appendix Figure C1b. Third, as we show later, global financial intermediaries'
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                     21

exposure to risky EM debt in this period was small, which mitigates concerns regarding re-
verse causality: a change in net worth due to the changes in EM bond prices. The estimated
average share of EM risky assets as a function of total assets in our sample of global finan-
cial institutions is 10%--see Appendix Table C1--so the average contraction of 3% in EM
bond prices during the narrow window considered should only have modest effects relative
to the 11% average contraction in global financial intermediaries' net worth.11 We also ad-
dress the concern regarding reverse causality by instrumenting the change in global financial
intermediaries' net worth. See the next subsection for more details.
  An important element of our identification strategy is that within an EM country­sector,
bonds with similar default risk, liquidity properties, and other relevant characteristics have
different holders. To further clarify using an example, our identification learns from the relative
price dynamics of two foreign currency bonds issued by the Mexican government with similar
maturities and liquidity, which therefore have the same default risk but are held by different
global financial intermediaries.
  Another relevant element of our identification strategy is that, as stated above (Table 1),
intermediaries exhibit differential holdings of bonds in our sample. Appendix B investigates
the nature of the sorting of financial intermediaries into different types of bonds. We first
document some degree of sorting of financial institutions with different changes in net worth
into bonds issued by different countries and sectors. However, these are the characteristics we
can precisely control for with the use of country­sector fixed effects. We then show that there
is no selection of financial intermediaries into bonds with different maturities, liquidities, or
default risk. A possible interpretation of why different intermediaries hold different bonds with
similar default risk, liquidity properties, and other relevant characteristics is that institutions
might develop some degree of specialization in certain bonds for trading purposes. Consistent
with this view, Appendix B also documents that the holdings of intermediaries are "sticky,"
i.e., intermediaries tend to exhibit persistence in their holdings of bonds, even after controlling
for country-intermediary fixed effects. We incorporate this view in our model with secondary


  11In   Appendix Tables C1 and C2, we report an average ratio of EM debt to total assets of 10% and an av-
erage leverage--adjusted to account for assets under management--of 3.8. A back-of-the envelope calculation
suggests that a 3% drop in EM bond prices would result in a 1.1% drop in intermediaries' net worth.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                               22

markets, bond varieties, and trading networks, which we develop in Supplementary Material
A.


3.4. Empirical Results
  Figure 4 presents the results from estimating (17) on the bonds' yields to maturity at
different horizons, h, ranging from 20 days prior to 70 days after the Lehman episode. Panel
A of Table 2 reports estimated coefficients and standard errors for the on-impact effect and the
peak effect. Results indicate a negative estimated elasticity, h , which indicates that bonds
whose lenders' net worth contracted more during the Lehman episode experienced significantly
higher yields to maturities in the 2 months after the episode. The estimated elasticity ranges
from -0.01 to -0.14 and averages -0.056 in the 2 months after the Lehman episode. To
put this estimated coefficient into perspective, it implies that bonds whose holders suffer a
contraction in net worth one standard deviation higher than the mean experienced an increase
in yields that is roughly 1.5 times as large as that of the average bond during the Lehman
episode.
  The fact that the point estimate of h is zero before the Lehman episode suggests that
there are no pretrends that may drive the empirical analysis. Additionally, the estimated
effect of intermediaries' net worth on bond prices is temporary. The estimated elasticity
begins to revert 45 days after the Lehman episode and ceases to be significantly different from
zero shortly after 2 months. As we argue in Supplementary Material A, in the cross-section,
temporary effects can be expected if financial intermediaries gradually arbitrage out excess
returns for bonds with similar characteristics.
  We perform a series of additional empirical analyses to show that the empirical results are
robust to alternative specifications and to mitigate potential concerns regarding our identifi-
cation strategy. Panel B of Table 2 reports a series of robustness exercises. These indicate
that we estimate negative elasticities between bond yields and lenders' net worth if we do
not include bond-level controls, if we restrict the sample to only sovereign bonds or bonds
with similar maturity, or if we estimate a contemporaneous relationship between the bond
yields and lender's net worth instead of a local projection, as in our baseline regression.
In particular, this latter exercise involves estimating at each horizon h the empirical model
h yi = ksh + ch + h h ei + h Xi + hi , which only differs from our baseline regression (17)
                                           GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                            23


      Figure 4. The Dynamic Effect of Intermediaries' Net Worth on EM-Bond Yields




                              0
                              -.05
                              -.1
                       Beta
                              -.15
                              -.2
                              -.25




                                     -20      -10   0   10   20     30   40   50   60   70
                                                             Days Post



Notes: This figure shows the estimated elasticity of bonds' yields to maturity, h , to changes in the holder's
net worth at horizon h from estimating regression (17). Solid lines represent point estimates of the regression
at each horizon and dotted lines are 90% confidence intervals.



in that the changes in lenders' net worth are computed over the same horizon as our left-
hand-side variable. This latter exercise is important in addressing the potential presence of
autocorrelation in individual lender's net worth following the Lehman shock. Given that this
elasticity is roughly half of the baseline, we use this alternative estimate to conduct robustness
analysis of our quantitative model in Section 4.
  Panel C of Table 2 shows estimates of our baseline regressions by splitting the bonds based
on their currency of denomination. This distinction is important because, as shown in Maggiori
et al. (2017), the currency of the bond is an important prediction of the marginal investor.
Results show a more precise estimate for foreign currency, consistent with the view that global
intermediaries are more important in the pricing of these bonds. Panel D analyzes the role
of different types of intermediaries by estimating the elasticity associated with banks, banks
excluding asset managers' divisions, asset managers, and other intermediaries (which includes
insurance companies, among others). Although the results are imprecisely estimated for asset
managers, they indicate similar negative elasticities for all types of financial intermediaries.
These results are consistent with our theoretical model, in which the main mechanism operates
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                           24


        Table 2. Effect of Intermediaries' Net Worth on EM-Bond Yields: Summary

                                                          Impact        Peak      Average Obs.
             A. Baseline                                   -0.006     -0.142       -0.056     531
                                                          (0.004)      (0.059)
             B. Robustness        No Controls            -0.012 -0.172             -0.078     615
                                                          (0.004)      (0.040)
                                  Only Sovereign           0.0014      -0.039      -0.015     287
                                                          (0.005)      (0.052)
                                  Same Maturity            -0.009     -0.325       -0.125     128
                                                          (0.008)      (0.080)
                                  Contemporaneous          -0.006     -0.070       -0.022     531
                                                          (0.004)      (0.029)
             C. By currency       Only Foreign             -0.006     -0.139       -0.054     481
                                                          (0.004)      (0.060)
                                  Only Local               -0.022      -0.147      -0.059      50
                                                          (0.023)      (0.115)
             D. By institution Banks                       -0.003     -0.163       -0.062     465
                                                          (0.009)      (0.068)
                                  Banks (ex. AMD)          -0.002     -0.187       -0.072     466
                                                          (0.009)      (0.069)
                                  Asset Managers           -0.025      -0.357      -0.190     394
                                                          (0.040)      (0.263)
                                  Other                   -0.012      -0.163       -0.063     466
                                                          (0.005)      (0.044)
             E. IV Strategy                                0.0061     -0.211       -0.089     115
                                                          (0.006)      (0.057)
             F. Russian Crisis                             -0.059     -0.502       -0.177      95
                                                          (0.105)      (0.201)

Notes: This table shows the estimated elasticity of bonds' yields to maturity, h , to changes in the holder's net
worth at two different horizons h, from estimating the regression (17). The on-impact effect corresponds to
the estimated elasticity for h = 0. The peak effect corresponds to the most negative estimated elasticity over
all horizons before two months. Different rows show different specifications, detailed in Section 3.4. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses, and *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         25

through the increasing marginal cost of external finance, which is present for both levered and
unlevered institutions.
  One concern is that the empirical estimates can capture the direct effects that drops in
EM bond prices around the Lehman episode can have on financial intermediaries' net worth,
because these bonds are part of their asset portfolios. As argued before, this concern is
alleviated because EM bonds constitute only a small fraction of global financial intermediaries'
asset portfolios. To further strengthen this point, Panel E of Table 2 shows the results of
conducting an instrumental variable (IV) strategy, aimed at ensuring that the results are
not driven by the reverse causality of bond prices to financial intermediaries' net worth. We
instrument the change in the bond holders' net worth ei with the share of each bond held
by AIG as of 2008.q2. AIG is a financial institution that was a relevant holder of EM bonds
and was severely hit during the Lehman episode, but its downfall was driven by its activities
related to subprime securities.12 The logic of this IV strategy, then, is that by instrumenting
the change in net worth held by AIG's share, we abstract from any effect that changes in bond
prices may have on intermediaries' net worth. Results indicate a negative peak effect that is
statistically significant and larger (in absolute value) than the baseline.
  To demonstrate the external validity of our empirical exercise, we perform the same empiri-
cal analysis in a narrow window around the default of Russia in August 1998, which triggered
the collapse of the Long-Term Capital Management fund (LTCM). This event is a paradig-
matic case studied in the international macro literature of sovereign risk contagion through
common lenders (see, for example, Calvo, 2004). We estimate equation (17), in which we
compute ei with data on lenders' holding of EM bonds for 1998.q2 and changes in inter-
mediaries' net worth from 10 days before to 3 days after the Russian default on August 17,

  12Appendix    Table B5 reports descriptive statistics for AIG in the EM debt market. AIG's stock price
dropped by 88% during the narrow window around the Lehman episode, and was the financial institution with
the largest drop in stock price of our sample of global financial intermediaries. Its stock crash was attributed
to its large volume of activity in providing insurance by issuing CDS on subprime mortgage-backed securities
(see, for example, Harrington (2009)). AIG held more than 100 EM bonds, and its average share among
                                                                                         AIG
lenders of these bonds was 9%. In the first stage of our IV strategy, ei = ksh + ch + 1S i   + h Xi + iks
       AIG
(where i   denotes the share of bonds held by AIG in 2008.q2) and the estimated coefficient ^1S is positive

and statistically significant at the 0.1% level.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                 26

1998. As in our baseline model, we measure, in the left-hand-side variables, cumulative daily
changes in EM bond yields following this event. Consistent with our baseline results, Panel
F shows a negative estimated elasticity of lenders' net worth on EM bond yields. Appendix
Figure B2 depicts the dynamic effect, which shows that the elasticity peaks 15 days after the
episode. The estimated elasticities are larger than our baseline in absolute value, consistent
with the view that the Russian crisis was more concentrated in EM debt markets.
  Appendix B3 presents additional robustness exercises. First, we show that our results are
insensitive to choosing a wider or tighter window around the Lehman episode in computing
global financial intermediaries' change in stock price ei , as well as to extending the length of
the window to compute ei . Second, we show that the results are robust to excluding market
makers when computing the change in the stock price of the holders of each bond. Third, we
show that there is no selection of financial intermediaries into bonds with different maturities,
liquidities, or amounts issued.
  Finally, Appendix B3 examines how the effect of intermediaries' net worth on EM bond
yields varies depending on the financial positions (liquidity and leverage) of intermediaries
holding the bonds. For this, we collect additional data on intermediaries' balance-sheet in-
formation from Compustat. We also study how the estimated elasticity varies for bonds with
different shares held by global intermediaries. Our results suggest that bonds that were held
by intermediaries with higher liquidity and lower leverage and bonds that have lower shares
held by global financial intermediaries exhibit lower elasticities, although the results are not
precisely estimated and are not statistically significant.
  To summarize the findings of this empirical section, we exploit bond-level variation to
document that well-identified shocks to global financial intermediaries' net worth have an
impact on EM bond prices. This evidence is of interest on its own because it supports the
main mechanism highlighted in our model, through which global financial intermediaries' net
worth is relevant for the pricing of EM debt. As will be seen in the next section, we use our
estimated elasticity to quantitatively discipline the degree of financial frictions that financial
intermediaries face in our model.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                               27

                                 4. Quantitative Analysis

  In this section, we use our model and empirical evidence to examine the relevance of global
financial intermediaries to international lending. Section 4.1 discusses the model's calibration
and its ability to account for observed international business-cycle patterns. Section 4.2 uses
the calibrated model to quantify global banks' role in driving emerging markets' systemic
debt crises and borrowing-cost fluctuations. Finally, Section 4.3 shows how financial interme-
diaries' portfolios and the distribution of bond positions in the world economy matter for the
amplification of aggregate shocks.

4.1. Calibration and Quantitative Performance
4.1.1. Parameterization
  We discuss the calibration of the model by describing functional forms, parameter values,
and the quantitative performance of the model in terms of targeted and untargeted mo-
ments. In terms of solution method, our model's heterogeneity and aggregate uncertainty
imply that the joint distribution of bond positions and output in the world economy--an
infinite-dimensional object--is a state variable in agents' individual problems. We follow a
Krusell and Smith (1998) type of approach to approximate the distribution of bond positions,
combined with global methods for individual agents' problems, to solve the model's general
equilibrium. We provide details on the numerical solution method in Supplementary Material
B1.
  In terms of functional forms, we assume that EM households' period utility function includes
                                         c1-
constant relative risk aversion u(c) =   1-
                                             .   For the EMs' endowment processes, we assume
AR(1) processes:

                      ln yemt = em ln yemt-1 + em    emt ,         emt    N (0, 1),

                        ln zit = em ln zit-1 + em it ,       it    N (0, 1).

In this baseline calibration, we restrict the systemic and idiosyncratic component of output to
have the same stochastic process (governed by em and em ) in order to study the differential
effects of these shocks that arise due to endogenous amplification, rather than to having
different stochastic processes. As further discussed below, in our robustness analysis we relax
this assumption. For the capital quality shocks, we assume an i.i.d. process, ln t =         t ,
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                           28

with   dmt    N (0, 1), that abstracts from exogenous and predictable movements in expected
returns.13 Finally, we parameterize the output net of default costs by H(y ) = y (1 - d0 y d1 ),
where d0 , d1  0. This or similar nonlinear functional forms, which lead to higher nonlinear
default costs for higher values of y , are often used in the literature to rationalize the fact that
countries tend to default in bad times (e.g., Arellano, 2008; Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2012;
Aguiar et al., 2016).
  We calibrate the model in two steps, by setting one subset of parameters to fixed values
and another to match relevant EMs and global-bank moments. Panel (A) of Table 3 describes
the set of eight parameters we fix in the calibration. One period corresponds to 1 year.
For parameters on preferences and technologies, we use standard values in the business-cycle
literature: a coefficient of relative risk aversion for EMs,  = 2; a discount factor for DM
households, dm = 0.98, which implies an annual risk-free interest rate of 2%; a depreciation
rate  = 0.15; and the share of capital,  = 0.35. For the probability of reentering credit
markets, we set  = 0.25 so that the average exclusion period is 4 years, in line with empirical
evidence (Dias and Richmond, 2008; Gelos et al., 2011). The value of  = 0.8, the decay
rate of bonds, is chosen so that the duration of bonds is 5 years, which is in line with that
reported in Cruces et al. (2002) for emerging economies. For EMs' endowment process, we
set em = 0.68 and em = 0.03 to match the average autocorrelation and volatility of GDP in
the sample of countries analyzed in Section 3 with available data.
  We calibrate the remaining parameters of our model (Panel (B) of Table 3) to match key EM
and global-bank data moments, detailed in Table 4. The first group of moments are standard
targets in the sovereign-debt literature--namely, the average EM external borrowing, the
average EM default rate, and the correlation between EM-bond spreads and GDP. To compute
these data moments, we use a sample of EMs with available data for the period 1994­2014.
Supplementary Material B2 details the data sources. We target the observed average external-
debt-to-GDP ratio of 15%, the average default frequency of 1.5%, and the average correlation
between an individual country's spreads and GDP of -31%. These moments are particularly
informative about EM discount factors (em ) and default costs (d0 , d1 ). A second group of

  13This   parameterization also delivers an autocorrelation of DM securities close to those observed in the
data for U.S. high-yield bonds (a first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.2 in our period of analysis).
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                     29


                     Table 3. Parameter Values of the Baseline Calibration


              Panel A: Fixed Parameters                           Panel B: Calibrated Parameters
 Param.            Description                  Value Param.              Description                   Value
            Risk aversion                        2.00      EM     Discount rate of EMs                   0.90
            Reentry probability                  0.25      d0     Default cost--level                  0.0321
            Debt duration                         0.8      d1     Default cost--curvature                14.0
   EM       EM endowment, autocorrelation        0.68             Bank survival rate                     0.71
   EM       EM endowment, shock volatility       0.03             Marginal cost of raising equity        2.50
   DM       Discount rate of DM                  0.98      µEM    Mass of EM economies                   2.02
            Share of capital                     0.35      DM     Volatility of DM shock                0.068
            Depreciation                         0.15             Debt to net worth ratio                3.50
                                                            n
                                                            ¯     Net worth of new entrants              0.46
                                                          DM,EM   Correlation of exogenous shocks        0.45


Notes: This table shows the set of model parameters. Panel A describes the subset of fixed parameters; panel
B shows the subset of parameters calibrated to match the targeted moments detailed in Table 4.


moments are related to the role of global banks in EM debt markets. These are the average
and volatility of EM spreads, the volatility of global banks' net worth, the correlation between
global banks' net worth and EMs' output, and the average leverage ratio of global banks.14
  While each parameter can potentially affect all moments in the joint calibration, we find that
the volatility of DM shocks,  , and the global banks' survival rate,  , most affect the volatility
of global banks' net worth and the volatility of EM-bond spreads. We target the observed
volatility of EM-bond spreads of 170 basis points and a volatility of global banks' market value
of 28%, proxied by cyclical fluctuations in the stock price of publicly traded U.S. banks that
have data coverage for the period of analysis (tracked by the XLF index). We also target the
observed correlation between global banks' net worth and EMs' endowment of 35%, which is
mostly governed by the correlation between EM and DM shocks, dm,em . In our model, the
  14To   compute the volatility of global banks' net worth and its correlation with EMs' output, we measure
net worth at market value. In the model, both the book and market value of intermediaries' net worth are
relevant variables in determining equilibrium dynamics.
                         GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                30

average difference between the physical probability of default in EMs and their bond spreads
is governed by average net worth in the system, linked to n. We calibrate this parameter to
target the average observed EM-bond spread of 410 basis points. Finally, the leverage ratio
of global banks is mostly governed by the parameter on financial intermediaries' borrowing
constraint, which we set to  = 3.5. The data-target for this moment is 3.8 (see Table C2).
As detailed in Supplementary Material B2, this moment is computed as the average of a set
of levered (banks) and non-levered institutions (mostly asset managers), taking into account
both assets reported in the balance sheet and off-balance-sheet assets under management. The
latter is because, in our model, financial intermediaries are aimed at capturing a consolidated
entity that maximizes the joint value of the owners of the firms' equity and the owners of
the assets under management. With this assumption,  = 0 corresponds to the case of asset
managers. In the robustness analysis, we report our results of an alternative calibration where
intermediaries are only asset managers ( = 0), and another that targets twice the leverage
of our baseline model (with  = 7.0).
  Two additional key moments are targeted by our calibration: the exposure of global banks to
EMs and the elasticity of EM bond yields to global banks' net worth, estimated in our empirical
analysis. The mass of EMs, µem , particularly influences the share of EMs in global banks'
portfolio of risky assets, which, as will be seen later, is an important moment that governs
global banks' role in amplifying EM shocks. We measure this moment by combining data on
individual financial institutions' balance sheets in the sample from our empirical section with
aggregate data on debt positions, and obtain a share of EMs in global banks' risky assets of
10% (see Table C1). For details on the estimation of this moment, see Supplementary Material
B2. Section 4.3 examines alternative targets for this moment.
  Finally, we discipline global banks' degree of financial frictions, governed by , by targeting
an elasticity of EM-bond yields to changes in global banks' net worth following a DM shock
of -0.056, which is the average of our empirical estimates in Section 3.4 after the Lehman
episode. In the model, to compute this elasticity, we conduct an impulse-response function on
t that leads to a contraction of net worth of the same magnitude as that observed around
the 2008 Lehman episode during the window considered in our empirical analysis. Given that
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                31

our empirical estimates were obtained in a regression that absorbs default risk (with country­
sector fixed effects), in the model we compute the elasticity of the change in bond yields that
is not explained by changes in default risk (i.e., the intermediation premium, as defined below)
to the change in global banks' net worth. As discussed in Section 2.5, this moment depends
on the degree of financial frictions faced by global banks, governed by . In the absence of
financial frictions ( = 0), the elasticity of EM-bond yields to global banks' net worth would
be zero. As  increases, so does the elasticity in absolute value. Our calibration targets this
conditional elasticity estimated out of cross-sectional variation. Later in this section, we also
show that this calibration strategy delivers an untargeted unconditional correlation between
aggregate net worth and EM-bond spreads close to that observed in the data (-57%).
  Furthermore, in Supplementary Material A, we develop and solve an extension of the base-
line model with secondary markets for risky debt. In this extension of the model, banks
are heterogeneously affected by shocks and trade securities in secondary markets that fea-
ture trading frictions in the short run. These characteristics allow the model to feature the
same source of variation as that used in the empirical analysis and make the net worth of
the holders of each bond relevant for its pricing. We analyze a parameterization that targets
the cross-sectional elasticity estimated in Section 3 when running an equivalent regression on
model-simulated data. This model quantification generates quantitative results that are in
line with those of the baseline model. Additionally, we show that the cross-sectional elasticity
in the secondary market is tightly linked to the aggregate elasticity in the primary market.
This is because the cost of raising equity, parameterized by , governs the slope of the demand
for funds in the secondary and primary markets.
  In addition to this baseline calibration, we study the robustness of our results to four
alternative calibrations, all of which are detailed in Supplementary Material B4. First, we
calibrate the model to target a more conservative elasticity of EM-bond yields to changes in
global banks' net worth of -0.022, which we estimate in a contemporaneous regression in
Section 3. Second, we conduct a calibration in which we estimate different autoregressive
and volatility parameters for the systemic and idiosyncratic processes of EM endowment and
obtain results similar to those presented in this section. Third, we report the results for an
alternative calibration of the model with  = 0, which would correspond to asset managers
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       32



                                     Table 4. Targeted Moments

   Target                      Description                                               Data     Model
   E[Di /Yi ]                  Average EM debt                                           15.0% 14.4%
   P[DFi ]                     EM default frequency                                       1.5%    1.7%
   E[SPi ]                     Average EM-bond spreads                                   410bp 416bp
    (SPi )                     Volatility EM-bond spreads                                173bp 152bp
   corr(SPi , logYi )          Correlation EM-bond spreads & endowment                   -31% -84%
    (logV (N ))                Volatility global banks' net worth (NW)                    0.28     0.24
   corr(logV (N ), logYEM ) Correlation banks' NW & systemic EM endowment                 40%      44%
   E[AEM /(AEM + ADM )]        Global banks' exposure to EMs                              10%      10%
   EM,N                        Elasticity EM spreads to banks' NW                        0.056    0.059
   E[(AEM + ADM )/N W ]        Total assets to equity ratio                                3.8      3.7


Notes: This table shows the set of data moments targeted in our calibration and their model counterparts,
obtained by simulating a panel of countries from the calibrated model and computing the average of individual
countries' moments. Supplementary Material B2 provides details on the data measurements of EM debt,
default frequency and bond spreads, and global banks' net worth. See Sections 3 and 4 for details on the data
measurement of global banks' exposure to EMs and assets to equity ratio, as well as on the data and model
counterparts of the elasticity of EM-bond spreads to global banks' net worth.


(unlevered institutions) being the only type of global financial intermediaries in the model.
Finally, we extend the model to allow for a time-varying marginal cost of raising external
finance and capture the idea that it may be less costly for intermediaries to raise external
funding during tranquil times.

4.1.2. Targeted and Untargeted Moments
  Table 4 shows that our model closely approximates most targeted moments. An exception is
the countercyclicality of bond spreads, which our model overestimates relative to the data.15

  15Our   calibration does not perfectly match the targeted moments because our model is nonlinear. Matching
more closely the countercyclicality of bond spreads can only be done at the expense of worsening model
performance in other important dimensions, such as the average debt position and default rate.
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         33



                     Table 5. International Comovements: Data and Model

                   Correlation of SPEM with         Correlation of logV(N) with         Factor Models
                   SPEM,i          SPDM             SPEM             SPDM                 R2     RMSE
       Data          0.69           0.51            -0.57            -0.79              96.9%    3.19%
       Model         0.74           0.69            -0.65            -0.80              97.4%    0.72%
       Model f                                                                          83.2%    3.05%


Notes: This table shows untargeted moments regarding international asset prices. SPem refers to the average
EM-bond spread; SPem,i to the bond spread of an individual EM economy i; SPdm to high-yield U.S. corporate
bond spreads; and V (N ) to the market value of global banks' net worth. Supplementary Material B2 provides
details on the data measurements of these variables. The last two columns show the R2 and root mean squared
error of the cross-sectional regressions of expected sovereign bond returns using a factor model structure. See
Supplementary Material B6 for details on the analysis of factor models.




Most of the parameter values of our baseline calibration, detailed in Table 3, are broadly
aligned with those of the related literature.
  Our calibrated model is also consistent with key untargeted moments regarding the inter-
national synchronization of EM debt prices. First, our model is consistent with the large
comovement within EM-bond spreads and between them and DM spreads documented in
Section 3 and Longstaff et al. (2011). The first two columns of Table 5 show that our model
predicts an average correlation between an individual EM-bond spread and the average EM-
bond spread close to that observed in the data, and a high correlation between EM and DM
spreads, although larger than that observed in the data for U.S. high-yield corporate bonds.
Importantly, columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 show that the model also predicts comovements
between debt spreads and global banks' net worth that are quantitatively aligned with those
observed in the data. This result means that if we were to follow an alternative calibration
strategy, targeting the unconditional correlation between global banks' net worth and EM-
bond prices instead of our estimated elasticity in Section 3.4, we would obtain results similar
to those in our current baseline calibration, which uses our empirical estimates.
                          GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                  34

  We also assess the model's ability to price the cross-section of EM sovereign bond returns. To
do so, we follow standard practice in the empirical finance literature (see Borri and Verdelhan,
2011; Lettau et al., 2014, for two examples related to international asset prices), by estimating
a factor version of our model and assessing its ability to explain cross-sectional expected
returns in the data and the model. In our model, the stochastic discount factor that prices
EM sovereign debt is a nonlinear function of the model's state variables. In this exercise
we consider an approximated stochastic discount factor given by a linear function of global
banks' market value of net worth. The benefit of considering such an approximation is that
this factor is also measurable in the data, thereby allowing us to perform the same exercises
in the model and the data.
  We consider the data bond portfolios analyzed by Borri and Verdelhan (2011) that vary
in the degree of default risk and comovement with market returns, and construct similar
portfolios in model-simulated data. We then carry out an estimation in two stages. In the
first stage, we regress excess returns on the global banks' net worth to obtain portfolio loadings.
In the second stage, we regress time-series average returns for each portfolio on their factor
loadings. We perform three sets of estimation exercises. The first uses observed data to
compute portfolios' returns and the market factor; the second uses model-simulated data; and
in the third we assess the explanatory power of estimating cross-sectional expected returns in
the data with the model-estimated market price of risk. Supplementary Material B6 provides
details on the construction of bond portfolios and estimation procedures. We report multiple
statistics related to the goodness of fit of these estimations in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5.
In both the data and the model, the net worth of global banks can account for an important
component of the cross-sectional variation in expected returns (with R2 of 97% and 98% in the
data and model estimations, respectively). Additionally, the R2 of predicted expected returns
in the data with the model-estimated price of risk is 86%, suggesting that the calibrated model
also prices well the observed cross-sectional sovereign risk.
  Finally, our model is also consistent with important individual business-cycle patterns in
emerging markets (see, for example, Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007).
In particular, Appendix Table C3 shows that our model is able to reproduce the high volatility
of consumption relative to output and the high correlation between consumption and output.
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         35

Additionally, consistent with the data, the model delivers a countercyclical trade balance,
which in the model is due to the fact that interest rates endogenously increase in downturns
due to the higher likelihood of default.

4.2. Global Banks' Relevance
  We now use our calibrated model to quantitatively assess global banks' role in the interna-
tional transmission and amplification of shocks.

4.2.1. Systemic Debt Crises
  We begin by focusing on the recent global financial crisis as an example of a systemic
debt crisis that affected borrowing economies in a synchronized fashion. Appendix Figure B2
shows that during the 2007­2009 global financial crisis, the net worth of U.S. banks contracted
by more than 3 standard deviations, and EMs' GDP contracted by more than 2 standard
deviations. We study episodes of this nature in the model by analyzing the response to
aggregate DM and EM shocks (t and yemt ) that lead to a contraction in global banks' net
worth and EMs' endowment of the magnitude observed in these data during 2007­2011. In
particular, we consider the decrease in yemt observed during 2007­2009 and a decrease in
t that generates a drop in global banks' net worth that is of the same magnitude as that
observed in the data.
  Figure 5 compares the dynamics of EM-bond spreads and consumption predicted in the
model with those observed in the data during 2007­2011. In the data, during the 2007­2009
contraction, EM-bond spreads increased by 400 basis points (more than 2 standard deviations)
and consumption adjusted by 1.5 standard deviations. The model predicts that in the face of
a contraction of global banks' net worth and EMs' systemic endowment of the magnitude ob-
served in the data during 2007­2009, EM-bond spreads increased and consumption-experience
adjustments aligned with those observed in the data.16 In the model, spreads and consump-
tion adjustment are the result of two forces. First, the lower realizations of returns on DM
  16The   model predicts an increase in bond spreads of 500 basis points and an adjustment of consumption
of 2 standard deviations, both of which are larger than those observed in the data. A reason for the overpre-
diction of adjustment in consumption in the model relative to the data might lie in the set of unconventional
macroeconomic policies introduced worldwide during the global financial crisis (see, for example, Cat~
                                                                                                     ao et al.,
2009).
                               GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                         36


        Figure 5. EM-Bond Spreads and Consumption Dynamics During the Global
        Financial Crisis: Data and Model

                   (a) EM-Bond Spreads                            (b) EMs' Consumption Dynamics


      600                                                       1.5



      500                                                       1.0



      400
                                                                0.5


      300
                                                                0.0


      200
                                             Model                                                   Model
                                             Data                                                    Data
                                                                0.5
            2007     2008   2009     2010     2011                    2007   2008   2009     2010     2011


Notes: Data. Objects in the figure (dashed black lines) refer to the average of sovereign-bond spreads and the
cyclical component of consumption in a sample of EMs (detailed in Supplementary Material B2). EM-bond
spreads are expressed in basis points. The cyclical component of consumption is expressed as deviations from a
log-linear trend and standardized. Model. Objects in the figure (solid blue lines) refer to the dynamic response
of the model counterparts of these variables under the Lehman exercise. For details on the Lehman exercise,
see Section 4.



risky assets have a negative impact on global banks' aggregate net worth. With a lower
net worth, global banks must reduce their lending and thereby reduce their supply of funds
to EMs. Given an aggregate EM demand for funds, this reduces bond prices and increases
spreads. Higher costs of borrowing induce households to adjust consumption. Second, a drop
in EM output increases spreads due to a combination of an increase in default risk and an
amplification effect through global banks' net worth.
  We then use the model to disentangle the relevance of each mechanism in the dynamics of
spreads and consumption adjustment during the global financial crisis. For this, we analyze
spread and consumption dynamics predicted by the model in response to only a drop in 
of the magnitude analyzed in the 2007­2009 episode. Appendix Table C4 shows that two-
thirds of the increase in borrowing costs and 20% of the consumption adjustment during
                                GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                      37

the crisis can be explained by DM shocks, transmitted through global banks. Thus, global
banks play an important role during systemic debt crises, which operates by transmitting DM
shocks rather than amplifying EM-origin shocks. Appendix Table C4 also shows that the
main quantitative insights from the decomposition are still present in all of the alternative
calibrations we consider.
   We also assess whether our model is able to account for the dynamics of spreads and
consumption before the global financial crisis. To study the predictions of our model for
the full boom-bust episode, we feed DM and EM shocks to recreate the observed dynamics of
global banks' net worth and EM output during the period 2004-11. Appendix Figure C2 shows
that the dynamics of spreads and consumption in the model are similar to those observed in
the data. It is worth mentioning that our model abstracts from the buildup of risk through
time-varying leverage, which was a relevant element at the onset of the crisis.17




4.2.2. Decomposing Borrowing Costs
   The recent global financial crisis was characterized by a sharp decline in global banks'
net worth. How relevant are global banks for regular business-cycle fluctuations? Table 6
conducts an unconditional decomposition of borrowing costs in EMs into their default- and
intermediation-premium components. We define the default premium component of spreads
as the bond spreads that would be observed, given EMs' equilibrium sequence repayment
and borrowing policies, if debt were priced by a risk-neutral lender. Similarly, we define the
intermediation premium component of spreads as the bond spreads that would be observed if




   17See,   for example, Adrian and Shin (2010); Schularick and Taylor (2012); Bruno and Shin (2015a); Coimbra
and Rey (2017); and Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) for a related literature that studies the buildup of risk
prior to financial crises.
                                GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       38

debt were risk-free.18 These two components need not account for the level of spreads, since
bond payoffs covary with the stochastic discount factor. We define this remainder component
as the pure risk component.
  The first three columns of Table 6 show the decomposition of average spreads. Consistent
with our calibration, which targets physical default probabilities and average spreads, the
default premium accounts for slightly more than half of total spreads. The remainder of
average spreads are mostly accounted for by the intermediation premium, with the pure risk
component playing a modest role. The last three columns show that the intermediation
premium also accounts for roughly half the standard deviation of spreads. Panel (C) of the
table shows that these results are robust to alternative model specifications. The role the
intermediation premium played in EMs' spreads fluctuations is in line with the conditional
decomposition of risky asset prices reported in the impulse-response functions in Bocola (2016).
Our findings are also aligned with independent empirical estimates of the role of global factors
for EM-bond spreads from the international-finance literature (e.g., Longstaff et al., 2011), and
suggest that global banks play a central role in driving these global factors. Moreover, global
banks' role, which drives half of the fluctuations in EMs' spreads, suggests that the proposed
model can provide a microfoundation for exogenous fluctuations in external borrowing costs,
which have been identified as critical drivers of EM consumption, output, and exchange-
rate dynamics (e.g., Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Garc´
                                                   ia-Cicco et al., 2010). In Supplemental
Material B5, we show how the unconditional decomposition of spreads changes for different
values of , highlighting the fact that financial frictions drive the role of global banks in the
determination of sovereign spreads.



  18In                                                              i
         the model, the equilibrium prices of EM debt are given by qem                       i
                                                                       t = Et mt+1 it+1 1 + qemt+1 , where
              e
mt+1 = vt+1 /Rdm t is the global banks' stochastic discount factor. To compute the default premium component
                                                            i                       i                  
of spreads, we compute a sequence of risk-neutral prices, q
                                                          ~em t = Et dm it+1 1 +  q
                                                                                  ~em t+1 , where {it }t=0

denotes the sequence of state-contingent repayment policies from our baseline economy. We then compute EM
                                                   i    
yields to maturity based on risk-neutral prices {q
                                                 ~em t }t=0 . Similarly, to compute the intermediation premium,
                                          i                    i                  
we price a synthetic EM risk-free bond, q
                                        ^em t = Et mt+1 1 +  q
                                                             ^em t+1 , where {mt }t=0 denotes the stochastic

process of the stochastic discount factor from our baseline economy. We then compute EM yields to maturity
                                i    
based on this risk-free bond {q
                              ^em t }t=0 .
                                  GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                  39


                   Table 6. Unconditional Decomposition of EM-Bond Spreads


                                                 Average                        Standard Deviation
                                               % Default % Interm.                % Default % Interm.
                                       Total                             Total
                                               Premium     Premium                Premium      Premium
  Data                                  410                               173
  Baseline Model                        416      57%         39%          152       76%          39%
  Robustness
      i. Alternative Elasticity         314      82%         16%          128       92%          16%
      ii. Measured Income Process       521      53%         47%          192       84%          40%
      iii. Asset Managers               435      56%         43%          160       74%          57%
      iv. High Leverge                  378      63%         30%          141       80%          28%
      v. Time-varying                   442      52%         50%          141       73%          46%


Notes: This table shows a decomposition of EM-bond spreads predicted by the model into the contribution to
total spreads of their default-premium and intermediation-premium components. For definitions of default and
intermediation premiums, see Section 4. The Total columns are expressed in basis points, and the remaining
columns are expressed in share of the Total. The first row corresponds to observed data and the remaining
rows to different model specifications. For details on each model specification, see Supplementary Material
B4.


4.3. The Role of Financial Intermediaries' Portfolios and the Distribution of Bond Holdings
  So far our quantitative model has focused on a calibration in which, as currently observed
in the data, global banks' exposure to EMs in their portfolio of risky securities is relatively low
(10%). However, as the literature on the history of debt crises suggests, low exposure is not
always the rule. For instance, Appendix Table C5 shows that in the Latin American debt crisis
of the 1980s, U.S. banks' exposure to EM debt was three times their current exposure. We
now study the predictions of the model for a calibration of the model in which global banks'
exposure to EM debt is 35%, closer to that observed in the 1980s. We refer to this calibration
as a high-exposure economy and to our baseline calibration as a low-exposure economy.
  Supplementary Material Figure B3c shows that in a high-exposure economy, EMs' borrow-
ing costs respond significantly more to EM systemic endowment shocks than to idiosyncratic
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                      40

endowment shocks.19 This is because negative systemic shocks lead to EM default, which con-
tracts global banks' net worth, contracting the global supply of funds and further increasing
the returns to EMs. Supplementary Material Figure B3a shows that in our baseline calibra-
tion, this effect is relatively small, since low exposure attenuates the effect of lower EM debt
prices on global banks' net worth.
  This exercise analyzes the effects of changes in the share of intermediaries' portfolios that is
invested in EM debt. Even if this share is held constant, the amplification of EM-originated
shocks can change if the degree of leverage or the term structure of banks' assets change.
As emphasized by previous literature, when banks are more levered or when they hold debt
with longer maturities, an increase in sovereign risk can be amplified through a larger impact
on intermediaries' net worth (see, for example, Bocola, 2016). The time-varying nature of
intermediaries' exposure to EMs, leverage, and other factors highlights the importance of
having a micro-founded model of risky lending to assess systemic risks in emerging markets.
  We further argue that the degree of amplification is also influenced by the distribution of
debt positions in the economy. To illustrate this, we replicate the same impulse-response
analysis starting from an initial distribution of debt positions with a cross-sectional standard
deviation that is twice as large as the average standard deviation from the ergodic distribu-
tion.20 Supplementary Material Figure B3d shows the differential reaction of spreads to an
idiosyncratic and systemic output shock. In this case, the amplification is roughly 50% larger
than starting from the ergodic dispersion. The reason is that when debt positions are more
dispersed, a systemic output drop increases default risk for those heavily indebted economies,
which constitute a larger fraction and hence create a larger drop in global banks' net worth.
Finally, Appendix Figure C3 shows that this differential amplification holds globally for mul-
tiple parameterizations of the debt-distribution dispersion. It also shows that banks must be

  19In   particular, we analyze the impulse-response of equal-magnitude negative shocks to the systemic and
idiosyncratic components of output. To compute the responses to a shock to the systemic (idiosyncratic)
component of output, we analyze the economy starting from the average aggregate states from its ergodic
distribution and feed in a negative shock of the same magnitude to each component of output, then trace the
dynamics of the variables of interest.
  20A standard deviation that is twice as large is empirically plausible. Both in the data and in model

simulations, the standard deviation fluctuates to reach levels that are twice as large as the average.
                              GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                     41

more heavily exposed to EM debt to generate this differential amplification. This last exercise
demonstrates that two key variables, banks' exposure to EM debt and the dispersion in the
debt distribution, are relevant in determining the transmission and amplification of aggregate
shocks in the world economy.

4.4. Global Policies
  The recurrent occurrence of systemic debt crises also stresses the value of implementing
global stabilization policies during these episodes. Historically, we have observed different
examples of such policies, which include coordinated expansionary monetary policies, global
liquidity provision by multilateral institutions and central banks, and demand­stimulating
fiscal policies.
  We use our model of the world economy to study the effects of policies that provide liquidity
to financial intermediaries. We introduce this policy by allowing the funding rate of financial
intermediaries to be contingent on the aggregate shock.21 In particular, we parameterize the
                   -1
risk­free rate as Rd  ( ) =  ( ) = 1  2 , where {1 , 2 } govern the average rate and its
elasticity to the  shock. Note that the timing assumption is that a DM shock in period
t affects the risk-free rate at which banks can borrow from period t to t + 1, and not the
repayments on outstanding deposits. We keep the same parameterization as in the baseline
model and calibrate 1 = 0.98 and 2 = -0.2 to match the data moments of an average
risk-free rate of 2% and a covariance of the risk-free rate and the log of the market value of
intermediaries' net worth of 0.18. The negative value of 2 = -0.2 implies that the funding rate
intermediaries face is reduced during DM­recessions. We label this model parameterization
as the economy with liquidity provision.
  We then analyze the effects of a negative 2­s.d. DM shock to the economy with liquidity
provision and compare it with the baseline economy. As shown in Appendix Figure C4, the
effect of the  shock on EM bond yields and EM aggregate consumption is attenuated by
approximately one-half in the economy with liquidity provision. In this economy, funding
rates decrease in response to the shock, which allows intermediaries to access funding at
cheaper rates and mitigate the impact on their demand for risky assets.

  21This   type of policy could be implemented by imposing a tax/subsidy on the risk-free funding of global
financial intermediaries that is financed via lump-sum transfers/taxes to DM households.
                            GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                 42

  This exercise suggests that global policies aimed at mitigating the impact of debt crises on
global financial intermediaries can also benefit emerging economies through their effects on
borrowing rates.


                                          5. Conclusions

  In this paper, we examined the long-held view in policy circles that global financial in-
termediaries are central actors who shape systemic debt crises. We did so by combining
new empirical evidence and a quantitative model of the world economy with heterogeneous
borrowers and financial intermediaries. The empirical evidence shows that emerging-market
bond prices are affected by changes in the net worth of the global financial intermediaries
holding these bonds. Our model shows that this evidence can be interpreted as being driven
by the financial frictions faced by intermediaries investing in emerging-market debt, and the
quantitative analysis of our model suggests a key role for financial intermediaries in driving
fluctuations in borrowing costs and consumption in emerging-market economies, during both
debt crises and in regular business cycles.
  Our findings stress the lender side of systemic debt crises and episodes of large external
borrowing and consumption adjustments (or sudden stops ). From the perspective of individ-
ual borrowing economies, lenders' dynamics manifest themselves as fluctuations in external
borrowing costs, which have a long tradition in international macroeconomics. However, for
policymakers operating in the world economy, a detailed framework such as the one con-
structed in this paper can help understand the nature of these fluctuations. In this sense, the
paper's findings highlight the importance of measuring global financial intermediaries' port-
folios and the distribution of debt positions in the global economy in detail in order to assess
potential global risks. We leave a more detailed policy analysis based on this framework for
future research.


                                             References

Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014): "Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of asset
  returns," The Journal of Finance, 69, 2557­2596.
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010): "Liquidity and leverage," Journal of financial intermediation, 19,
  418­437.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       43

Aguiar, M., S. Chatterjee, H. Cole, and Z. Stangebye (2016): "Quantitative models of sovereign
  debt crises," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier, vol. 2, 1697­1755.
Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2006): "Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current Account," Journal
  of International Economics, 69, 64­83.
------ (2007): "Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the trend," Journal of political Economy, 115,
  69­102.
Algan, Y., O. Allais, W. J. Den Haan, and P. Rendahl (2014): "Solving and simulating models with
  heterogeneous agents and aggregate uncertainty," Handbook of Computational Economics, 3, 277­324.
Arellano, C. (2008): "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies," The American
  Economic Review, 98, 690­712.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and L. Bocola (2019): "Sovereign Default Risk and Firm Heterogeneity," Manu-
  script.
Arslanalp, S. and T. Tsuda (2014): "Tracking Global Demand for Emerging Market Sovereign Debt,"
  IMF Working Paper 14/39.
Avdjiev, S., B. Hardy, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and L. Serven (2018): "Gross capital flows by banks,
  corporates, and sovereigns," The World Bank.
Bai, Y., P. J. Kehoe, and F. Perri (2019): "World Financial Cycles," Manuscript.
Baskaya, Y. S., J. di Giovanni, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and M. F. Ulu (2017): "International spillovers
  and local credit cycles," NBER Working Paper No. w23149.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative
  Business Cycle Framework," Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1, 1341­1393.
Bianchi, J., J. C. Hatchondo, and L. Martinez (2018): "International Reserves and Roll-Over Risk,"
  Forthcoming at The American Economic Review.
Bocola, L. (2016): "The pass-through of sovereign risk," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 879­926.
Bocola, L. and A. Dovis (2019): "Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis," American Eco-
  nomic Review, forthcoming.
Borri, N. and A. Verdelhan (2011): "Sovereign risk premia," .
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014): "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector," The
  American Economic Review, 104, 379­421.
Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin (2015a): "Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy," Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 71, 119­132.
------ (2015b): "Cross-border banking and global liquidity," The Review of Economic Studies, 82, 535­564.
Calvo, G. A. (1998): "Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden stops,"
  Journal of applied Economics, 1, 35­54.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                       44

------ (2004): "Contagion in emerging markets: when Wall Street is a carrier," in Latin American economic
  crises, Springer, 81­91.
Cao, Q., R. Minetti, M. P. Olivero, and G. Romanini (2020): "Recessions and recoveries: Multinational
  banks in the business cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics.
   ~ o, L., E. A. Cavallo, E. Ferna
Cata                              ´ ndez-Arias, A. Galindo, P. Ottonello, D. Pe
                                                                              ´rez, and A. Re-
  bucci (2009): "Policy trade-offs for unprecedented times: Confronting the global crisis in Latin America
  and the Caribbean," .
Cetorelli, N. and L. S. Goldberg (2011): "Global banks and international shock transmission: Evidence
  from the crisis," IMF Economic Review, 59, 41­76.
Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2012): "Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk," The American
  Economic Review, 102, 2674­2699.
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2013): "The employment effects of credit market disruptions: Firm-level evidence
  from the 2008­9 financial crisis," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1­59.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing (Revised Edition), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Coimbra, N. and H. Rey (2017): "Financial cycles with heterogeneous intermediaries," Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Coppola, A., M. Maggiori, B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2020): "Redrawing the map of global
  capital flows: The role of cross-border financing and tax havens," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Correa, R., W. Du, and G. Y. Liao (2020): "US banks and global liquidity," Tech. rep., National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Coval, J. and E. Stafford (2007): "Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 86, 479­512.
Cruces, J. J., M. Buscaglia, and J. Alonso (2002): "The Term Structure of Country Risk and Valuation
  in Emerging Markets," Working Papers 46, Universidad de San Andres, Departamento de Economia.
Den Haan, W. (2010): "Assessing the accuracy of the aggregate law of motion in models with heterogeneous
  agents," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 79­99.
Devereux, M. B. and J. Yetman (2010): "Leverage constraints and the international transmission of
  shocks," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 71­105.
Dias, D. A. and C. Richmond (2008): "Duration of Capital Market Exclusion: Stylized Facts and Deter-
  mining Factors," Manuscript.
               ´bert, and A. W. Huber (2019): "Are intermediary constraints priced?" Tech. rep.,
Du, W., B. M. He
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duffie, D. (2010): "Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital," The Journal of
  finance, 65, 1237­1267.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                      45

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981): "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical Anal-
  ysis," The Review of Economic Studies, 48, 289­309.
Forbes, K. J. and R. Rigobon (2002): "No contagion, only interdependence: measuring stock market
  comovements," The Journal of Finance, 57, 2223­2261.
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015): "International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 130, 1369­1420.
    ia-Cicco, J., R. Pancrazi, and M. Uribe (2010): "Real Business Cycles in Emerging Countries?"
Garc´
  The American Economic Review, 100, 2510­2531.
Gelos, R. G., R. Sahay, and G. Sandleris (2011): "Sovereign Borrowing by Developing Countries: What
  Determines Market Access?" Journal of International Economics, 83, 243­254.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010): "Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle
  Analysis," Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3, 547­599.
Gomes, J. F. (2001): "Financing investment," American Economic Review, 91, 1263­1285.
Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007): "International financial adjustment," Journal of Political Economy,
  115, 665­703.
Harrington, S. E. (2009): "The financial crisis, systemic risk, and the future of insurance regulation,"
  Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76, 785­819.
He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela (2017): "Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many asset
  classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 126, 1­35.
He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2011): "A model of capital and crises," The Review of Economic Studies,
  79, 735­777.
------ (2013): "Intermediary asset pricing," American Economic Review, 103, 732­70.
------ (2018): "Intermediary asset pricing and the financial crisis," Annual Review of Financial Economics,
  10, 173­197.
Hennessy, C. A. and T. M. Whited (2007): "How costly is external financing? Evidence from a structural
  estimation," The Journal of Finance, 62, 1705­1745.
Jorda, O. (2005): "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections," The American
  Economic Review, 95, 161­182.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018): "Monetary policy according to HANK," American
  Economic Review, 108, 697­743.
Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2008): "Idiosyncratic shocks and the role of nonconvexities in plant and
  aggregate investment dynamics," Econometrica, 76, 395­436.
Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir (2017): "How credit cycles across a financial crisis," Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
                             GLOBAL BANKS AND SYSTEMIC DEBT CRISES                                        46

Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998): "Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy," Journal
  of Political Economy, 106, 867­896.
Lagos, R., G. Rocheteau, and R. Wright (2017): "Liquidity: A new monetarist perspective," Journal
  of Economic Literature, 55, 371­440.
Lettau, M., M. Maggiori, and M. Weber (2014): "Conditional risk premia in currency markets and
  other asset classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 114, 197­225.
Lizarazo, S. V. (2013): "Default risk and risk averse international investors," Journal of International
  Economics, 2, 317­330.
Longstaff, F. A., J. Pan, L. H. Pedersen, and K. J. Singleton (2011): "How sovereign is sovereign
  credit risk?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 75­103.
Maggiori, M. (2017): "Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies," Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 107, 3038­71.
Maggiori, M., B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2017): "International Currencies and Capital Allocation,"
  Manuscript, Harvard University.
Mendoza, E. G. (2010): "Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage," American Economic Review, 100,
  1941­66.
Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino (2007): "Slow moving capital," American Economic
  Review, 97, 215­220.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2018): "Identification in macroeconomics," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 32, 59­86.
Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005): "Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of interest rates,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 345­380.
Park, J. (2014): "Contagion of Sovereign Default Risk: the Role of Two Financial Frictions," Manuscript.
Reiter, M. (2009): "Solving heterogeneous­agent models by projection and perturbation," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics and Control, 33, 649­665.
Rey, H. (2015): "Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy independence,"
  NBER Working Paper No. w21162.
Sachs, J. (1989): New approaches to the Latin American debt crisis, 174, Princeton Univ Intl Economics.
Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor (2012): "Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles,
  and financial crises, 1870-2008," American Economic Review, 102, 1029­61.
Siriwardane, E. (2019): "Limited investment capital and credit spreads," Journal of Finance.
Tourre, F. (2017): "A Macro-Finance Approach to Sovereign Debt Spreads and Returns," Manuscript.
