                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 LABOR DYNAMICS AND SUPPLY CHAIN DISRUPTION IN FOOD MANUFACTURING

                                        A. Ford Ramsey
                                        Barry Goodwin
                                         Mildred Haley

                                      Working Paper 28896
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28896


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




The findings and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and should not be construed to
represent any official USDA or U.S. Government determination or policy. This research was
supported in part by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service and NIFA-
AFRI Grant Number 2020-67023-32760: "COVID-19 Rapid Response: Coronavirus Disease
2019, Price Transmission, and the Farm-Retail Price Spread in U.S. Livestock." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Е 2021 by A. Ford Ramsey, Barry Goodwin, and Mildred Haley. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Е notice, is given to the source.
Labor Dynamics and Supply Chain Disruption in Food Manufacturing
A. Ford Ramsey, Barry Goodwin, and Mildred Haley
NBER Working Paper No. 28896
June 2021
JEL No. J2,L66

                                         ABSTRACT

Food manufacturing and processing is an important link between agricultural producers and
consumers in the agricultural supply chain. The food manufacturing sector in the United States is
both increasingly mechanized and increasingly concentrated. Consequently, labor risks in food
manufacturing have changed over time with changes in industry structure. Labor risks were
highlighted by the COVID-19 pandemic - particularly in the animal slaughtering and processing
industry - where labor-driven disruptions resulted in temporary plant closures. We use county-
level data on employment in food manufacturing and dynamic panel models estimated via
generalized method of moments to examine employment and wage dynamics in the food
manufacturing sector and animal processing industry. We then compare forecasts from the
estimated models with changes in food manufacturing and animal processing employment and
wages during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our results provide insight into the role of
operational and disruption risks in food manufacturing. We find significant delays in adjustment
to employment and quicker adjustment in wages. Although there is an unanticipated drop in
employment in food manufacturing and animal processing in April of 2020, employment returned
to predicted levels within two to three months. The response of wages and employment to the
COVID-19 pandemic suggest a degree of resilience in food supply chains.

A. Ford Ramsey                                  Mildred Haley
Virginia Tech                                   US Department of Agriculture
202-B Hutcheson Hall                            805 Pennsylvania Avenue
250 Drillfield                                  Kansas City, MO 64105
Blacksburg, VA 24061                            mildred.haley@usda.gov
aframsey@vt.edu

Barry Goodwin
Departments of Economics and Agricultural
and Resource Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8109
Raleigh, NC 27695
barry_goodwin@ncsu.edu
Introduction

Agricultural supply chains link agricultural producers to consumers and end-users. The nature
and organization of the agricultural supply chain has changed drastically over time with
increased vertical integration, increased prevalence of contract farming, and specialization in
different supply activities (Adjemian, Brorsen, Hahn, Saitone, & Sexton, 2016; Boehlje, 1999).
Firms strategically design supply chains in response to new innovations and technologies
(Zilberman, Lu, & Reardon, 2019). In designing and adopting different organizational
structures or technologies, firm owners and managers in the supply chain act in entrepeneurial
capacities by reacting to disequilibria in their environment (Schultz, 1975). Disequilibria are
uncertain in both frequency and magnitude, resulting in a variety of risks for supply chain
participants.
   Just as supply chains have changed over time, supply chain risk has also evolved. Many
organizational structures and technologies introduced into food supply chains have been aimed
at reducing risks faced by participants (Antle, 1996; Knoeber & Thurman, 1995; McCluskey
& O'Rourke, 2000). Supply chain risks can be broadly characterized as either operational
risks or disruption risks. Tang (2006) defines operational risk as risks that are inherent to
the business, such as uncertain market conditions. In contrast, disruption risks arise from
natural disasters or other extreme events. Operational and disruption risks can be closely
linked as the same elements of the supply chain that are subject to inherent uncertainty -
consumer demand, for example - can serve as transmission mechanisms for disruptive events.
   A major risk in agricultural supply chains arises from the diverse skills required of workers
in the agriculture and food industry labor forces. These risks are compounded by consolidation
and increased concentration in food manufacturing and processing, including meatpacking,
which has resulted in increased plant size (MacDonald, 2014; MacDonald, Ollinger, Nelson,
& Handy, 2000; Wohlgenant, 2013). Although varying in significance by industry within
the food manufacturing sector, labor is a critical input to most manufacturing operations.
Huang (2003) shows that changes in labor inputs to food manufacturing are heterogeneous

                                               2
across industries; meat products and miscellaneous foods saw increased employment between
1975 and 1997, while other food industries saw decreased employment of production workers.
The meatpacking industry employs the most production workers of all food manufacturing
industries. Given heterogeneity in the types and uses of labor in food manufacturing, firms
face an array of operational and disruption risks related to their labor inputs.
   Operational risks can be characterized by empirically modeling industry operation and
assessing the flexibility of supply chain participants in responding to changes in the operating
environment. For instance, if meatpacking labor is more specialized and harder to acquire than
labor in other areas of food manufacturing, we might expect employment in the meatpacking
sector to respond more slowly to changes in demand or other factors. There may be significant
temporal relationships that affect the ability of firms to adjust to changing market conditions.
Accurate assessment of labor and wage flexibility is necessary for characterizing labor-related
operational risks faced by firms.
   In contrast to operational risks, disruption risk arises from events that may entail a
sudden and complete break in the supply chain or firm operations. Probabilities of loss and
magnitudes of loss are difficult to assess for disruption risk as disruptive incidents usually
occur with low probability and potentially large losses. These characteristics of disruption risk
make it difficult for firms to perform cost-benefit analyses or other studies for risk management
as the results of such studies can be highly dependent on a small number of disruptive events
(Tang, 2006). Firm management may view the probability of such events to be so low that
they are not worthy of incorporation in risk management strategies (Kunreuther & Useem,
2018). Despite difficulties in modeling disruptive events, such events often lead to calls for
public policy actions to improve resilience of a system.
   The COVID-19 pandemic illustrates the impact of a major disruption in the food manu-
facturing sector. Impacts occurred at all stages of the supply chain with effects across both
demand and supply sides of markets. In particular, labor inputs to food manufacturing
were disrupted due to the nature of work in manufacturing facilities. Work routines in food


                                               3
manufacturing plants make workers particularly susceptible to infection by respiratory viruses
such as SARS-CoV-2. Disruption was most evident in the animal slaughtering and processing
sector. On April 12, 2020 Smithfield Foods announced that it would temporarily suspend
operations at a plant in Sioux Falls, Idaho in response to a surge in the number of infected
workers. At the time, the plant was one of the largest sources of COVID-19 infection in the
United States (Bunge, 2020a, 2020b). Many other plants experienced similar local outbreaks
of COVID-19 resulting in temporary closures. Plants that remained open and operated at
increased speed were associated with higher rates of infection in the counties in which they
were located (Taylor, Boulos, & Almond, 2020).
   The supply chain implications of COVID-19 in agriculture have received significant
attention. Hobbs (2020) discussed the potential for supply-side disruption due to labor
shortages in downstream food processing and transportation. She notes that the nature of the
COVID-19 pandemic afforded manufacturing facilities a period of time to make adjustments
to manufacturing processes and working environments. Labor issues up and down the supply
chain are discussed in Larue (2020). Within food manufacturing, he notes that firms have the
ability to reallocate capacity and an industry-wide shutdown would be the most difficult to
manage. However, complete shutdowns are extreme measures - likely to be only temporary -
and he suggests the sector will switch to operation below capacity to implement mitigation
measures.
   Temporary plant closures and changes in capacity utilization have the potential to result
in stockouts and shortages of food at retail. Stockouts were observed in retail establishments
for specific products as consumers stockpiled in the early days of the pandemic. However,
widespread shortages of food, whether meat, vegetables, processed items, or other items,
did not occur (Hobbs, 2021). Many manufacturing plants were operating near capacity by
the middle of 2020. While COVID-19 did create a major and unprecedented disruption for
food manufacturers and meat processors, rapid response on the part of market participants
indicates a degree of resilience.


                                              4
   Using the COVID-19 pandemic as an example of a major disruptive event related to
manufacturing labor (and other market conditions), we investigate labor dynamics in food
manufacturing and animal processing and slaughtering using county-level data from the
Current Employment Survey compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We model employ-
ment and wage dynamics using dynamic panel models estimated using generalized method of
moments (GMM). We then compare employment and wages under the estimated dynamic
models with employment and wages during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early
2020.
   The dynamic labor demand and wage models allow for interdependencies across space
and time to be taken into account when evaluating the impacts of economic shocks. The
response of market participants to changes in wages and other relevant economic variables
can be assessed. Dynamics in the estimated models are useful in evaluating operational risk;
they highlight factors resulting in employment and wage changes as well as capturing the
speed of adjustment to changes in these factors. Therefore, the combination of the dynamic
models with a COVID-19 event study provides assessment of both operational and disruption
risks in food manufacturing and the agricultural supply chain.



Labor and the Food Manufacturing Link in Agricultural

Supply Chains

In spite of increased mechanization in manufacturing, labor remains a major input for food
manufacturers and animal processors. The food manufacturing sector defined by the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) consists of nine constituent industries of
which animal slaughtering and processing is one. While farm labor has received extensive
treatment in the literature, labor in food manufacturing has garnered less attention (Hertz
& Zahniser, 2013; Richards, 2018). However, labor disruption as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic has brought new focus to employment in food manufacturing.


                                             5
   Among several studies investigating historical changes in the structure of food manufac-
turing, Goodwin and Brester (1995) showed that demand elasticities for labor decreased and
that the degree of substitutability between inputs increased over much of the second half of
the twenty-first century. Their findings with respect to labor were in line with an earlier study
of factor demand in food manufacturing conducted by Huang (1991). Contemporary statistics
compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that both total output and employment in
food manufacturing have increased over the past thirty years as shown in figure 1. While
employment in food manufacturing fell in the early 2000s, a sharp increase in employment
occurred from 2010. Also shown in figure 1, sector labor productivity grew until 2005, but
has since experienced a modest decline.


                                    [Figure 1 about here.]


   Labor is the largest component of the marketing bill for food products. The marketing
bill is the difference between the farm value of food and what consumers actually pay for food.
In a review of food costs between 1950 and 1997, Elitzak (1999) found labor costs contributed
to 55% of rising marketing bills and that 38.5 cents of every food dollar in 1997 was spent
on labor associated with the food industry. Larger price spreads - between farm and retail
levels - are typically observed for highly processed foods. Figure 2 shows unit labor costs and
average hourly earnings in food manufacturing. Both average hourly earnings and unit labor
costs have risen over the past two decades. Unit labor costs increased by nearly 70 percent
between 1990 and 2020. Trends of increasing employment and labor costs suggest that labor
is an important input to food manufacturing and a potential source of supply chain risk.


                                    [Figure 2 about here.]


   Figues 3 and 4 show the distribution of employment and weekly wages in food manu-
facturing as a whole, and meat processing specifically, across the United States. The meat
processing sector is significantly more concentrated compared to food manufacturing. In


                                               6
contrast to the early 20th century, when meat processing was largely conducted in urban
areas, processing facilities are mostly in rural counties with close proximity to livestock inputs.
Rural labor pools may be relatively shallow, resulting in increased frictions in the adjustment
of employees and wages.


                                     [Figure 3 about here.]


                                     [Figure 4 about here.]


   Figure 5 shows kernel density estimates of the 2019 wage and employment distributions
by county for both food manufacturing and animal slaughtering and processing. The
average weekly wage in food manufacturing was approximately $802 with standard deviation
of $292. In animal slaughtering and processing the average weekly wage was $779 with
standard deviation of $272.The mean number of employees per establishment was 52 in food
manufacturing versus 92 in animal slaughtering and processing. All of the distributions are
strongly right skewed. In general, animal slaughtering and processing facilities were larger
and employed more workers compared to the average food manufacturing operation in 2019.


                                     [Figure 5 about here.]


   Much of the risks associated with labor in food manufacturing are likely to be heterogeneous
across firms within an industry. McGuckin, Nguyen, and Reznek (1998) note significant
impacts of plant ownership changes in food manufacturing on increased productivity and
employment. More generally, variation in wages and frequency of job changes have been
shown to be greater within industries compared to across industries (S. Davis & Haltiwanger,
1992). Wage and employment dynamics are expected to differ between industries in food
manufacturing. For instance, animal processing has tended to make higher use of immigrant
and undocumented labor which could result in supply chain risk related to immigration policy.
Other industries make less use of this type of labor and are insulated from unanticipated
policy changes.

                                                7
   The labor demand created by food manufacturing plants can have large impacts on local
economic outcomes, especially when food manufacturing operations are located in rural
or otherwise sparsely populated counties. The meatpacking industry is a major source of
jobs for low-income and immigrant workers. Artz, Jackson, and Orazem (2010) find that
meat packing plants alter the demographics of communities in which they are located, being
associated with immigrant populations, as well as populations with limited English-speaking
ability. These changing demographics are reflected in local school systems and poverty rates.
However, they found little evidence of per capita increases in government spending as a result
of this demographic change. Their conclusive findings are similar to those of Artz, Orazem,
and Otto (2007).
   Plant siting decisions and food manufacturing growth are also related to local labor market
conditions. Goetz (1997) shows that establishment growth is associated with lower labor costs,
higher educational attainment, higher unemployment rates, and a larger population. Similarly,
Among other factors, Henderson and McNamara (2000) found that food manufacturing
facilities were more likely to locate in counties with lower average wages. Lambert and
McNamara (2009) indicate that both labor availability and the skill level of labor are
important for attracting manufacturers. They argue that deeper and more diversified labor
pools increase the likelihood of being able to hire workers for all positions. Labor heterogeneity
is one of the most important factors attracting food manufacturing operations (D. E. Davis
& Schluter, 2005).
   There are relatively few comprehensive studies of labor disruption in food manufacturing
which may reflect the low probability of widespread disruptive events. However, case studies
of labor disruption in specific firms have been mentioned in the literature. Artz et al. (2010)
described a 2008 Immigration and Customs Enforcement raid on an Iowa meatpacking facility
in which one-third of all employees were arrested. The operating firm subsequently filed
for bankruptcy and closed the plant down. Other notable food manufacturing supply chain
disruptions have occurred, but did not arise through labor disruption: for instance, the Tyson


                                                8
meatpacking fire of 2019.
   The COVID-19 pandemic caused widespread disruption in food manufacturing with news
reports concentrating on the meatpacking sector. These disruptions were the result of working
conditions that put workers at high risk of contracting COVID-19. However, Asher, Deb,
and Gangaram (2021) found COVID-19 cases and deaths to be heterogenously associated
with industries in food manufacturing. Meatpacking plants were associated with higher
cases and deaths, but so were seafood processing facilities and bakeries. In contrast, dairy
manufacturing facilities were associated with less cases. Asher et al. (2021) suggest that this
disparity is related to capital-labor ratios, which are low in meat processing and baking, and
much higher in dairy manufacturing.
   Cho, Lee, and Winters (2020) report findings on the impacts of COVID-19 on the
employment status of food sector workers - including manufacturing workers - up through
April of 2020. COVID-19 infection rates locally were found to be associated with a decreased
likelihood of continuing to work in the same food industry and increased temporary absence
for food manufacturing workers. The percentage of previously employed food and beverage
workers who were unemployed increased from March of 2020 to April of 2020. Their findings
imply that the impact of COVID-19 on labor in food manufacturing arose not only through
plant shutdowns, but also through the individual actions of workers to protect themselves
from possible exposure.
   The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted calls for increased regulation of meatpacking
facilities, and potentially other food manufacturers, due to plant shutdowns. Increasing price
spreads between farm and retail levels were observed at the start of the pandemic. However,
increased marketing margins can result from a competitive market environment (Lusk, Tonsor,
& Schulz, 2021). Any potential policy actions will need to consider issues of operational and
disruption risks in food manufacturing and resilience to shocks. The question is, how flexible
are firms during normal operation in terms of adjusting employment, wages, and output, and
was their adjustment to the pandemic faster or slower? Both of these elements of labor risk


                                              9
in food manufacturing are addressed in the empirical analysis that follows.



Methodology

We estimate a panel dynamic model of the framework of Holtz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen
(1988), Arellano and Bond (1991), and Blundell and Bond (1998). The general formulation is
given by
                                       L                        K
                              yit =          j yi,   t-j   +         xitk k + хi +   it       (1)
                                      j =1                     k=1

where yit is an m О 1 vector of endogenous variables for the ith unit of observation in time
t. Then yi,t-j are lagged endogenous variables and xitk is a matrix of exogenous variables.
The errors   it   are assumed to be independent from xit . The fixed effect хi is correlated with
lagged values of y which induces endogeneity in the lagged values.
   As noted above, the data in this case are large in cross-section but the time dimension is
relatively small. Estimating a dynamic panel model via ordinary least squares would result in
biased estimators as noted in Nickell (1981). If one differences equation 1, then the differenced
endogenous variable is correlated with the differenced error term. However, several authors
have addressed estimation problems in dynamic panel settings with generalized method of
moments (GMM) estimators. These include Holtz-Eakin et al. (1988), Arellano and Bond
(1991), Blundell and Bond (1998), and Binder, Hsiao, and Pesaran (2005).
   Consider the case of equation 1 where both L and K are equal to one. The basic problem
is that the moment condition,
                                               E [yit-1 it ] = 0                              (2)

where it is the differenced error term, is violated. Instruments that are relevant for yi,t-1 and
satisfy the moment condition can be used to correct for endogeneity bias. As shown in Arellano
and Bond (1991), an intuitive set of instruments is given by all other previous realizations of
yi . The lagged endogenous variables will not be correlated with the contemporaneous error



                                                           10
term and are relevant for the contemporaneous value of the dependent variable because the
model is autoregressive.
   The differenced model for individual i is given by


                                            d
                                           yi = Xid  + id                                              (3)


where
                                                                                                  
        yi3                            yi2      xi3 
                                                                                                 i3 
                                                                                                    
        yi4                            yi3      xi4                                              i4 
                                                                                              
    d
   yi = .                  Xid =                                  =                      id = 
                                                                                                    
        .
                                       .
                                       .        .
                                                .
                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                    
        .                              .        .                                                . 
                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
        yiT                          yi,T -1    xiT                                              iT


with the matrix of instruments given by

                                                                                         
                           yi1   0    0    0    0     0     иии   0     0         0
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                     
                           0     yi1 yi2   0    0     0     иии   0     0         0      
                                                                                         
                 d
                                                                                         
                Zi =       0     0    0    yi1 yi2 yi3 0 и и и          0         0      
                                                                                         
                           .     .    .     .   .   .  ..   .           .         .
                                                                                         
                     
                           .
                           .     .
                                 .    .
                                      .     .
                                            .   .
                                                .   .
                                                    .     . .
                                                            .           .
                                                                        .         .
                                                                                  .
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                           0     0    0    0    0     0     0     yi1 и и и yi,   T -2



   Blundell and Bond (1998) implement a system GMM estimator that makes use of additional
moment conditions. The gains from the additional moment conditions are typically larger
when there is a high degree of autocorrelation in the dependent variable ( is large). The set
of equations in equation 3 are augmented by level equations where


                                             y i = Xi + i




                                                 11
and                                                                               
                     yi2                   yi1           xi2          i +    i2
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                     yi3                   yi2           xi3          i +    i3
                                                                                  
             yi =               Xi =                                =
                                                                                  
                      .                     .             .     i        .        
                  
                      .
                      .  
                                     
                                            .
                                            .             .
                                                          .  
                                                                     
                                                                         .
                                                                         .        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                     yiT                  yi,T -1        xiT          i +    iT


The instrument matrix for the full system is given by
                                                            
                                           Zid       0    Di 
                                  Zi = 
                                       
                                                             
                                            0        Zi   0


The general formulation is easily extended to settings where both L and K are greater than
one.
   Robust two-step estimators of the finite sample variance in this setting are biased.
Windmeijer (2005) notes the potential for severe downward bias in small samples and
proposes a corrected estimator. The proposed corrected estimator is found to perform well
in approximating the finite sample variance in simulation, thus resulting in more accurate
inference. The Windmeijer (2005) correction essentially involves the use of an additional
correction term in estimation of the variance with the correction term disappearing as the
sample size grows larger. Although the sample size in the following empirical analysis is
relatively large, we utilize the bias-corrected estimator of the variance in estimating the
employment and wage equations (as well as a single-equation dynamic model of industry
output).
   Using dynamic employment and wage models estimated via GMM, we then project
employment and wages in each county through 2020 and compare the projections to actual
employment and wages in an event study framework (Campbell, Lo, & MacKinlay, 2012;
Kothari & Warner, 2007). It is important to note that this approach does not constitute a
natural experiment because we do not observe a counterfactual. Any results only describe
changes in employment and wages under COVID-19 and any other conditions prevailing in


                                                12
the market in 2020.
   In spite of our inability to isolate labor effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the event
study provides potentially useful evidence about food manufacturing and animal processing
resilience in the face of a disruptive event. Firms take equilibrating actions given constraints
in the face of disruption. If these actions return employment and wage levels to those implied
by the model, and do so quickly, then the food manufacturing and animal processing sectors
are by definition resilient. By using county-level data, the event study also permits us to
examine if the initial impacts of COVID-19 and the degree of resilience is heterogeneous
across counties, which we might expect by virtue of different rates of infection and industry
structures.



Empirical Results

Our empirical application utilizes data collected from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) and the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). A county-level consumer price
index (CPI) deflator was constructed using the metropolitan statistical area (MSA) implicit
price deflators. MSA and regional data were translated to the county level using the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) MSA to County crosswalk data tool. For those
counties that were not covered by a BLS-defined MSA or regional area, the state-level
non-urban household CPI was used. Price data are taken from the BLS CPI database. We
consider four classes of commodities Г food, pork, poultry, and beef. All price, income, and
wage data were deflated using the county-specific CPI.
   County level wages and employment were taken from the BLS Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages. These data include annual and monthly employment statistics
for 3- and 4-digit NAICS industry classifications. Two specific industries are of interest
in this analysis Г food manufacturing and processing (NAICS 311) and animal slaughter
and processing (NAICS 3116). As noted previously, the data for food manufacturing and



                                              13
processing include animal slaughter and processing as a constituent industry. The data
provide a rich assessment of employment and wage patterns at the county level. However,
the data do suffer from one shortcoming Г wage and employment data are not reported when
such reporting would disclose proprietary details of individual firms.
       We only consider the subset of counties for which wages and employment are reported.1
This likely omits those counties with a small number of workers or employees in the relevant
sectors. We also consider county-level data taken from the BEA's Regional Economic
Information System (REIS). This data source reports county-level income, population, and
a range of potentially relevant economic variables. Our data are observed annually at the
county level. However, the BLS reported wages for the first three quarters of 2020. Monthly
employment was also available for the associated nine months of 2020. These data allow
an evaluation of COVID-19 pandemic effects on wages and employment levels in these two
specific industries in 2020.
       The goal of our empirical analysis is to evaluate the factors associated with the level of
wages and numbers of employees in the food manufacturing sector and animal slaughter and
processing industry. These sectors were impacted significantly by the COVID-19 pandemic
suffering widespread disruptions. The drop in capital utilization and industry output was
especially acute in these two sectors. This is demonstrated in figure 6, where a significant
decline in output and plant capacity utilization is apparent in 2020. However, capacity
utilization and output recovered within the first three quarters of 2020 and exceeded levels
observed at the end of 2019 by the end of the year.

                                         [Figure 6 about here.]

       We jointly estimated wage and employment equations using the dynamic panel estimation
procedures described above for all food manufacturing and for animal slaughter and processing.
Summary statistics for the variables used to explain wage and employment levels are presented
   1
    The number of establishments is reported for all counties in the United States. A valuable future research
direction would address possible specification biases that may result from nondisclosure data reporting
considerations.

                                                     14
in table 1. Food manufacturing as a whole tends to have higher wages and levels of employment
over the entirety of the sample. Wages and employment also tend to be less historically
variable in food manufacturing as shown by the historical coefficient of variation (CV) for
wages and employees in the two industries. Per capita wage income is slightly higher in the
counties with meat processing facilities,
   We assume that employment and wages are jointly endogenous and are influenced by
adjustment lags, which are represented using lagged employment and wages. These adjustment
lags may represent labor and wage contracts and agreements or other factors causing frictions
in the adjustment process. Preliminary results indicated a faster adjustment for wages, where
only a single lagged value was significant. Employment is slower to adjust and required two
lags.


                                    [Table 1 about here.]


   We estimated the following specifications for the employment and wage equations. In the
food manufacturing sector, the employment equation is given by




    employeesit =хi + employeesit-1 + employeesit-2 + establishmentsit + f oodcpiit
                                                                                          (4)
                   + wageit + wagecvit + employeescvit + pcwageincomeit +     it



while the wage equation is given by


        wageit =хi + wageit-1 + establishmentsit + f oodcpiit
                                                                                          (5)
                  + employeesit + wagecvit + employeescvit + pcwageincomeit +      it




                                             15
For the animal slaughter and processing industry, the employment equation is given by


employeesit =хi + +employeesit-1 + employeesit-2 + establishmentsit + porkcpiit

               + poultrycpiit + beef cpiit + wageit + wagecvit + employeescvit + pcwageincomeit +   it

                                                                                            (6)


and the wage equation is given by


      wageit =хi + wageit-1 + establishmentsit + porkcpiit + poultrycpiit + beef cpiit
                                                                                            (7)
                + employeesit + wagecvit + employeescvit + pcwageincomeit +        it



where counties are indexed by i and time is indexed by t. Employment and wages are
affected by lagged values, contemporary values of employment and wages, the number of
establishments in a county, prices of food and/or meat, historical variation in employment
and wages, and per capita wage income in a county.
   Parameter estimates and related statistics for the dynamic models for food manufacturing
are presented in table 2. The results indicate that average weekly wages in the food processing
sector are positively associated with the price of output, as represented by the food CPI.
Historical volatility in wages, which is represented using the wage CV, tends to increase real
wages. This likely represents a risk premium to workers in counties and years that had volatile
wages. In contrast, greater volatility in the number of employees tends to be associated with
lower wages. Greater volatility in the availability of labor would be expected to result in
lower real wages. Finally, counties and years that realized a higher average wage per person
also tended to have higher wages in the food manufacturing sector.

                                    [Table 2 about here.]

   Strong lagged effects are apparent for the number of employees in the food manufacturing
sector. The first-order autoregressive coefficient is 0.90, which represents a very slow adjust-
ment over time. This is consistent with expectations in that, although wages may be more

                                              16
easily adjusted in response to economic conditions, the actual number of employees is much
slower to adjust. This requires hiring and firing of workers and therefore is more likely to
involve significant frictions that impair adjustment. Long-term employment agreements are
one factor that is likely to slow adjustments in the number of workers.
   A scale effect on the number of workers is reflected in the number of establishments. More
manufacturing plants would be expected to require a greater number of workers. The real
price of food tends to lower the number of workers employed in the food manufacturing
sector. This is counter to expectations but may reflect the cost of other unobservable inputs.
The endogenous weekly wage does not have a significant effect on the number of workers. A
higher historical volatility of wages tends to lower employment. A greater degree of wage
volatility may suggest a higher level of risk to both workers and plant managers, thereby
leading to a lower level of employment.
   We also considered a single-equation dynamic panel model of the value of total output
from the food industry. This was represented using the industry-specific total personal income
for food, beverage, and tobacco manufacturing. A strong lagged effect with a near unitary
autoregressive parameter was found for total output. The number of plants in a county
and year is associated with lower total output. However, a higher value for the output, as
represented by the food CPI, was associated with greater output. The number of employees
was associated with greater output. Higher average wages for workers lower the value of
output. Greater volatility of average wages is associated with higher output. However,
volatility in the number of workers tends to lower the value of output. This suggests that
volatility in the availability of workers tends to have a negative effect on the supply chain
and reduces the value of output.

                                    [Table 3 about here.]

   The wage and employment analysis was repeated for a much more finely defined industry
Г animal slaughter and processing. COVID-19 had significant impacts on workers in the meat
processing sector, although as noted, there is emerging evidence of similar but apparently

                                             17
less newsworthy effects in other areas of food manufacturing (Asher et al., 2021). Employees
working on the animal slaughter and meat processing lines spent hours in close proximity
to one another and the spread of the virus among plant workers was felt across the beef,
pork, and poultry industries. Significant lags in adjustment are apparent for both wages
and the number of workers in the industry. A greater number of processing plants increased
the number of employees but had no statistically significant impact on wages. Wages were
negatively related to pork prices but beef and poultry prices had no impact on wages or
employment. A higher number of workers is associated with higher wages. Wages are
increased as the volatility of wages rises but are decreased as the volatility of the number of
workers increases.

                                    [Table 4 about here.]

   A central objective of our analysis is to assess the impacts of COVID-19 on wages and
employment in the food and animal processing sectors as a study of disruption risk in the
sector. To this end, we utilized BLS wage data for the first three quarters of 2020 and
monthly employment through September of 2020. We predicted wages and the number of
workers holding all other factors at their 2019 levels. Figure 7 illustrates the implied impact
on average wages in the food manufacturing sector across the first three quarters of 2020.
The predicted and realized values of wages are plotted alongside a 45o line. Observations
above the line indicate wages that are higher than expected while the converse is true for
observations below the line.
   In general, wages appear to have been slightly higher than one might have expected,
conditional on other economic factors being held constant. The cross-sectional volatility of
wages appears to have fallen in the second quarter of 2020. Panel (b) of figure 7 shows a
much lower level of dispersion of wages. Higher wages may have been necessary to induce
employment in the plants during COVID-19. The lower cross-sectional volatility of wages in
the second quarter of 2020 may have been associated with a general slowdown in the entire
economy.

                                              18
                                   [Figure 7 about here.]


   Employment over the first nine months of 2020 is illustrated in Figure 8. Again, obser-
vations below the 45o line represent a case where the number of workers is lower than the
model predicts. A subtle pattern of declining employment in April and May is visible. Figure
9 illustrates the proportion of counties that had higher than predicted employment in the
food manufacturing sector across the first nine months of 2020. A fall in employment relative
to what would have been expected is apparent from March through June. This period was
characterized by worsening conditions due to the pandemic.


                                   [Figure 8 about here.]


                                   [Figure 9 about here.]


   Predictions of wages and employment in the livestock slaughter and processing sector are
presented in Figures 10 and 11. Again, wages appear to have been higher during the first
three quarters of 2020 than the model predicted. A lower degree of cross-sectional volatility
of wages is again notable for the second quarter. Figure 11 again suggests subtle decreases in
employment relative to what was expected. Figure 12 repeats the analysis of the proportion
of counties that realized lower and higher levels of employment than were expected. Again, a
substantial drop in employment from March through May is apparent.


                                   [Figure 10 about here.]


                                   [Figure 11 about here.]


                                   [Figure 12 about here.]


   From the point of view of labor related risks in food manufacturing, several conclusions
are apparent from this analysis. First, in terms of operational risks, there are complicated
dynamics at play for wages and employment in these industries. While wages are relatively


                                             19
quick to adjust, employment is slower. This lag suggests that labor inflexibilities in food
manufacturing and animal processing may be a significant source of risk with implications
throughout the supply chain. Second, historical variation in wages and employment have
impacts on current wages and employment, possibly reflecting risk premia. In terms of
disruption risk, there are noticeable impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on employment and
wages, particularly in March, April, and May of 2020. Employment is lower than predicted
and wages are higher for most (but not all) counties in the sample. These dynamics are
indicative of equilibrating actions on the part of firms and market forces at work.



Conclusion

We model employment and wages in the food manufacturing sector and animal slaughter
and processing industries using dynamic panel models and data at the county level. The
estimated models allow us to characterize labor dynamics in these industries and provide
insight into the operational risks faced by firms in this environment. We then compare
estimated employment and wages with these labor outcomes during a disruptive event. The
COVID-19 pandemic had large impacts on employment and wages in early 2020. However,
the food manufacturing industry recovered quickly returning to pre-pandemic levels. Taken
together, these assessments of operational and disruption risk in food manufacturing suggest
that labor risk is an important source of risk in the agricultural supply chain. However, the
food manufacturing sector as currently organized is relatively resilient, at least to the types
of labor shocks resulting from the pandemic.
   This analysis of labor dynamics and disruption in food manufacturing points to several
lines of research where the literature on agricultural supply chains might be advanced. First,
there are a number of interesting outstanding questions related to food manufacturing and
animal processing operations. While this analysis focuses on county-level employment, and
makes no distinction between regular and production employees, later work could focus on



                                              20
plant-level analysis. By distinguishing between different types of employees, it would be
possible to better understand intra-firm changes in the distribution of workers. Presumably
any risks associated with labor could also differ across worker types.
   Second, richer datasets will enable the use of increasingly sophisticated methodologies
for the measurement and analysis of agricultural supply chains. Difficulties in empirically
modeling supply chains arise from the oftentimes limited availability of current data and
the spatially and temporally dynamic nature of supply chains. On one hand, deterministic
models of supply chains can be parameterized and used to examine counterfactual supply
chain makeup. On the other, purely empirical models can be developed. In either case,
computational and econometric methods will need to be increasingly flexible to account for
the complexities of global value chains. Such advances are already being incorporated in
supply chain research (Chor, 2019; Yu & Nagurney, 2013).
   Lastly, the expanding literature on supply chain innovation and its relationship to supply
chain risk could be expanded to manufacturing labor and labor flexibility. Among the growing
literature in this area, Lu, Reardon, and Zilberman (2016), focus on machinery rental at the
farm level. Du, Lu, Reardon, and Zilberman (2016) considers a portfolio selection approach to
supply chain design using the example of a firm that requires feedstock processing. The focus
is on purchase of feedstock or production in-house. Few studies have explicitly considered
labor issues in food manufacturing and animal processing although unique labor markets
(such as heavy use of immigrant labor) characterize these sectors.
   The COVID-19 pandemic presents an opportunity to understand how supply chains
respond to major - and potentially prolonged - disruption. At the current time, any measured
responses can only be considered short term. Important questions about firms' long run
response to the pandemic, especially in the food sector, remain. Has disruption spurred
food manufacturers to make permanent adjustments to supply chains and manufacturing
operations? Anecdotal evidence suggests that animal processors have made increased use of
robotization in processing facilities. If widespread, increased mechanization could lower the


                                             21
the number of production workers required in processing with concomitant changes in supply
chain risk.




                                           22
References

Adjemian, M., Brorsen, B. W., Hahn, W., Saitone, T. L., & Sexton, R. J. (2016). Thinning
     Markets in U.S. Agriculture (Economic Information Bulletin 148). Economic Research
     Service.
Antle, J. M. (1996). Efficient food safety regulation in the food manufacturing sector.
     American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 78 (5), 1242Г1247.
Arellano, M., & Bond, S. (1991). Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte carlo
     evidence and an application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies ,
     58 (2), 277Г297.
Artz, G., Jackson, R., & Orazem, P. (2010). Is it a jungle out there? Meat packing,
     immigrants, and rural communities. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics ,
     35 (2), 299Г315.
Artz, G., Orazem, P., & Otto, D. (2007). Measuring the impact of meat packing and
     processing facilities in nonmetropolitan counties: a difference-in-differences approach.
     American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 89 (3), 557Г570.
Asher, T., Deb, P., & Gangaram, A. (2021). Nursing facilities, food manufacturing plants
     and COVID-19 cases and deaths. Economics Letters , 109800.
Binder, M., Hsiao, C., & Pesaran, M. H. (2005). Estimation and inference in short panel
     vector autoregressions with unit roots and cointegration. Econometric Theory , 21 ,
     795Г837.
Blundell, R., & Bond, S. (1998). Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel
     data models. Journal of Econometrics , 87 (1), 115Г143.
Boehlje, M. (1999). Structural changes in the agricultural industries: how do we measure,
     analyze and understand them? American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 81 (5),
     1028Г1041.
Bunge, J. (2020a, April 12). Smithfield CEO Warns of Risks to Pork Supply. Wall Street
     Journal .

                                            23
Bunge, J. (2020b, April 15). Smithfield to close more pork plants over coronavirus pandemic.
     Wall Street Journal .
Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., & MacKinlay, A. C. (2012). Event-Study Analysis. In The
     Econometrics of Financial Markets. Princeton University Press.
Cho, S. J., Lee, J. Y., & Winters, J. V. (2020). COVID-19 Employment Status Impacts on
     Food Sector Workers (IZA Discussion Paper). Institute of Labor Economics.
Chor, D. (2019). Modeling global value chains: approaches and insights from economics. In
     Handbook on Global Value Chains. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Davis, D. E., & Schluter, G. E. (2005). Labor-force heterogeneity as a source of agglomeration
     economies in an empirical analysis of county-level determinants of food plant entry.
     Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics , 30 (3), 480Г501.
Davis, S., & Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment
     reallocation. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 107 (3), 819Г863.
Du, X., Lu, L., Reardon, T., & Zilberman, D. (2016). Economics of agricultural supply chain
     design: A portfolio selection approach. American Journal of Agricultural Economics ,
     98 (5), 1377Г1388.
Elitzak, H. (1999). Food cost review, 1950-97 (Agricultural Economic Report 780). Economic
     Research Service.
Goetz, S. J. (1997). State-and county-level determinants of food manufacturing establishment
     growth: 1987Г93. American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 79 (3), 838Г850.
Goodwin, B. K., & Brester, G. W. (1995). Structural change in factor demand relationships
     in the US food and kindred products industry. American Journal of Agricultural
     Economics , 77 (1), 69Г79.
Henderson, J. R., & McNamara, K. T. (2000). The location of food manufacturing plant
     investments in corn belt counties. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics ,
     25 (2), 680Г697.
Hertz, T., & Zahniser, S. (2013). Is there a farm labor shortage? American Journal of


                                             24
     Agricultural Economics , 95 (2), 476Г481.
Hobbs, J. E. (2020). Food supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic. Canadian Journal
     of Agricultural Economics/Revue canadienne d'agroeconomie , 68 (2), 171Г176.
Hobbs, J. E. (2021). The Covid-19 pandemic and meat supply chains. Meat Science , Online.
Holtz-Eakin, D., Newey, W., & Rosen, H. S. (1988). Estimating vector autoregressions with
     panel data. Econometrica , 56 (6), 1371Г1395.
Huang, K. S. (1991). Factor demands in the us food-manufacturing industry. American
     Journal of Agricultural Economics , 73 (3), 615Г620.
Huang, K. S. (2003). Food manufacturing productivity and its economic implications (Technical
     Bulletin 1905). Economic Research Service.
Knoeber, C. R., & Thurman, W. N. (1995). "don't count your chickens...": Risk and risk
     shifting in the broiler industry. American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 77 (3),
     486Г496.
Kothari, S. P., & Warner, J. B. (2007). Econometrics of event studies. In Handbook of
     empirical corporate finance. Elsevier.
Kunreuther, H., & Useem, M. (2018). Mastering catastrophic risk: How companies are coping
     with disruption. Oxford University Press.
Lambert, D. M., & McNamara, K. T. (2009). Location determinants of food manufacturers in
     the united states, 2000Г2004: are nonmetropolitan counties competitive? Agricultural
     Economics , 40 (6), 617Г630.
Larue, B. (2020). Labor issues and COVID-19. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economic-
     s/Revue canadienne d'agroeconomie , 68 (2), 231Г237.
Lu, L., Reardon, T., & Zilberman, D. (2016). Supply chain design and adoption of indivisible
     technology. American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 98 (5), 1419Г1431.
Lusk, J. L., Tonsor, G. T., & Schulz, L. L. (2021). Beef and pork marketing margins and
     price spreads during COVID-19. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy , 43 (1),
     4Г23.


                                              25
MacDonald, J. M. (2014). Technology, organization, and financial performance in US broiler
     production (Economic Information Bulletin 126). Economic Research Service.
MacDonald, J. M., Ollinger, M., Nelson, K. E., & Handy, C. R. (2000). Consolidation in us
     meatpacking (Agricultural Economic Report 785). Economic Research Service.
McCluskey, J. J., & O'Rourke, A. D. (2000). Relationships between produce supply firms
     and retailers in the new food supply chain. Journal of Food Distribution Research , 31 ,
     11Г20.
McGuckin, R. H., Nguyen, S. V., & Reznek, A. P. (1998). On measuring the impact of
     ownership change on labor: evidence from US food-manufacturing plant-level data. In
     Labor statistics measurement issues. University of Chicago Press.
Nickell, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica , 49 (6),
     1417Г1426.
Richards, T. J. (2018). Immigration reform and farm labor markets. American Journal of
     Agricultural Economics , 100 (4), 1050Г1071.
Schultz, T. W. (1975). The value of the ability to deal with disequilibria. Journal of Economic
     Literature , 13 (3), 827Г846.
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International Journal of
     Production Economics , 103 (2), 451Г488.
Taylor, C. A., Boulos, C., & Almond, D. (2020). Livestock plants and COVID-19 transmission.
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117 (50), 31706Г31715.
Windmeijer, F. (2005). A finite sample correction for the variance of linear efficient two-step
     gmm estimators. Journal of Econometrics , 126 (1), 25Г51.
Wohlgenant, M. K. (2013). Competition in the us meatpacking industry. Annual Review of
     Resource Economics , 5 (1), 1Г12.
Yu, M., & Nagurney, A. (2013). Competitive food supply chain networks with application to
     fresh produce. European Journal of Operational Research , 224 (2), 273Г282.
Zilberman, D., Lu, L., & Reardon, T. (2019). Innovation-induced food supply chain design.


                                              26
Food Policy , 83 , 289Г297.




                              27
                                 Figure 1: Food Manufacturing Sector Output, Employment, and Labor Productivity
                                             Output Index                                                                                                                  Production Employees

                                                                                                                                                      1300




                           100
Index Value (2007 = 100)




                                                                                                                              Employees (Thousands)
                                                                                                                                                      1250




                            90



                                                                                                                                                      1200




                            80


                                                                                                                                                      1150



                                  1990        2000                                           2010                      2020                                  1990              2000                 2010   2020
                                                     Year                                                                                                                                    Year


                                                                                                     Labor Productivity Index
                                                                                105




                                                                                100




                                                                                 95
                                                     Index Value (2007 = 100)




                                                                                 90




                                                                                 85




                                                                                 80




                                                                                      1990                      2000                                                2010              2020
                                                                                                                              Year


                                                                                                    All data from Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                                                                         28
Figure 2: Food Manufacturing Sector Unit Labor Cost and Hourly Wages
                                                    Unit Labor Cost Index

                               130




                               120
 Index Value (2007 = 100)




                               110




                               100




                                90




                                80

                                     1990            2000                             2010          2020
                                                                   Year

                                                   Average Hourly Earnings




                               21
 Average Hourly Earnings ($)




                               19




                               17




                                            2010                            2015             2020
                                                                   Year

                                              All data from Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                29
      Figure 3: Food Manufacturing Sector Employees and Weekly Wage by County, 2019
                                             Employees


      50




      45

                                                                                    Employees
                                                                                        40000
      40
                                                                                        30000
lat




                                                                                        20000
      35
                                                                                        10000



      30




      25

              -120                  -100                                    -80
                                            long


                                           Weekly Wages


      50



      45

                                                                                  Weekly Wage
      40
                                                                                     3000
lat




                                                                                     2000
      35
                                                                                     1000


      30



      25
             -120                 -100                                -80
                                           long



                                All data from Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                   30
       Figure 4: Animal Processing Sector Employees and Weekly Wage by County, 2019
                                              Employees


      50




      45

                                                                                     Employees
      40                                                                                 8000

                                                                                         6000
lat




                                                                                         4000
      35
                                                                                         2000


      30




      25

              -120                   -100                                    -80
                                             long


                                            Weekly Wages


      50



      45

                                                                                   Weekly Wage
                                                                                      2000
      40
                                                                                      1500
lat




      35                                                                              1000

                                                                                      500

      30



      25
              -120                 -100                                -80
                                            long



                                 All data from Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                    31
Figure 5: Wage and Employment Distributions for Food Manufacturing Sector and Animal
Processing Sector, 2019
                                                                       Food Manufacturing

                                                                                                 0.0015


          0.015




                                                                                                 0.0010

          0.010
Density




                                                                                       Density




                                                                                                 0.0005
          0.005




          0.000                                                                                  0.0000

                   0   200            400                  600             800                                  1000          2000             3000      4000
                               Employees per Facility                                                                     Weekly Wage


                                                        Animal Slaughtering and Processing
                                                                                                 0.0015
          0.0100




          0.0075

                                                                                                 0.0010
Density




                                                                                       Density




          0.0050




                                                                                                 0.0005


          0.0025




          0.0000                                                                                 0.0000

                   0     200                400                  600             800                      500          1000             1500          2000
                               Employees per Facility                                                                     Weekly Wage


                                                            All data from Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                                  32
Figure 6: Food Manufacturing Sector Capacity Utilization and Output
             (a) Food Manufacturing Capacity Utilization




                   (b) Food Manufacturing Output




                                 33
Figure 7: COVID-19 Related Changes in Average Weekly Wages in the Food Manufacturing
Sector
                     (a) 2020 Quarter 1 Predicted vs. Actual Wages

                                    8.0




                                    7.5




                                    7.0




                           Actual

                                    6.5




                                    6.0




                                    5.5
                                          5.5       6.0       6.5               7.0       7.5       8.0
                                                                    Predicted




                     (b) 2020 Quarter 2 Predicted vs. Actual Wages


                                    8




                                    7
                           Actual




                                    6




                                    5




                                                5         6                           7         8
                                                                    Predicted




                     (c) 2020 Quarter 3 Predicted vs. Actual Wages


                                    7.5




                                    7.0
                           Actual




                                    6.5




                                    6.0




                                    5.5
                                          5.5       6.0       6.5               7.0       7.5       8.0
                                                                    Predicted




                                                                34
     Figure 8: 2020 Monthly Differences in Predicted and Actual Employment in the Food Manufacturing Sector
                                       (a) January                                                                    (b) February                                                                   (c) March

                      10                                                                             10                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                       8                                                                              8




                                                                                                                                                                                    6




             Actual
                                                                                            Actual
                                                                                                                                                                          Actual
                       6                                                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                       4                                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                       2                                                                              2

                           2           4              6                   8       10   12                 2           4             6                   8       10   12                 2        4          6               8   10   12
                                                              Predicted                                                                     Predicted                                                           Predicted




                                                   (d) April                                                                      (e) May                                                                (f) June

                      10                                                                             10                                                                            10




                       8                                                                              8                                                                             8




35
                       6                                                                              6                                                                             6




             Actual
                                                                                            Actual
                                                                                                                                                                          Actual




                       4                                                                              4                                                                             4




                       2                                                                              2                                                                             2


                               2           4              6                   8   10   12                     2           4             6                   8   10   12                 2        4          6               8   10   12
                                                              Predicted                                                                     Predicted                                                           Predicted




                                                   (g) July                                                               (h) August                                                            (i) September

                      10                                                                             10                                                                            10




                       8                                                                              8                                                                             8




                       6                                                                              6                                                                             6




             Actual
                                                                                            Actual
                                                                                                                                                                          Actual




                       4                                                                              4                                                                             4




                       2                                                                              2                                                                             2



                                   2           4          6                   8   10   12                         2           4         6                   8   10   12                     2        4      6               8   10   12
                                                              Predicted                                                                     Predicted                                                           Predicted
Figure 9: Unanticipated Decreases in 2020 Food Manufacturing Employment




                                  36
Figure 10: COVID-19 Related Changes in Average Weekly Wages in the Animal Processing
Sector
                     (a) 2020 Quarter 1 Predicted vs. Actual Wages

                                    8.0




                                    7.5




                                    7.0


                           Actual




                                    6.5




                                    6.0



                                              6.0   6.5              7.0       7.5   8.0
                                                              Predicted




                     (b) 2020 Quarter 2 Predicted vs. Actual Wages

                                    9




                                    8
                           Actual




                                    7




                                    6
                                          6               7                8         9
                                                              Predicted




                     (c) 2020 Quarter 3 Predicted vs. Actual Wages

                                    8.0




                                    7.5
                           Actual




                                    7.0




                                    6.5




                                    6.0
                                              6.0   6.5              7.0       7.5   8.0
                                                              Predicted




                                                              37
     Figure 11: 2020 Monthly Differences in Predicted and Actual Employment in the Animal Processing Sector
                              (a) January                                  (b) February                                      (c) March


                      8                                            8                                            8




                      6                                            6                                            6




             Actual
                                                          Actual
                                                                                                       Actual
                      4                                            4                                            4




                      2                                            2                                            2

                          2    4                  6   8                2    4                  6   8                2         4                   6       8
                                      Predicted                                    Predicted                                          Predicted




                               (d) April                                        (e) May                                       (f) June


                      8                                            8                                            8




38
                      6                                            6                                            6




             Actual
                                                          Actual
                                                                                                       Actual




                      4                                            4                                            4




                      2                                            2                                            2
                          2    4                  6   8                2    4                  6   8                2         4                   6       8
                                      Predicted                                    Predicted                                          Predicted




                                   (g) July                                (h) August                                       (i) September


                      8                                            8                                            8




                      6                                            6                                            6




             Actual
                                                          Actual
                                                                                                       Actual




                                                                                                                4
                      4                                            4




                                                                                                                2
                      2                                            2

                          2    4                  6   8                2     4                 6   8                    2         4                   6       8
                                      Predicted                                    Predicted                                          Predicted
Figure 12: Unanticipated Decreases in 2020 Animal Processing Employment




                                  39
                                      Table 1: Variable Definitions and Summary Statisticsa

                                                                             Food Manufacturing      Animal Processing
                                                                                        Standard               Standard
              Variable                          Definition                    Mean      Deviation     Mean     Deviation
     Per-Capita Income          Log of Real Per-Capita Income               3.7763        0.2259
     No. Establishments         Number of Industry Establishments           2.3630         0.9452     1.7272     0.6298
     CV of Wages                CV of Real Wage Rate (previous 8 quarters) 17.1946        30.7891    25.2171    41.9651
     CV of Employment           CV of Employment (previous 12 months)      15.7715        31.2680    22.6170    42.7803
     Per-Capita Wage Income     Log of Real Per-Capita Wage Income          2.8543        0.3931     3.0378      0.4032




40
     No. Employees              Number of Industry Employees                5.6864         1.6492     5.2038     1.8154
     Average Weekly Wage        Log of Real Average Weekly Wage            6.5454         0.3918     6.4935     0.3548
     Food Total Output          Real Income in Food Processing Industry     0.0759        0.1865
     Food CPI                   Log of Regional Food CPI                    5.5401         0.0242
     Pork CPI                   Log of Regional Pork CPI                                              5.3979     0.0424
     Poultry CPI                Log of Regional Poultry CPI                                           5.4774     0.0333
     Beef CPI                   Log of Regional Beef CPI                                              5.6728     0.0935
     a
         Numbers of observations are 14,187 for the food processing sector employment and wages, 13,726 for food processing
         industry output, and 2,300 for the meat processing sector.
Table 2: Dynamic Panel Model of Food Manufacturing Sector Weekly Wages and Employment

                               Average Weekly Wages                     No. Employees
                            Parameter     Standard   t         Parameter      Standard       t
 Variable                    Estimate       Error  Ratio        Estimate        Error      Ratio
 Intercept                    -2.1271        0.5975     -3.56      1.2128       0.9462       1.28
 Weekly Waget-1                0.7347        0.0418     17.58
 No. Employeest-1                                                  0.9009       0.0431     20.92
 No. Employeest-2                                                 -0.0495       0.0180      -2.75
 No. Establishments            0.0048        0.0129      0.37      0.3890       0.0281     13.84
 Food CPI                      0.6334        0.1081      5.86     -0.3186       0.1807      -1.76
 Weekly Wage                                                       0.0797       0.0533      1.50
 No. Employees                 0.0288        0.0086      3.37
 CV of Wages                   0.0044        0.0005      8.90     -0.0013       0.0005      -2.62
 CV of Employment             -0.0041        0.0005     -8.27      0.0006       0.0005      1.17
 Per-Capita Wage Income        0.0625        0.0288     2.17      -0.0133       0.0456      -0.29
  ...............................................................................................
 R2                                           0.90                               0.97
 Number of Cross Sections                     1378                               1378
 Time Series Length                            12                                 12
 Number of Instruments                         92                                 71




                                            41
     Table 3: Dynamic Panel Model of Food Manufacturing Sector Output

                                   Parameter      Standard   t
         Variable                   Estimate        Error  Ratio
         Intercept                   -0.5225        0.1321     -3.96
         Food Total Outputt-1         0.9961        0.0410     24.30
         Food Total Outputt-2        -0.0408        0.0473     -0.86
         No. Establishments          -0.0032        0.0019     -1.68
         Food CPI                     0.1040        0.0265      3.92
         No. Employees                0.0107        0.0056      1.92




42
         Weekly Wage                 -0.0164        0.0078     -2.11
         CV of Wages                  0.0001        0.0000      2.21
         CV of Employment            -0.0001        0.0000     -1.83
         Per-Capita Wage Income       0.0016        0.0066      0.24
         ............................................................
         R2                                          0.98
         Number of Cross Sections                    1324
         Time Series Length                           12
         Number of Instruments                        91
     Table 4: Dynamic Panel Model of Animal Processing Industry Weekly Wages and Employment

                                    Average Weekly Wages                     No. Employees
                                 Parameter     Standard   t          Parameter     Standard       t
     Variable                     Estimate       Error  Ratio         Estimate       Error      Ratio
     Intercept                      1.9945        0.7800      2.56     -1.3635       1.7477      -0.78
     Weekly Waget-1                  0.8000       0.0549     14.57
     No. Employeest-1                                                   0.9584       0.0827      11.58
     No. Employeest-2                                                  -0.1577       0.0421      -3.75
     No. Establishments             -0.0221       0.0356     -0.62      0.2642       0.0727      3.63
     Pork CPI                       -0.3586       0.0962     -3.73     -0.0041       0.1734      -0.02




43
     Poultry CPI                     0.1080       0.1416      0.76      0.1182       0.2772       0.43
     Beef CPI                        0.0596       0.0593      1.00      0.0066       0.1615       0.04
     Weekly Wage                                                        0.1299       0.1163      1.12
     No. Employees                   0.0300       0.0120      2.51
     CV of Wages                     0.0017       0.0007      2.27     -0.0005       0.0009      -0.51
     CV of Employment               -0.0014       0.0007     -1.84     -0.0005       0.0009      -0.60
     Per-Capita Wage Income         0.0622        0.0538     1.16       0.1582       0.2176       0.73
      ................................................................................................
     R2                                            0.90                               0.98
     Number of Cross Sections                       266                                266
     Time Series Length                             12                                 12
     Number of Instruments                           94                                73
