                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TRADE POLICY IS REAL NEWS:
                               THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                    George A. Alessandria
                                       Carter B. Mix

                                     Working Paper 28904
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28904


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We thank Ariel Burstein, Fabrizio Perri, Davide Melcangi, Ricardo Reyes-Heroles, Kim Ruhl,
Mike Waugh and audiences at the Banco de Mexico, SED Edinburgh, 2017 CEBRA IFM, 2018
RIDGE, NBER Fall 2018 IFM, LAEF conference on "Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics,''
Maryland, Nottingham, Bank of Portugal, Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, Rochester, and
Singapore Management University for helpful comments. We appreciate Kristy Buzzard sharing
data on U.S.-Korea tariff schedules with us. A previous version circulated as "The Global Trade
Slowdown: Trade and Growth, Cause and Effect." The views expressed in this paper are solely
those of the authors and should not be viewed as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve
System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by George A. Alessandria and Carter B. Mix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Policy is Real News: Theory and Evidence
George A. Alessandria and Carter B. Mix
NBER Working Paper No. 28904
June 2021
JEL No. E3,F1,F4

                                         ABSTRACT

We evaluate the aggregate effects of changes in trade barriers when these changes can be
implemented slowly over time and trade responds gradually to changes in trade barriers because
firm-level trade costs make exporting a dynamic decision. Our model shows how expectations of
changes in trade barriers affect the economy. We find that while decreases in trade barriers
increase economic activity, expectations of lower future trade barriers temporarily decrease
investment, hours worked, and output. Further-more, canceling an expected decline in future
trade barriers raises investment and output in the short run but substantially lowers medium-run
growth. These effects are larger when the expected reform is bigger. In the data, we find that
countries with more trade growth after the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) rounds decreased investment and hours worked in the years leading to the tariff cuts,
as predicted by our model.


George A. Alessandria
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Harkness 204
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
george.alessandria@rochester.edu

Carter B. Mix
Division of International Finance
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th & C St. NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
carter.mix@gmail.com
1     Introduction

    Understanding the role of news about future technology or policy on the current state
of the economy is a long running and contentious issue (Pigou (1927), Keynes (1936), and
Beaudry and Portier (2014)). One challenge for work on this topic, particularly as relates
to news about future productivity, is to identify these future changes in technology. This
challenge has led to important and creative empirical methods that beget differing inter-
pretations of the data. These differing interpretations have led researchers to focus more
on how pre-announced policies can affect economic activity today. In this paper we argue
that the tendency for trade policy to be pre-announced, implemented gradually, and closely
linked to productivity makes it the ideal policy to revisit the effect of news on the business
cycle. Using cross-country evidence from the GATT reforms, we show that news about trade
reforms is contractionary even as the implementation is expansionary.
    Changes in trade policy often follow long negotiations between countries. When negotia-
tions conclude successfully, the changes in policy occur gradually according to a well-defined
schedule, often called a phaseout. Both the negotiations and the phaseouts are public knowl-
edge, so the future policy changes are anticipated by consumers and firms. Because the
policy changes affect future productivity, income, and prices, news about future changes in
trade barriers influences consumers' and firms' current behavior through large wealth effects,
leading to a different aggregate response than if the changes are unanticipated.
    We study the aggregate effects of past, present, and future changes in trade barriers in
a two country heterogeneous firm dynamic general equilibrium model. The model nests the
standard international real business cycle model (Backus et al. (1994)) and the heterogeneous
firm model for trade policy analysis (Melitz (2003) and Alessandria and Choi (2014)). We
specify a stochastic process for trade costs that allows for both anticipated and unanticipated
changes. Consumers make forward-looking decisions about consumption and labor supply,
and firms, which pay a large sunk cost to begin exporting, make forward-looking decisions
about investment as well as their production and export status. Expectations of future
changes in trade barriers can therefore affect consumers' and firms' current behavior. The
sunk cost assumption also implies that changes in trade costs affect trade gradually as the
share of firms exporting grows slowly. Thus, both past and future trade barriers matter for
the current economy. The model also captures the composition of trade in consumption,
investment, and material goods so that changes in trade costs ­ whether past, present, or
future ­ induce substitution effects between goods. The interaction between trade dynamics
and capital accumulation with capital intensive trade leads to rich transitions that are absent
in other models.
   In the model, a permanent surprise decrease in trade costs increases trade and economic
activity through standard efficiency channels. Because consumers have higher wages and
goods prices are lower, they substitute toward consumption and away from leisure, increasing
labor supply and gross domestic product (GDP). Even with balanced growth preferences,
this substitution effect dominates the income effect. Because trade is intensive in capital
goods, cheaper imports decrease the price of capital goods relative to consumption goods
and firms invest more, which in turn increases the marginal product of labor and leads to
an even larger boost in economic activity in the long-run.
   News of future reductions in trade costs decreases investment and hours worked and
increases consumption and exporting capacity. Consumers still expect to be richer in the
future, and the wealth effect that makes them want to consume more and work less has no
offsetting substitution effect until trade costs actually change. Therefore, agents work less
and consume more before trade costs fall. Furthermore, firms delay investment in physical
capital until trade costs fall and the price of capital is lower. Meanwhile, lower future
trade costs increase the future value of being an exporter, so firms invest more in exporting
capacity and the number of exporters increases. Therefore, the economy starts the trade
liberalization with more consumption and exporters and less investment, labor, and GDP
than if the liberalization is unexpected.
   In summary, the transition of the economy depends on whether the changes in trade


                                              3
costs are expected or unexpected. Consider, for example, a decreasing path of trade costs
where agents either know the complete path at the beginning or are constantly surprised by
unanticipated reductions. Because the expectation of lower barriers decreases investment, a
gap between the investment response under the two cases forms immediately and persists
for many periods as firms continue to expect even lower capital prices in the future. GDP,
consumption, and labor also differ along the transition.
   The model also tells us what happens when expected changes in trade costs are not
realized. What should we have expected in the U.S. economy, for example, when the U.S.
pulled out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) after the agreement had been signed? Or
when it withdrew from the negotiations of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partner-
ship (TTIP)? The theory predicts that U.S. consumers were already consuming more and
firms were already investing in greater export market access. At the same time, consumers
were working less because they expected higher future wages, and firms were investing less
in physical capital because they expected lower future costs. Canceling the agreement de-
creased expected wealth for consumers and raised the future price of investment for firms.
Therefore, consumers worked more and consumed less, and firms invested more in physical
capital and less in exporting capacity. Overall, GDP increased: Canceling an agreement once
it is expected raises activity in the short run. Of course, the model also predicts that by can-
celing the agreement, the U.S. is missing out on medium-run growth during the liberalization
period.
   Having sorted out the rich interactions between trade barriers and the aggregate economy,
we next turn to the data for evidence concerning the aggregate predictions of the model for
expected trade liberalizations. Specifically, we consider the dynamics of GDP, consumption,
investment, and hours worked of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD) countries both before and after GATT round implementations. GATT rounds
are useful because they are multilateral agreements that affect each member country's trade
flows and the negotiation and phase out periods are well documented. Furthermore, because


                                               4
the agreements include a large number of countries, the timing of the agreements is exoge-
nous to any one country's business cycle. The data exercise suggests that GDP, investment,
and hours worked fell in the years directly preceding tariff cuts while consumption increased.
Thus, the data outcomes are qualitatively consistent with our stylized model.
      The idea that past and expected future changes in trade policy affect current trade and
other aggregate variables casts doubt on traditional static trade models, in which changes
in trade and real income are proportional to changes in trade barriers. Our model implies
that the effect of changing trade barriers on the economy is more nuanced. Building on our
work here, Alessandria and Mix (2018) estimate time-varying expectations of US inward and
outward trade policies and quantify their aggregate effects over the past 60 years on the U.S.
economy.


1.1       Relevant Literature

      Our paper relates to several strands of the literature on business cycles and international
trade. Our paper contributes to the literature on the delayed effects of aggregate shocks on
trade. A large branch of this work, focuses on the gradual expansion of trade following trade
agreements. Baier and Bergstrand (2007) show that the full impact of free trade agreements
(FTAs) on trade can take up to 10 to 15 years to be realized. Baier et al. (2014), Alessandria
and Choi (2014), and Besedes et al. (2020) show that most of this delayed effect comes from
the dynamics of the extensive margin of trade as one would expect if exporting involves a
durable investment in foreign market access. In addition, a large literature in international
macroeconomics focuses on the slow adjustment of trade and the trade balance to movements
in the terms of trade and the real exchange rate.1 The model we develop captures both of
these observations and therefore allows for the impacts of a liberalization episode to become
stronger over time.
      Several papers have examined the quantitative impact of changes in trade barriers or trade
  1
      See Ruhl et al. (2008), Rabanal and Rubio-Ramirez (2015), and Alessandria and Choi (2019b).



                                                    5
policy on business cycle fluctuations.2 Crucini and Kahn (1996) show that the increases in
tariffs during the Great Depression could have reduced economic activity in the U.S. by
more than 2 percent per year from 1931 to 1935. Similarly, Perri and Quadrini (2002) find
the increases in tariffs in Italy reduced output by 7 to 10 percent in the 1930s, with the
higher reductions depending on wage rigidities. The larger effects in Italy than in the U.S.
can be attributed to Italy being more open and raising barriers by more. Caldara et al.
(2020) show that changes in trade policy uncertainty can be recessionary for the U.S. with
most of the impact arising from a reduction in investment. They show these effects of trade
policy uncertainty arise in a dynamic exporting model with nominal rigidities. Our focus is
on future shocks for which nominal rigidities are unlikely to be important. Alessandria and
Choi (2019b) show that changes in inward and outward US trade barriers have had a large
impact on the dynamics of the US trade balance since the 1980s. Here we consider a richer
process of trade integration and a richer model of business cycle fluctuations. Alessandria
and Mix (2018) build on our framework and study the contribution of shocks to past, current,
and future inward and outward trade barriers to U.S. aggregate fluctuations over the period
1965 to 2020.
       Our paper also contributes to the literature that explores how news about future changes
in policy or the aggregate economy can be a source of business cycle fluctuations. Most work
in this spirit has considered either predictable changes in productivity or fiscal policy, with
much debate about how to identify future changes in these variables.3 There is little doubt
that trade agreements (and disagreements) contain important predictable components and
that changes in trade barriers will feed into productivity. We use generalized information
about tariff phaseouts to discipline trade policy news in our model.
       News about the future has also featured quite prominently in the analysis of business
   2
     A very large literature studies the long-run effects of changes in trade barriers. See Irwin (2019) for a
summary of this work.
   3
     See, for example, Beaudry and Portier (2006), Barsky and Sims (2012), Schmitt-Groh´   e and Uribe (2012),
Ramey (2011), Mertens and Ravn (2010) and Mertens and Ravn (2012). For a full survey of the literature,
see Beaudry and Portier (2014).



                                                      6
cycles in the open economy. Backus et al. (1994) show that spillovers in technology across
countries can lead to very low international comovement. Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) show
that the high volatility of consumption and countercyclicality of the current account in
emerging markets relative to industrialized countries can be explained if emerging economies
are characterized by more persistent shocks to the growth rate of total factor productivity
(TFP). More recently, Colacito et al. (2018) identify news shocks about productivity from
price­earnings ratios and show the dynamics of borrowing and lending to these news shocks
are quite different empirically. Perhaps closest in spirit to our paper is recent work by Arezki
et al. (2017) that shows that in response to large oil discoveries there is a contractionary
effect of news on economic activity. We find quite similar contractionary effects in response
to future trade reforms.
     In Section 2, we discuss frequently observed patterns of changes in trade costs and trade.
In Section 3, we describe the model in detail. In Section 4, we describe our calibration
of parameters. In Section 5, we explore the impact of trade policy shocks on the aggregate
economy. In Section 6, we turn to the data to validate the predictions of the model regarding
the aggregate implications of future changes in trade costs. Finally, we conclude in Section
7.



2      Trade and Trade Cost Patterns

     To set ideas we discuss four key features of trade and trade policy. First, trade has grown
dramatically over a long period. Second, even though this growth has been a bit uneven,
with periods of fast and slow growth, there was generally sustained and gradual growth from
the mid-1960s to the mid 2010s. Third, this gradual growth reflects both gradual reductions
in trade barriers and gradual expansion in trade, particularly on the extensive margin. And
fourth, there is a large forward-looking component to trade policy from negotiations and
agreed-upon phase-outs of trade restrictions.



                                                7
   Since the mid-1960s, global trade as a share of global GDP has almost tripled.4 This
growth has been much larger for some countries and when one adjusts for changes in the
relative price of traded and non-traded goods. For instance, Figure 1 plots the path of
average real trade flows (exports plus imports) as a share of GDP for the United States.
From 1967 to 2007, the trade share more than tripled, from just under 8 percent to 27
percent. Since the recovery from the Great Recession the growth in trade integration has
slowed precipitously falling far below the pre­Great Recession trend.
   While trade growth has varied across periods, overall, the adjustment has been gradual.
The gradual adjustment of the trade-to-GDP ratio over time arises from two well-known
features of trade policy and trade: (1) The response of trade to changes in trade policy
or trade costs is gradual, and (2) trade policy changes gradually. As evidence of the first
feature, Baier and Bergstrand (2007) show that a trade agreement triples bilateral trade
but that this growth takes between 10 and 15 years. Baier et al. (2014) and Alessandria
and Choi (2014) find that the adjustment of trade is more gradual at the extensive margin
of products or firms. Jung (2012) and Besedes et al. (2020) confirm that trade expansion
is delayed beyond the slow phaseouts in tariffs. Using product-level tariffs and trade flows
from the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Khan and Khederlarian (2019)
find that the trade response to a tariff change in eight years is nearly three times the impact
effect. We capture the gradual adjustment of trade in our model by assuming exporters face
a relatively high cost to begin exporting and a smaller cost to continue exporting, as first
proposed by Baldwin and Krugman (1989). This formulation of trade costs makes exporting
a dynamic decisions so that the extensive margin of trade adjusts slowly in response to
changes in trade costs or other aggregate shocks. Since Baldwin and Krugman (1989), this
framework has been called the sunk cost model of exporting.
   Evidence that trade policy changes have occurred gradually is clear in Figure 2, which
plots several measures of tariffs and a trade restrictiveness index (TRI) since 1960. In general,
   4
     Using Penn World Tables 10.0 (PWT) data the share of trade rose from 9.2 percent of world GDP in
1967 to 26.2 percent in 2007.


                                                 8
the series tell a similar story for aggregate trade policy barriers in the past 60 years: They
have trended downward at a gradual pace. The trade-weighted measure of tariffs shows
that they have fallen from about 7 percent in the 1960s to about 2.5 percent before to the
U.S.­China trade war.5 The declines in this rate are related to the three GATT rounds and
the two FTAs with Canada and Mexico. A more direct measure of tariffs comes from Yi
(2003) for manufacturing goods and shows that average tariffs in manufacturing were close
to 14 percent before the first GATT round and fell gradually with each subsequent round.
We also plot a TRI that incorporates more of the product-level heterogeneity of the tariffs
and adjust for the average tariffs to understate the size of trade barriers. It shows a similar
gradual decline. The gradual decline in tariffs is even more pronounced in U.S. trading
partners position vis-`
                      a-vis the U.S. (see Trefler (2004)).
       The declines in trade policy barriers have a large predictable component related to the
negotiation and implementation. Table 1 reports the years that GATT member countries
were negotiating during the Kennedy Round, the Tokyo Round, and the Uruguay Round
and the years over which tariffs phased out (linearly) after an agreement was made. The
table also gives the tariff phaseout period for the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC)
implemented in the Uruguay Round.6 Negotiations were no shorter than three years, during
which consumers and firms likely anticipated that trade costs would decline. Following an
agreement, there was usually a short delay before implementation and then tariffs phased
out over no less than five years. The tariff phase out schedule and implementation date were
both known by consumers and firms even before implementation. Agents were able to fully
anticipate the changes in policy in each year following the agreement.
       This pattern of long negotiation and extended phase outs in global trade agreements
is also a common feature of bilateral liberalizations. The bottom two panels of Table 1
show that two bilateral trade agreements, NAFTA and the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agree-
   5
      The spikes in the tariff series correspond to the Nixon import surcharge of 10 percent imposed with the
fall of Bretton Woods in 1971 and the Ford import fee on crude oil starting in 1975.
    6
      The ATC itself was the last step in a series of short-run agreements in textile and clothing that started
in the early 1960s.


                                                      9
ment (KORUS FTA), followed extended negotiation periods with long phase outs of tariffs.7
Besedes et al. (2020) look at NAFTA's scheduled phase outs at the Harmonized System
10-digit product level. Of the products they consider, 18 percent were already duty free at
the commencement of NAFTA and an additional 42 percent were made duty free on impact.
All other products took at least five years for tariff cuts to phase in, and about 7 percent
of all products became duty free in 10 equal annual tariff cuts. Less than 1 percent of all
products had a tariff phaseout longer than 10 years.
      Figure 3 shows the world export weighted and simple average weighted scheduled US
tariff phase outs on Korean goods resulting from the KORUS FTA. The scheduled tariffs
dictate, at the aggregate level, a very smooth decrease in bilateral tariffs. Figure 4 shows
tariffs for autos shipped between the US and Korea. This picture clearly demonstrates that
tariff phaseouts differ in both their duration and the timing of when they begin. The US, for
example, secured a 25% tariff on Korean trucks that would not begin to phase out until 2018,
6 years after the agreement. In the fall of 2018, the renegotiated US-Korea FTA pushed out
this phaseout once again, currently scheduled to begin in 2041. The 10% tariff on Korean
cars, on the other hand, was scheduled to drop immediately. Korean tariffs on US cars
were cut in half at the beginning of the agreement, held constant over the next three years,
and then dropped to zero. Importantly, all these tariff schedules for individual products are
publicly available.
      These phaseouts combined with the long negotiations highlight the predictable aspect
of trade policy. The long negotiations also suggest that the outcome of these negotiations
has an unpredictable aspect. Sorting out the predictable and unpredictable components of
trade policy is challenging, but consumers and firms are clearly not completely surprised by
these policy changes and have an opportunity to adjust behavior along many dimensions in
anticipation of the future path of trade policy barriers.
  7
     The Canadian U.S. Free Trade Agreement enacted in 1988 was the culmination of many discussion and
followed up on the Auto Pact in 1965 that eliminated auto tariffs.




                                                 10
3         Model

        We now develop a two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with het-
erogeneous firms to study the short- and long-run effects of current and future changes in
trade barriers. We extend the international real business cycle model with heterogeneous
firms and a sunk cost of exporting of Alessandria and Choi (2007) and firm entry of Alessan-
dria and Choi (2019a) to include trade intensive in durable and capital goods, material
inputs in production, and most importantly, anticipated and unanticipated changes in trade
costs. The high trade intensity in durable and intermediate goods is necessary to capture
the industry structure of trade and the propagation of shocks. The changes in trade costs
are needed to match the growth of trade and changes in trade policy over time. The entry
margins and material inputs in production are necessary to capture the aggregate effects of
changes in trade barriers most accurately.8
        Two symmetric countries, Home and Foreign, are each populated by a continuum of
identical and infinitely lived consumers.9 Consumers make consumption and labor decisions
and trade a non-contingent bond across countries. In each period t, the economy experiences
an event st that determines exogenous variables such as productivity and trade costs. The
history of these events is denoted st  (s0 , ..., st ) where s0 is given. We denote the probability
of a history st as  (st , s0 ).
        Each country has a continuum (mass Nt ) of monopolistically competitive firms that
produce differentiated intermediate goods. The firms are indexed by i  [0, Nt ]. Intermediate
goods producers use capital, labor, and material inputs to produce. Firm productivity is
subject to idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks.
        All intermediate goods firms sell their variety in the domestic market, but only some
export. To export a firm pays an iceberg cost and a fixed cost which depends on the firm's
    8
     Atkeson and Burstein (2010) and Alessandria and Choi (2014) show that transition following a change
in tariffs or trade costs depends on having a firm entry decisions and firm or exporter lifecycle.
   9
     Mix (2020) develops a multi-country variation of this model and shows that many bilateral effects of
trade reforms can be captured in the two country model.



                                                   11
export status in the previous period. Non-exporters pay a higher fixed cost to export than
continuing exporters, as is common in the literature on firm dynamics and trade. The fixed
costs are denominated in units of labor. We hold fixed costs constant, but allow iceberg costs
to vary over time in unanticipated and anticipated ways. We consider the effect of changes
in tariffs as well.
   The mass of intermediate goods available is endogenous. Each period an unbounded
mass of potential firms can enter the market by paying a fixed cost denominated in labor.
Firms enter until the expected profits net of fixed costs of entering the market is zero (a free
entry condition). Among existing firms, firms face a fixed probability of survival ns from
one period to the next. With probability 1-ns , a firm must exit and receives the value of its
capital stock at current investment prices.
   Competitive final goods producers in each country use intermediate goods produced in
the domestic and foreign market to produce consumption and investment goods. Use of
intermediates in production follows the familiar constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
structure. To capture the empirical observation noted by Boileau (2002), Engel and Wang
(2011), Eaton et al. (2016), and others that trade is intensive in durable goods, we assume
that the bias in production for home goods is different for consumption and investment
goods.


3.1      Variable Trade Costs

   As we are interested in the response to a range of expected and unexpected paths for
trade policies, it is useful to discuss trade costs first. As is common, we assume the exports
of Home and Foreign intermediate goods producers are subject to an iceberg cost. A key
part of our model is that this iceberg cost is stochastic with both a trend and less persistent
component. The trend component captures gradual changes in bilateral trade barriers, such
as a trade agreement. We model both shocks as following first-order autoregressive processes
as in the work of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), which studies the effects of changes in trend


                                              12
productivity growth.10 We assume that shocks to the trend are known one period in advance
while transitory shocks are contemporaneous. Because the model is solved by linearization,
we choose a stochastic process for trade costs such that a trend shock to trade costs will still
eventually return to the steady state, but it will take a long time. The process for the trade
cost is


                              (st ) = (1 -  )¯ +   (st-1 ) + (st-k ) +                                    (1)

                            (st ) =  (st-1 ) +                                                            (2)


             2
and a  N (0, a ) for all a  {, }. For generality we write the effect of the trend
that affects current trade costs as being determined in state st-k . In our benchmark we
assume k = 1 so that agents know one period in advance how trade barriers will begin to
change. We vary the strength of the phase-out with the persistence of the trend shock,  .
When  = 0 there is no phase-out but the shock is known one period in advance. As we
raise  the length of the phase-out increases, as does the magnitude of the shock. Notice
that all trade cost shocks are assumed to be symmetric for ease of exposition. Introducing
differential movements in trade costs is straightforward, as in Alessandria and Choi (2019b)
or Alessandria and Mix (2018).


3.2       Consumers

       Consumers are endowed with one unit of time that they can use for leisure or labor L(st ).
Consumers choose labor, consumption, and holdings of a one-period non-contingent bond to
maximize welfare subjective to a budget constraint. The representative consumer's objective
  10
    An alternative approach is to introduce a rich set of shocks to future trade barriers indexed by the
current and future dates. For instance, a five-year linear phase out would involve five equal steps in tariffs
over the next five years. Our approach captures these linear phase outs in a tractable manner.




                                                     13
function is11
                                      
                               max                t  (st |s0 )U C (st ), 1 - L(st )
                                      t=0   st

where C (st ) denotes aggregate consumption at time t given history st ,  is the discount
factor, and  (st |s0 ) is the probability of a history st at time t given state s0 at t = 0. The
budget constraint is

                                                  b
           PC (st )C (st ) + Q(st )B (st+1 ) +      B (st )2  PC (st )W (st )L(st ) + B (st ) + (st )
                                                  2

where PC (st ) is the price of consumption goods relative to the home currency, W (st ) is the
real wage, Q(st ) is the price of a bond (relative to a numeraire) B (st+1 ) that pays one unit
of the home currency in the next period, and (st ) denotes profits from home intermediate
goods producers. There is also a portfolio adjustment cost determined by the parameter
b . Notice that the budget constraint is written in terms of the home currency. The foreign
budget constrainst is similar:


         t                                       b  t 2
       PC (s )C  (st ) + Q(st )B  (st+1 ) +                  t
                                                   B (s )  PC (s )W  (st )L (st ) + B  (st ) +  (st ),
                                                 2

where asterisks denote prices and allocations in Foreign.
       From now on, we abstract from state dependence and write all variables with only time
subscripts unless it is likely to be confusing. The first order conditions from the Home
consumer's problem are

                                     UL,t   Wt
                                 -        =                                                              (3)
                                     UC,t   PC
                                                    UC,t+1 PC,t
                                      Qt =  Et                   (1 - b Bt+1 )                           (4)
                                                     UC,t PC,t+1

where Ux denotes the marginal utility with respect to x  (C, L).
  11
   With our focus on global shocks and symmetric countries there is no need for the bond. We write it this
way to allow us to consider asymmetric shocks and borrowing and lending with asymmetric countries.


                                                         14
3.3    Final Goods Producers

   Each country has many final goods producers that engage in perfect competition. Home
final goods producers use all Home-produced and a subset of Foreign-produced intermediate
goods as inputs to create consumption C p , investment I p , and material input M p goods with
CES production technologies. Let X  {C p , I p , M p }, then

                                                                                                             1
                                    N                                            N                           
                                                         1-                                           1
                X (st ) =                X
                                        yh (i, st ) di + X  
                                                                                      X
                                                                                     yf (i, st ) di              ,   (5)
                                0                                            0


       X
where yn (i, st ) is the quantity of intermediate goods produced by firm i in country n used in
the production of good X , N is the number of firms at Home and N  is the number of firms
at Foreign. Parameter  determines the elasticity of substitution between within-country va-
rieties while  determines the elasticity of substitution between Home- and Foreign-produced
goods. X captures home bias in production of final good X . It is equivalent to allowing for a
different shipping cost for goods depending on their final use. We allow the weight in produc-
tion to differ for individual final goods, and in particular we impose I , M > C to capture
the empirical observation that trade is more common for durable goods and materials.
   Final goods producers produce consumption, investment, and material goods separately
and maximize profits over each type of final good. That is, they choose intermediates to
maximize the following profit function for each final good X :

                                             N                                       N
                    t       t                           t     X
              PXh (s )X (s ) -                   ph (i, s   )yh (i, st )di   -                       X
                                                                                         pf (i, st )yf (i, st )di    (6)
                                         0                                       0



subject to the good-specific aggregation technology. The firm treats the problem for each
final good as distinct. Notice that while final goods producers buy intermediates for the
production of all types of final goods separately, the intermediate goods producers only
produce one type of intermediate and charge the same price for it, regardless of its final use.
   Demand for an individual firm i's output for use in production of final good X 


                                                                15
{C, I, M } in the Home market can be expressed as

                                                                           1                    1
                          X,d                        ph (i, st )           -1     Ph (st )      -1
                         yh   (i, st )   =                                                                Xh (st )                   (7)
                                                      Ph (st )                   PXh (st )

and the demand for the same firm's output for use in Foreign is

                                                                       1                       1
                         X,d
                                   t         ph (i, st )               -1        Ph (st )      -1
                      yh       (i, s ) =                                                                 X Xf (st )                  (8)
                                              Ph (st )                          PXf (st )

where prices of bundles Ph and final goods prices PXh are the usual Dixit-Stiglitz price
indices:                                                                                        -1
                                                                  1                             
                                                                                     
                                             t                                  t
                                       Ph (s ) =                      ph (i, s )     -1   di
                                                              0

                                                                                               -1
                                                                                      
                                                                                               
                                                 t                -1                  -1
                                       PXh (s ) = Ph                       +  X Pf                   .


3.4     Intermediate Goods Producers

   Each country has a continuum of intermediate goods producers that survive to the next
period with probability ns . These firms each produce a unique variety and engage in mo-
nopolistic competition. Intermediate goods producers produce with capital, labor, and in-
termediate inputs. Firm productivity has an aggregate and idiosyncratic component.
   The production technology of the firm is


                                                                      t                                       1-m
       yh (i, st ) +   (st )yh
                             
                               (i, st )n(i, st ) = e(i,s ) k (i, st-1 ) l(i, st )1-                                   m(i, st-1 )m   (9)


                       
where yh (i, st ) and yh (i, st ) represent domestic and export sales of intermediates for the pro-
                                                                                                t
duction of final goods, k (i, st ), l(i, st ), m(i, st ) and e(1-)(i,s ) represent firm specific capital
stock, labor, material inputs, and productivity, respectively,   represents the stochastic ice-
berg cost of exporting to the Foreign market, and n(i, st ) is an indicator variable taking
value 1 if i exports at time t and 0 otherwise.


                                                                      16
       Firm productivity is heterogeneous across firms. Each period, firms draw productivity
 (i, st ) from a distribution that is independent and identially distributed (iid) across both
firms and time with  (i, st )  N (0, 2
                                       ). Alessandria and Choi (2007) show that the aggregate
properties of this model are similar when the idiosyncratic shock is persistent.
       Firms own the capital and choose investment x(i, st ) every period. The law of motion
for capital is
                                           k (i, st ) = (1 -  )k (i, st-1 ) + x(i, st ).                 (10)

       At the beginning of a period, a firm is identified by its idiosyncratic productivity  (i, st ),
undepreciated capital stock k (i, st-1 ) from the previous period, and the previous period's
export status n(i, st-1 ). The firm then chooses investment x(i, st ), labor l(i, st ), material
inputs m(i, st ), current export status n(i, st ), and prices ph (i, st ) and p       t
                                                                               h (i, s ) to maximize

                                                                                                12
the present discounted value of profits. Firm i's Bellman equation is


                                 V (, k, m, st ) =               max         (i) + n (i)  (i)            (11)
                                                           x,l,m ,ph ,ph,




                          +                Dh ns        V ( , k , n (i))dF ( ) + (1 - ns )PIh  k (i)
                              st+1   |st

where


                                 (i) = ph yh (i) - PC W l - PI x - PM m                                  (12)

                                 (i) = en [p   
                                            h yh (i) - PC W (n1 + (1 - n)0 )]                            (13)


                                           Ch PCh            u
and Dh is the subjective discount factor  uCh P
                                                  subject to the production technology (9),
                                                                      Ch

the law of motion for capital (10), and the downward-sloping demand curves (7 and the
                                                       C        I        M
Foreign analog of 8) with the condition that yh (i) = yh (i) + yh (i) + yh (i) and similar for
demand by foreign final goods producers. F ( ) is the cumulative distribution function of the
                                  2
normal distribution with variance   .  introduces capital adjustment costs in the model by
  12
       Dependence on the state st is not shown explicitly in the following exposition for convenience.

                                                                 17
taking the form
                                                        ¯
                                                        I
                                      = 1 + ac          ¯ - ,
                                                        K
      ¯ and K
where I     ¯ denote aggregate investment and capital so that agents do not internalize

the effect of their personal investment on the aggregate adjustment costs. The adjustment
cost makes the price higher when aggregate net investment is positive and lower when net
investment is negative, making adjustment in either direction more costly.
   Let V1 (, k, m, st ) be the value of a firm that chooses n = 1 (that is, the firm chooses to
export in the current period). Similarly, let V0 (, k, m, st ) be the value of a firm that chooses
n = 0. Then we can rewrite the value of a firm as


                      V (, k, n, st ) = max{V1 (, k, n, st ), V0 (, k, n, st )}.


   V1 and V0 are both increasing functions of  , and V1 crosses V0 only once for given
(k, n, st ). Thus, there exists a cutoff productivity level at which the firm is indifferent
between exporting and not exporting. Above that level, the firm exports, and below that
level, it does not. Because the fixed cost of exporting depends on the firm's export status in
the previous period, the cutoff also depends on the exporters previous export status. Let 0
be the cutoff productivity level for firms that did not export in the previous period and 1
be the cutoff productivity for firms that did export. Then 0 and 1 satisfy


                                 V1 (0 , k, 0, st ) = V0 (0 , k, 0, st )                     (14)

                                 V1 (1 , k, 1, st ) = V0 (1 , k, 1, st ).                    (15)


Because 0 > 1 , we know that 0 > 1 ­that is, beginning to export requires a higher
productivity shock than continuing to export.
   To make clear the role of expectations in the firm's export decision it is useful to rewrite




                                                   18
the indifference condition of the marginal exporters n = 0, 1 as


                    W n -  (n ( ) , kn ,  ) = ns EDh [V ( ,  ,  ) ; n ]                         (16)


The left-hand side is the cost of exporting today net of the extra profit from exporting
today. The right-hand side measures the discounted expected change in future firm value.
It depends on the path of future trade barriers, summarized here by ( ,  ), as well as the
discount factor, which depends on the aggregate savings decisions of the consumers. Recall
that an important part of the iceberg cost is known in advance because of the phaseout.
   With iid idiosyncratic firm productivity shocks over time, all firms have the same expec-
tations over their productivity in the next period. Then, the only thing that determines a
firms choice of capital for the next period is its export status in the current period. The
distribution of capital is then determined by two mass points, weighted by the share of
exporters and nonexporters.
   The percentage of nonexporters that begin exporting in state st is just 1 - F (0 (st )).
Similarly, the percentage of exporters that continue exporting is 1 - F (1 (st )). Let Nx (st )
be the measure of exporters in state st and N (st ) be the number of firms. Then we have


          Nx (st ) = (N (st-1 ) - Nx (st-1 ))[1 - F (0 (st ))] + Nx (st-1 )[1 - F (1 (st ))].   (17)


   Let (st ) ( (st )) represent the set of Home (Foreign) firms that export. Then the
measure of (st ) is Nx (st ), the number of exporters. The labor hired in Home for the
purpose of paying the fixed cost Lf c is


                      Lf c (st ) =            1 n(i, st-1 ) + 0 (1 - n(i, st-1 ))di.            (18)
                                     i(st )




                                                     19
3.5      Firm Entry

    Each period, new firms may pay a fixed cost e and invest in capital to start producing as
non-exporters in the next period. If firms survive to produce, they have value V0 . Otherwise,
they can sell their capital that they bought in the previous period. The free entry condition
for entering firms is


                            PC W  e + P I K 0 =                   Dh [ns V0 + (1 - ns )PI  K0 ].
                                                     st+1   |st



The mass of entrants is denoted Ne .


3.6      Equilibrium

    In equilibrium, several market clearing conditions must be met. We must have C ()p (st ) =
                               N ()                                            N ()
C () (st ), I ()p (st ) =     0
                                      x() (i, st ), and M ()p (st ) =         0
                                                                                      m() (i, st ). The market clearing
                                              N                                                N 
conditions for labor are L(st ) =            0
                                                  l(i, st )+ Lf c + Ne e and L (st ) =        0
                                                                                                l (i, st )+ L       
                                                                                                             f c + Ne  e .

All profits from intermediate goods producers are given to the representative agent. The
market clearing condition for international bonds is B (st ) + B  (st ) = 0; bonds are in zero
                                                                                                    ()
net supply. The number of firms in each country is N () = ns (N () + Ne ) We normalize
the price of consumption in Home to one PC (st ) = 1 for all st .
    We center our attention on a stationary equilibrium so that all allocations and prices are
functions of the state st . Exogenous state variables have been described. Endogenous states
are bonds and the distribution of (, k, n) across intermediate firms. With iid idiosyncratic
firm productivity the distribution can be summarized by the mass of firms and exporters
and the capital stock of exporters and non-exporters (N, Nx , K0 , K1 ).




                                                                  20
4       Calibration

      Here we describe how we match the model to the data at the firm and aggregate lev-
els. Our approach closely follows the international macro literature with and without firm
heterogeneity (Engel and Wang (2011); Alessandria and Choi (2007)).
      The utility function is non-separable between consumption and leisure

                                                                                    1-
                                                                               1-
                                                        C (st ) (1 - L(st ))
                           U (C (st ), 1 - L(st )) =                                     ,
                                                                   1-

where the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is 1/ and  determines the share of
consumption in the composite good. These are traditional balanced growth preferences with
an important role for wealth on labor supply. Recent work by Boppart and Krusell (2020)
suggests a stronger wealth effect of labor supply than these preferences deliver.
      The assigned parameters are reported in Table 2. Many of these parameters are standard
and are taken from the literature. A period is one year. We set  =0.96 to match a steady
state real interest rate of 4 percent. We choose the share of consumption  in the utility
function so that time devoted to labor is 1/4 of the time endowment.13 The intertemporal
elasticity of substitution 1/ is set to 1/2. We set =0.36, as is common in the literature,
to match the share of revenue that goes to labor. We set  = 0.1/ns . The firm survival rate
ns is set to 0.973 so that 2.7 percent of firms exit each year.
      The elasticity of substitution between varieties within a country is determined by , which
also determines markups of intermediate firms. Here we set  = 5/6 which implies a markup
of 20 percent, within the estimates in the literature summarized by Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                                e (1997).
Given , we choose m = 0.4, which implies that gross output in the economy is 1.5 times
larger than value added. The elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods is
determined by . Here we choose an elasticity of 4 (=3/4). This value is higher than in
most business cycle analyses (Backus et al. (1994)) but recent work suggests that when the
 13
      This parameter implies a Frisch elasticity of about 2, within the bounds of the estimates in the literature.


                                                        21
gap in trade barriers moves systematically with the business cycle, a model of this type can
match aggregate fluctuations (Alessandria and Choi (2019b)). The model yields a long-run
trade elasticity of close to 8, which is common in the trade literature (Caliendo and Parro
(2014)) and matches the evidence of Khan and Khederlarian (2019) for the trade response
to tariffs in NAFTA.
    We calibrate the rest of the parameters to match aggregate and firm-level trade flows,
which are determined by the taste parameters and the fixed and variable trade costs. The
standard deviation of firm productivity  is set to 0.3, which implies ­ in the final calibration
­ that exporter sales are 6.5 times higher than non-exporter sales on average. The steady
state iceberg cost is normalized to ¯ = 1.15. The parameters that remain to be calibrated

are home bias for investment, materials, and consumption I , M , and C , and the fixed
costs of exporting for incumbent and new exporters 1 and 0 . We choose these parameters
to match the following five features in steady state, which are loosely based on the current
U.S. economy:



   1. An aggregate import to GDP share of 15 percent,

   2. 20 percent of trade in investment goods,

   3. 60 percent of trade in intermediate inputs,

   4. 21 percent of all firms export,

   5. 5 percent of exporters stop exporting every period,

    We assume variable trade costs are stationary but very persistent ( = 0.9999). The
high persistence is necessary to capture the sustained rise in trade flows observed in the data.
We set  =0.75 so that the model generates the same average trade barrier over 10 years
as with a 10­year linear phase-in, which matches our empirical observations about FTAs.14
We set ac = 0.015 so that the investment response to a Hicks-neutral productivity shock is
  14
     With our geometric trade costs this formulation leads to a slightly higher trade barrier over a ten year
window.



                                                     22
about three times as large as the GDP response. Our adjustment cost on bonds b is set to
be very close to zero.
       We consider several model variants to isolate the key channels of the model. The first
two model variations help isolate how the nature of trade determines the aggregate effects
of shocks to trade barriers. In the first variation, denoted Unbiased, we assume that trade
in different goods is unbiased. In other words, we assume C = I = M and give up on
matching the share of trade in investment and input goods. In the second variation, denoted
Static, we take Unbiased and constrain 1 =0 so that the startup and continuation costs are
identical and there is no dynamic aspect to the export decision. With a static exporting
decision, we give up on matching exporter persistence. This model has a higher short-run
trade elasticity and lower long-run trade elasticity than the benchmark or the unbiased trade
model. We also consider various other assumptions that could affect our results including
using Boppart and Krusell (2020) preferences that magnify the wealth effect, and allowing
for the trade policy to be in tariffs rather than iceberg trade costs.



5        Model Results

       We now discuss the response of the model economy to unanticipated and anticipated
shocks to global trade costs. The aggregate effects of unanticipated shocks have been studied
in the literature, and the aggregate response in our model to an unanticipated persistent
trade cost shock is qualitatively similar to that of existing models, though the transitions for
aggregate variables differ.15 Anticipated shocks, by contrast, have novel aggregate effects,
as the wealth effect and substitution effect occur at different times, particularly when trade
results from a firm-level dynamic decision.
       Figure 5 shows the aggregate response­in log changes from steady state­to an unantici-
pated and persistent decrease in the iceberg trade cost from 1.15 to 1.06, which doubles the
  15
    Recall the work by Crucini and Kahn (1996), Perri and Quadrini (2002), Alessandria et al. (2013), and
Alessandria and Choi (2019b).



                                                   23
trade-to-output ratio after 10 years. The reduction in trade costs lowers the price of foreign
relative to domestic intermediate goods, and trade grows 58 log points immediately. The
short-run impact on trade relative to GDP is a little less than three fourths of the effect
five years on as more firms from both countries start or continue exporting. These gradual
effects on trade and exporting are unique to the benchmark dynamic exporting model.
   Just as trade grows slowly, so do other aggregates. The aggregate gradualness arises
because it takes time to accumulate export capacity and physical capital, and to change
the mass of varieties. Because trade is intensive in investment goods, the decrease in the
price of traded goods also lowers the relative price of capital to consumption, which leads to
substantial capital deepening. On impact, investment grows 13 log points. Over time, more
foreign firms begin to export, decreasing the cost of traded goods and investment by even
more. Investment peaks two years after the agreement at more than 19 log points above
steady state. Thereafter, investment falls and eventually reaches its long run value, which is
about 8.5 log points above the initial steady state.
   The overshooting of investment that we observe here occurs in many models with dynamic
exporting and endogenous entry of firms. At the beginning of the liberalization, the economy
has too many firms and too few exporters. The liberalization lowers the value of being a
non-exporting firm, and because the probability of becoming an exporter is low, potential
entrants stay out of the market. The labor that was used to create new varieties is shifted
towards producing more goods, leading to elevated levels of investment and consumption.
Over time, the number of firms reaches its new steady state, more than 8 log points below
the initial steady state. The smaller number of firms means much less productive capacity
at home and fewer goods can be produced, leading to the strong overshooting in investment.
   On impact, consumption grows a little more than 3 log points and then gradually expands.
The wealth effect makes consumers want to consume more goods. Furthermore, firms are
delaying investment, freeing up resources to use for consumption. Consumption initially
rises slowly as firms invest intensively in their capital stocks. After 10 years, the trade to


                                             24
GDP ratio has doubled and yields a 5 log point increase in consumption. GDP, a weighted
average of consumption and investment, increases slightly on impact and grows the first few
years after the agreement before decreasing to its eventual long run outcome, reflecting the
same overshooting that we see in investment.
   Total labor supply drops on impact. Part of this fall is related to the wealth effect, which
encourages consumers to take more leisure while the cost of goods is still high. However,
labor is also lower because potential firms are not entering the market and are therefore not
using labor to pay fixed costs. Indeed, labor devoted to production of goods increases on
impact, though by much less than in the long run.
   Figure 6 shows responses for the same aggregates to an anticipated shock that similarly
doubles trade to output after 10 years. The shock is anticipated in two ways. First, it does
not affect trade costs until tomorrow but enters agents' information set today. Second, the
shock implies not only a decrease in trade costs tomorrow, but also a decreasing path of trade
costs into the future. We can think about this shock as news of a future trade liberalization.
Agents know that trade costs will drop when the agreement begins and that trade barriers
will continue to fall in subsequent years.
   As a result of discounting, this shock is substantially smaller than the unanticipated
shock to trade costs even if the shocks would have the same long-run effects if they were
permanent. Investment, trade, and GDP all fall sharply in the initial periods; an anticipated
trade liberalization is recessionary in the short run. Consumption, by contrast, increases
immediately but by only about half as much as with the unanticipated shock. Consumers
understand that lower future trade costs will make them better off. Today, they would like to
consume more, take more leisure, and save less. This wealth effect partly drives the decrease
in investment, trade, and GDP. Eventually, traded goods become cheap enough that firms
begin to replenish and then increase their capital stock. Cheaper goods also cause consumers
to substitute away from leisure and toward consumption so that the labor response is positive
in the long run. The increase in capital and labor translates to almost a 6 percent increase


                                              25
in GDP after 10 years.
   Although investment in physical capital is delayed until trade costs decrease and the
price of investment falls, investment in export capacity increases immediately. Because firms
expect trade costs to fall, the future value of exporting is high. Nevertheless, the probability
of drawing a productivity shock high enough to begin exporting is still low. If firms get a good
productivity shock before the agreement begins or before trade costs have fallen significantly,
they will start exporting-- even if they do so at a loss-- because exporting today makes
them more likely to be able to export tomorrow. In contrast, the liberalization leads to more
entry of foreign exporters, which lowers the future value of being a non-exporter, and fewer
potential firms enter the market.
   To make clear the role of expectations and wealth effects, we now model a gradual
liberalization in trade costs in three ways: (1) anticipated from the year before the trade
cost declines, (2) as a series of unanticipated persistent trade cost shocks, or (3) as a series of
unanticipated transitory trade cost shocks so that agents always expect a complete reversion
of trade costs to steady state in the next period. As we move from the first to third case we
are progressively reducing the wealth effect.
   As we saw earlier, when the decreasing path of trade costs is anticipated, consumption
increases on impact because the expected present value of the liberalization is larger than
the current trade cost decline and thus induces a large wealth effect. Consumption stalls for
the next few quarters as the capital stock depreciates; just as consumers expect to be richer
a year from now, firms expect capital to be cheaper a year from now and wait to invest.
Once the capital stock begins to grow again, consumption grows quickly throughout the
rest of the transition. The consumption paths for the case with anticipated shocks and the
two cases with unanticipated shocks cross, but we know that welfare is higher when agents
anticipate the agreement because their information set is expanded. Indeed, the transition
path for labor shows that agents enjoy more leisure early on because of the wealth effect.
   When trade shock changes are unanticipated, there is no movement in the first period


                                                26
because trade costs have not yet actually changed. Thereafter, we see a small wealth effect
in consumption for case (2), where shocks are perceived as almost permanent. A permanent
trade cost decline makes agents richer today and even richer in the future as more foreign
firms begin exporting, thereby reducing import prices. Consumption grows in transition as
the trade costs continue to decline. Leisure also grows over time, partly because of the wealth
effect, and partly because lower trade costs lower the value of being a non-exporter, leading
to less entrants and less labor devoted to entry fixed costs. In case (3), when the trade costs
are perceived to be purely transitory, agents see the low price of capital as temporary and
invest a lot, crowding out consumption so that it grows very little at the beginning of the
reform. As the shocks grow over time and capital accumulates, the demand for investment
goods slows down allowing for more consumption. When shocks are perceived as transitory,
agents work more to take advantage of the lower prices. Also, if the shock is expected to
be temporary, it does not affect the future value of non-exporters, and firms continue to use
labor to enter the market.
   The previous experiment demonstrates the role of expectations of future trade reforms, as
three identical trade cost paths yield very different outcomes for GDP, investment, consump-
tion, and labor in the first few years of the transition. Any analysis of the impact of trade
integration on the economy must therefore differentiate between expected and unexpected
movements in trade costs.


5.1    Anticipation Horizons

   We now explore how the timing of the future liberalization influences the transition
path holding the size of the liberalization constant. In general, we find that the declines in
consumption and employment on impact are quite similar. We also find that the longer the
anticipatory period, the deeper the decline in economic activity until reforms begin.
   To compare liberalizations expected at different time horizons, we define a discounted




                                              27
average trade cost:16
                                                             
                                       P V,t = (1 -  )Et           s-t s .
                                                            s=t

Consider three alternative trade liberalizations that are expected one, four, and eight years
before implementation and have the same P V,t . Figure 8 shows the impulse response func-
tions (IR) of macroeconomic variables for these three liberalizations.
      Regardless of the expectation time horizon, the announcement of a trade liberalization
is initially recessionary. In the case of four- and eight-year anticipation, the recession gets
worse over time, with a trough in output the year before trade costs actually begin to fall.
The recession is stronger at longer expectation horizons. Consumption increases on impact
in all cases. After the initial boost, consumption declines with investment and labor until
the liberalization actually begins.
      Despite decreases in economic activity, the number of exporters does not fall in advance
of the actual tariff cuts. Because firms are forward looking, they know that while exporting
today might be unprofitable, the future value of being an exporter is high. If they receive
a good productivity shock today, they use it to pay the sunk cost and begin exporting,
recognizing that the likelihood of receiving another good shock after the liberalization is
low. Once the liberalization begins, growth in the extensive margin of trade is even higher.


5.2       Violated Expectations

      Our model can be used to study the effect of canceling or delaying an FTA that was
expected by consumers and firms. FTAs are often canceled or delayed because of changes in
a country's leadership, economic downturns, or other factors. For example, President Trump
withdrew the United States from the TPP--a multilateral trade agreement that had already
been signed--soon after his election. How does such a withdrawal affect U.S. consumers and
firms?
      Suppose that agents receive news today that a trade liberalization will begin in four
 16
      An ideal measure of the present value of trade costs would use the subject discount factor instead of  .

                                                      28
years. The year before it starts, however, they receive news that the liberalization is either
delayed an additional four years or canceled.
       Figure 9 compares the macroeconomic outcomes under these two situations. For the first
three years, the IRs are the exact same, with consumption rising and investment, labor,
trade and output falling. When the agreement is canceled, the consumers' expected future
wealth decreases, causing them to consume less and work more. At the same time, firms
now expect a higher future price of capital and lower future export value, which causes
them to invest more in physical capital and pull out of the export market upon hearing the
news. Canceling a trade agreement therefore yields a persistent increase in hours, output,
investment, and trade from the date of cancellation. However, canceling an agreement also
reduces the growth of GDP about 1/2 percentage point per year over the next 15 years when
compared with the implied path when the liberalization occurs on time.
       Delaying a trade agreement mitigates all of these effects compared with canceling the
agreement. Labor, investment, output, and trade recover a little when the delay is an-
nounced, but decrease again before the new expected liberalization date. Consumption de-
creases as the delay lowers the present value of consumers' wealth. Prolonged low investment
serves to exacerbate the dip in consumption in the medium run.


5.3       Sensitivity to Model Assumptions

       In this section, we analyze how several key assumptions about the composition of trade,
exporter dynamics, preferences, tariffs, and country size affect the aggregate response to
changes in trade policy.17 Discussions frequently refer to the IRs in Figures 5 and 6, which
include dynamics for the benchmark model and all variations of the model described earlier.
Table 2 also includes the calibrated parameters for each alternate model.
Trade composition. In our benchmark model, we have allowed for trade to be more
intensive in investment and materials than in consumption. In this variation, we impose
  17
    In Appendix E, we also report sensitivity to the firm creation margin, the export decision, and the use
of materials in production.

                                                    29
C = I = M so that the composition of trade reflects the composition of the domestic
economy. This variation is denoted as "Unbiased trade" in the figures. In our benchmark
model, a liberalization in trade reduces the prices of investment (and materials) by more than
the price of consumption, inducing a larger investment response. With an unanticipated and
persistent trade cost decline, investment is more than 10 percent higher than in the inital
steady state after 10 years with capital-intensive trade and only 5 percent without it. Long-
run consumption and output are higher with capital-intensive trade, as higher investment
means higher long run capital stocks. Consumers also take more leisure in the long run (not
shown) when trade is intensive in capital as firms substitute toward capital and away from
workers.
Dynamic exporting decision. We now show that the dynamic response of aggregates to
a change in trade barriers depends on the firm-level trade frictions. The relative magnitude
of the sunk and fixed costs of exporting is calibrated by matching the churning of firms in
and out of the export market. This calibration resulted in a sunk cost that is about four
times higher than the continuation cost so that becoming an exporter is much harder that
continuing as an exporter. Now suppose that we assume there is no sunk cost of exporting
(0 = 1 ) in addition to the unbiased trade composition. In that case, firms are no longer
forward looking.18
       With a persistent trade cost decline, the trade response is immediate in a model with
static exporters. The immediate response is contrary to the slow adjustment of the extensive
margin that we see in the data (Baier et al. (2014)). The static exporting decision also reduces
long-run trade (and output), as a smaller share of exporters stay in the market each period.
       When the cost of exporting is the same for both non-exporters and exporters, the proba-
bility of becoming an exporter is much higher (and is equal to export participation in steady
state). As in the dynamic model, the liberalization raises the value of being an exporter and
lowers the value of being a non-exporter, but non-exporters and potential firms no longer
  18
    An alternative approach to making trade static would be to eliminate fixed trade costs entirely. Results
without the extensive margin are quite similar to the static exporting model and are shown in the Appendix.


                                                    30
see exporting as a rare event and the risks are more balanced. Hence, more firms enter than
in the dynamic exporting model, and the number of firms falls by less. More labor is needed
to pay entry costs in the early years of transition. As a result, fewer resources are available
in transition to boost consumption and investment and they grow by less.
   With an expected decrease in trade costs, the trade response in the static exporting
model is gradual but only because trade costs change gradually. Nothing internal to the
static exporting model slows down the trade response. As in the case with an unexpected
decrease in trade costs, the dynamic exporting model delivers larger long-run changes in
trade, output, investment, and consumption; the static model underestimates the effect of
trade cost changes on aggregates.
Preferences. Wealth effects on labor supply primarily determine the response to changes
in future trade policy. Recent cross-country evidence from Boppart and Krusell (2020) on
employment with development is consistent with stronger wealth effects than in our bench-
mark preferences. Given that we are considering a global policy change, we revisit the effects
with these alternative preferences. Figures 5 and 6 show that with these stronger wealth
effects on labor supply, the initial contraction in labor is twice as large as our benchmark
and the long-run expansion in labor supply is weaker. In fact, labor never returns to its
initial steady state.
Tariffs. We now discuss how tariffs can amplify or mitigate the contractionary effects of
future trade reforms. We show that cutting future tariffs will mitigate some of the contrac-
tionary effects on labor supply and magnify the long-run effects of a liberalization. For the
model with a cut in tariffs, we introduce a 10 percent global tariff in steady state and then
recalibrate the model.
   Consider now a gradual phaseout of tariffs. We find such a cut is less contractionary
in employment on impact and has a larger effect on long-run consumption. There are two
key differences between tariffs and trade costs. First, with a change in trade costs, there is
a direct resource gain from the change unlike with tariffs. Shifting to tariffs then tends to


                                              31
make the effect of a reform less important for welfare. Second, the tariff is a tax on goods
that reduces labor supply. This channel tends to magnify the effects of a reform. We can see
that the long-run effect on labor supply is much larger with the tariff cut than with iceberg
costs.
Asymmetric countries. The effects we identify from global reforms will be heterogeneous
across countries. They will depend on the importance of trade and the size of the reform
in each economy. We explore this heterogeneity by solving a version of the model with
asymmetries in country size. Specifically, we introduce asymmetric TFP z : The big country
has z = 1.05, and the small country has z = 0.95. Figure 10 shows the macroeconomic
effects of a phased-in global iceberg cost liberalization for each country. The size of the
liberalization in terms of the change in trade costs is the same for each country, but, by
construction, the small country has a larger trade-to-output share and thus the reform is
larger. The benchmark model in the figures is our model with symmetric countries (with
z = 1 for each).
   While the trade-to-GDP ratio evolves very similarly for both countries, the macroeco-
nomic effects in transition are very different. Because the small country relies more on trade,
the same future decrease in trade costs translates to a bigger decrease in prices and a larger
increase in wealth than for the large country. Accordingly, the small country consumes more
and works less once the path of future costs is known. Investment drops by more on impact
in the small country, partly because it is crowded out by consumption, but also because firms
in the small country are expecting a bigger capital price reduction in the coming years than
are firms in the large country. Over time, investment in the small country grows quickly, far
outpacing the growth of investment in the big country.
   In the next section, we will discuss empirical evidence of the anticipation effects of FTAs.
Our empirical method will exploit heterogeneity between the effects of global liberalizations
(GATT rounds) for different countries. Our empirical results are consistent with this section
on asymmetries: Countries for which the effect of an expected liberalization is larger have


                                              32
lower investment and labor and higher consumption in anticipation.



6        Aggregate Evidence from GATT Rounds

       We study the aggregate responses of OECD countries to future reductions in tariffs due
to GATT round implementations. Because GATT rounds are negotiated for several years,
we assume that participating countries have some prior knowledge about the timing and
expected impact of the round on aggregate trade. We construct a proxy for expected future
trade growth and implement a method similar to Arezki et al. (2017) to find the impact of
expected future trade on current aggregate variables. The analysis confirms that labor and
the investment rate fall and consumption rises in anticipation of a future trade liberalization
as expected from aggregate behavior in the model.
       Real GDP, investment, consumption, and trade data were obtained from the OECD, and
total hours were obtained from the PWT.19 We use only the 27 OECD countries that have
continuous data since 1960 and end the analysis in 2008. This time frame covers three large
GATT rounds: the Kennedy Round (implemented in 1968), the Tokyo Round (1980), and the
Uruguay Round (1995). Each of these rounds was negotiated for at least five years, allowing
member countries to anticipate the effects the agreements would have on the economy. To
measure the anticipated size of the agreement, we assume that agents knew the effect the
agreement would have on the trend growth of trade flows over the following 10 years. More
specifically, we construct a variable with the following steps.
       First, let t = log(1 - EX t +IMt
                               2GDPt
                                        ). That is, t measures how closed an economy is to foreign
trade, with an economy in autarky having t = log(1). Let T
                                                         t be the trend component of t

using a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter with smoothness parameter 6.25. The anticipated size
of the agreement ^ t is
                                               t+10 s-t
                                       ^t =    s=t      T s
                                                 t+10 s-t     .
                                                 s=t 
  19
   Consumption is assumed to include private consumption, government spending and net exports. Invest-
ments is the gross capital flows.

                                                 33
^ t is the discounted 10-year growth rate of T starting at year t. Figure 11 shows T for the
                                                                                   t

U.S. over the sample and -^ t at all GATT round implementations. As the figure illustrates,
^ t is increasing (further from zero) in future trade growth and initial openness.

   We assume agents know this measure of future trade growth in advance and estimate the
following equation:

                                     10
                   yit = yi,t-1 -          s ^ i,t-s GAT Ti,t-s + Zi,t + i + it
                                    s=-5


where yit is a macroeconomic variable of interest; GAT Ti,t is an indicator variable equal to
one if a GATT round is implemented at time t and country i is a GATT or World Trade
Organization member at the time; i is a country-specific fixed effect; and Zi,t is a vector of
control variables, including the real effective exchange rate, oil prices, the cyclical component
of HP-filtered Group of Seven (G-7) total GDP, and a quadratic country-specific trend as
appropriate. The cyclical component of G-7 GDP is intended to control for the state of the
world business cycle at time t.
   We estimate the regression for logged hours, logged GDP, and the consumption and
investment rates. Figure 12 shows the IRs and 90 percent confidence intervals­calculated
using Driscoll-Kraay standard errors (Driscoll and Kraay (1998))­ assuming ^ t = 1 percent,

which is roughly the mean value across countries in the first year of GATT rounds.
   For the average country, hours dropped more than 1 percent in the years preceding
the agreement and consumption as a share of GDP rose about 0.5 percent. The model
rationalizes these movements as a wealth effect with no offsetting substitution effect. Because
workers knew that the tariff cuts would increase wealth and wages, they reduced labor supply
and increased consumption in anticipation. GDP fell more than 1 percent. Mirroring the
consumption rate, the investment rate fell about 0.4 percent in anticipation of GATT tariff
cuts and then began to rise after the cuts began.
   The results confirm that investment and hours worked fall and consumption rises when



                                                  34
agents expect future tariff cuts, as predicted by the model. Importantly, the effect is not the
same for all countries. Rather, countries that had (and, we assume, expected) higher trade
growth after the tariff cuts had larger decreases in investment and hours and a larger increase
in consumption. The results are qualitatively robust to alternative measures of future trade
growth, excluding outliers, and to other ways of controlling for the global business cycle.
    Though adopted from Arezki et al. (2017), our empirical method differs in key ways.
In Appendix D, we validate this method for our purposes by using it to estimate IRs in
model-simulated data. The resulting IRs exhibit very similar paths as in the data, especially
for the consumption rate, the investment rate, and GDP. Because the method picks up the
anticipatory effects in the model­where we know they exist­and yields results very similar
to the data, we conclude that the empirical method is indeed picking up anticipatory effects
of future trade agreements in the data.



7     Conclusion

    We study the aggregate effects of changes in past, present, and future trade barriers
in a quantitative general equilibrium model with a dynamic exporting decision. Similar to
previous work on news on productivity, we find that expected decreases in future trade costs
lower employment, investment, and GDP on impact because of a wealth effect that is not
offset by a substitution effect until trade costs actually change. Future decreases in trade
costs also induce entry of firms into export markets as firms recognize that the future value
of exporting is high. This result, as well as the slow response of trade to changes in trade
costs, depends crucially on the firm export decision being dynamic. A first look at aggregate
movements before and after GATT liberalization suggests that hours and investment decline
and consumption increases before an anticipated liberalization, as predicted in the model.
    Because past and future trade costs can affect current trade, measures of trade costs
that rely on static gravity models and data on trade flows are prone to error. A model



                                              35
that incorporates the importance of trade cost timing and time-varying trade elasticity is
crucial to obtain accurate measures of trade costs over time and a better understanding of the
aggregate effects of global integration. An open question is then how to measure the expected
path of trade barriers at various points in time. Were each of the GATT rounds expected at
the formation of GATT? Or did the path of expected trade policy change dynamically with
past negotiation successes and business cycles? Our analysis suggests we can use aggregate
series to extract information on the outlook of trade policy.
   Our theory also suggests that variations in trade policy could be an important driver of
movements in GDP. Most trade models have a limited role for trade to affect the level of
activity as they abstract from issues of labor supply, capital accumulation, trade dynamics,
or trade barrier dynamics. Our model, extended to include usual business cycle shocks, is
well suited to estimate these effects. We expect that there are periods when these changes are
relatively important for both business cycle fluctuations and fluctuations in trend growth.
Importantly, these shocks to future trade policy may help to understand how changes to
other policies or technologies affect the aggregate economy. While we have not addressed
these questions here, our framework can easily be brought to bear on these issues. Indeed,
in a follow-up paper, Alessandria and Mix (2018), we study the contributions of changes in
trade barriers to U.S. aggregate fluctuations and extract an expected path of inward and
outward U.S. trade policies.




                                             36
References
Aguiar, M. and Gopinath, G. (2007). Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the
  trend. Journal of political Economy, 115(1):69­102.

Alessandria, G. and Choi, H. (2007). Do sunk costs of exporting matter for net export
  dynamics? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 289­336.

Alessandria, G. and Choi, H. (2014). Do falling iceberg costs explain recent u.s. export
  growth? Journal of International Economics, 94(2):311 ­ 325.

Alessandria, G. and Choi, H. (2019a). Entry, trade, and exporting over the cycle. Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 51(S1):83­126.

Alessandria, G., Kaboski, J., and Midrigan, V. (2013). Trade wedges, inventories, and
  international business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1):1­20.

Alessandria, G. and Mix, C. (2018). Trade policy is real news: An estimate of the effects of
  past, present, and future u.s. trade policy. Technical report.

Alessandria, G. A. and Choi, H. (2019b). The dynamics of the us trade balance and real ex-
  change rate: The j curve and trade costs? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Arezki, R., Ramey, V. A., and Sheng, L. (2017). News shocks in open economies: Evidence
  from giant oil discoveries. The quarterly journal of economics, 132(1):103­155.

Atkeson, A. and Burstein, A. (2010). Innovation, firm dynamics, and international trade.
  Journal of Political Economy, 118(3):433­484.

Backus, D., Kehoe, P., and Kydland, F. (1994). Dynamics of the trade balance and the
  terms of trade: the j curve? American Economic Review, pages 84­103.

Baier, S. L. and Bergstrand, J. H. (2007). Do free trade agreements actually increase mem-
  bers' international trade? Journal of international Economics, 71(1):72­95.

Baier, S. L., Bergstrand, J. H., and Feng, M. (2014). Economic integration agreements and
  the margins of international trade. Journal of International Economics, 93(2):339­350.

Baldwin, R. and Krugman, P. (1989). Persistent trade effects of large exchange rate shocks.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4):635­654.

Barsky, R. B. and Sims, E. R. (2012). Information, animal spirits, and the meaning of
  innovations in consumer confidence. American Economic Review, 102(4):1343­77.

Beaudry, P. and Portier, F. (2006). Stock prices, news, and economic fluctuations. American
  Economic Review, 96(4):1293­1307.

Beaudry, P. and Portier, F. (2014). News-driven business cycles: Insights and challenges.
  Journal of Economic Literature, 52(4):993­1074.

                                            37
Besedes, T., Kohl, T., and Lake, J. (2020). Phase out tariffs, phase in trade? Journal of
  International Economics, 127:103385.

Boileau, M. (2002). Trade in capital goods and investment-specific technical change. Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control, 26(6):963­984.

Boppart, T. and Krusell, P. (2020). Labor supply in the past, present, and future: A
  balanced-growth perspective. Journal of Political Economy, 128(1):118­157.

Caldara, D., Iacoviello, M., Molligo, P., Prestipino, A., and Raffo, A. (2020). The eco-
  nomic effects of trade policy uncertainty. Journal of Monetary Economics, 109:38­59.
  SI:APR2019 CRN CONFERENCE.

Caliendo, L. and Parro, F. (2014). Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1):1­44.

Colacito, R., Croce, M., Ho, S., and Howard, P. (2018). Bkk the ez way: International
  long-run growth news and capital flows. American Economic Review, 108(11):3416­49.

Crucini, M. J. and Kahn, J. (1996). Tariffs and aggregate economic activity: Lessons from
  the Great Depression. Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(3):427­467.

Driscoll, J. C. and Kraay, A. C. (1998). Consistent covariance matrix estimation with
  spatially dependent panel data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4):549­560.

Eaton, J., Kortum, S., Neiman, B., and Romalis, J. (2016). Trade and the global recession.
  American Economic Review, 106(11):3401­38.

Engel, C. and Wang, J. (2011). International trade in durable goods: Understanding volatil-
  ity, cyclicality, and elasticities. Journal of International Economics, 83(1):37­52.

Irwin, D. A. (2019). Does trade reform promote economic growth? a review of recent
  evidence. Working Paper 25927, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jung, B. (2012). Gradualism and dynamic trade adjustment: Revisiting the pro-trade effect
  of free trade agreements. Economics Letters, 115(1):63­66.

Keynes, J. M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. McMillan,
  London.

Khan, S. Y. and Khederlarian, A. (2019). How does trade respond to anticipated tariff
 changes? evidence from nafta. Working Paper.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695­1725.

Mertens, K. and Ravn, M. O. (2010). Measuring the impact of fiscal policy in the face of
 anticipation: a structural var approach. The Economic Journal, 120(544):393­413.



                                            38
Mertens, K. and Ravn, M. O. (2012). Empirical evidence on the aggregate effects of antic-
 ipated and unanticipated us tax policy shocks. American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 4(2):145­81.

Mix, C. (2020). Technology, geography, and trade over time: The dynamic effects of changing
 trade policy. Technical report.

Perri, F. and Quadrini, V. (2002). The great depression in italy: Trade restrictions and real
  wage rigidities. Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1):128­151.

Pigou, A. C. (1927). Industrial Fluctuations. McMillan, London.

Rabanal, P. and Rubio-Ramirez, J. F. (2015). Can international macroeconomic models
  explain low-frequency movements of real exchange rates? Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 96(1):199­211.

Ramey, V. A. (2011). Identifying government spending shocks: It's all in the timing. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1):1­50.

Ruhl, K. J. et al. (2008). The international elasticity puzzle. unpublished paper, NYU.

Schmitt-Groh´  e, S. (1997). Comparing four models of aggregate fluctuations due to self-
  fulfilling expectations. Journal of Economic Theory, 72(1):96­147.

Schmitt-Groh´e, S. and Uribe, M. (2012). What's news in business cycles. Econometrica,
  80(6):2733­2764.

Trefler, D. (2004). The long and short of the canada-us free trade agreement. The American
  Economic Review, 94(4):870­895.

Yi, K.-M. (2003). Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade? Journal of
  Political Economy, 111(1):52­102.




                                             39
A   Tables

               Name             Negotiation Period   Phaseout
               Kennedy Round        1964-1967        1968-1972
               Tokyo Round          1973-1979        1980-1986
               Uruguay Round        1986-1993        1995-1999
               ATC                       -           1995-2005
               NAFTA                1988-1993        1994-2004
               US Korea FTA         2006-2012            -

                  Table 1: Tariff Phaseouts and Negotiations


            Parameter Benchmark    Unbiased    +Static   Boppart-Krussell Tariff
                         0.96        0.96        0.96          0.96        0.96
Preferences              0.31        0.31        0.31        120.93        0.32
                           2           2          2              2           2
                          5/6        5/6         5/6           5/6          5/6
                          3/4        3/4         3/4           3/4          3/4
            C            0.28        0.87        0.66          0.28        0.41
            I            1.61        0.87        0.66          1.61        2.59
            M            1.97        0.87        0.66          1.97        3.23
Production               0.103      0.103       0.103         0.103        0.103
                         0.36        0.36        0.36          0.36        0.36
            m             0.4         0.4        0.4            0.4         0.4
            ns           0.973      0.973       0.973         0.973        0.973
                          0.3         0.3        0.3            0.3         0.3
            ac           0.015      0.015       0.015         0.015        0.015
            ¯
                         1.15        1.15        1.15          1.15        1.15
                        0.9999      0.9999     0.9999        0.9999       0.9999
Trade Costs              0.75        0.75        0.75          0.75        0.75
            1            0.076      0.039       0.067         0.076        0.079
            0            0.29        0.25       0.067         0.29         0.298

                       Table 2: Calibrated Parameters




                                     40
B   Figures




              Figure 1: US Trade to GDP (EX+M)/Y




                              41
            Figure 2: US Tariffs




Figure 3: US Korea Bilateral Tariff Schedule

                    42
Figure 4: US Korea Auto Tariff Schedule




                  43
44
     Figure 5: IRF Trade Cost
45
     Figure 6: IRF Trend Trade Cost
            Trade Cost                                Trade/GDP
  0
                   Anticipated              10
                   Unanticipated
-0.5
                   Temporary
                                             5
 -1

                                             0
       1      2     3      4       5              1    2    3    4   5



                  Labor                                    GDP
                                            1.5
  0

                                             1
-0.2
                                            0.5
-0.4
                                             0
-0.6
       1      2     3      4       5              1    2    3    4   5



           Consumption                                Investment
0.6                                          6

                                             4
0.4
                                             2

                                             0
0.2
                                             -2
  0
       1      2     3      4       5              1    2    3    4   5




           Figure 7: Anticipated vs Unanticipated Liberalization




                                       46
47
     Figure 8: Trend Trade Cost - Lagged
             Trade Cost                                 Trade/GDP
0
                                          80
-2
-4                        Expected        60
                          Canceled
-6                                        40
                          Delayed
-8                                        20
                                           0
     0   5     10   15     20                   0   5     10   15    20


               Labor                                      GDP
1                                           6
0                                           4
                                            2
-1
                                            0
-2                                         -2

     0   5     10   15     20                   0   5     10   15    20


         Consumption                                    Investment
6
                                          10
4
                                           0
2
                                          -10
0

     0   5     10   15     20                   0   5     10   15    20




         Figure 9: Canceled and Delayed Free Trade Agreements




                                     48
       Figure 10: A Liberalization with Asymmetric Countries




Figure 11: Aggregate Responses Before and After GATT Liberalizations




                                49
Figure 12: Aggregate Responses Before and After GATT Liberalizations




                                50
C     Data Description

    Our final data set includes data for the following 27 OECD countries: Australia, Aus-
tria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States. We
get data for real consumption, investment, GDP, and trade from the OECD and data on
hours from the WT. We use the West Texas Intermediate spot price of crude oil as the
measure of global oil prices.
    Among countries, there is substantial variation in the growth of trade following GATT
rounds. Our measure of the size of a liberalization for each country, ^ , reflects this variation

in trade growth, and it is the cross-sectional variation in the size of the liberalization across
countries that we are exploiting for our key result. Figure 13 shows the distribution of our
measure across all countries and all GATT rounds.




                                               51
                Figure 13: ^ for all countries in the year of a GATT round.


   On average, ^ = 0.011, and the standard deviation among all countries and rounds is

0.018. The outlying observations belong to Belgium, Ireland, Luxembourg, and the Nether-
lands, and our results still hold even when excluding these countries from analysis.




                                             52
D      Validity of Empirical Method

    Our empirical method differs from that of Arezki et al. (2017) in three key ways. First,
the timing of oil discoveries, and thus the timing of changes in expectations about future
wealth, are well-documented. While we know when negotiations began for GATT rounds, we
do not know at what point economic agents change their expectations about future tariffs.
Second, the change in expected wealth is much easier to measure with oil discoveries, as the
quantity of oil discovered and current price of oil is known. For GATT rounds, however,
agents may change their expectations about how large the agreement will be often during the
negotiating period, and it is unclear at what point expectations are clearly set. Furthermore,
measuring the expected size of the agreement for each country is difficult because we do not
really know how it affects the likelihood of future agreements or was already expected from
past agreements. In our analysis, we have assumed that post-GATT round trade growth was
known by agents and use variation in trade growth across countries to account for variation
in expectations. Finally, oil discoveries are a country-specific event while GATT rounds are
essentially global (though some of the countries in our analysis are not part of the GATT for
the Kennedy or Tokyo Rounds). We try to control for possible global cyclicality surrounding
trade agreements by including cyclical fluctuations in G-7 GDP in the regression.
    In this section, we validate our empirical method by performing the same exercise on
model-simulated data. In the model, we know the timing of changes in expectations because
it coincides with the period of announcement. We also know the expected size of the agree-
ment as the change in trade costs is announced beforehand. We find that the estimated IRs
are qualitatively similar to the data, albeit stronger quantitatively. We take this finding as
evidence that our empirical method is indeed capturing anticipatory effects of future trade
agreements.
    We use a stochastic version of the six-country model of Mix (2020), which predicts similar
anticipatory effects as in our model, to simulate data for use in our empirical exercise.
Countries are subject to contemporaneous TFP shocks and trend trade cost shocks that

                                              53
are announced three years before implementation. The TFP shocks have both a global
component zc and an idiosyncratic component zi . We choose the same standard deviation
of the TFP shocks for all countries. The variance and persistence of the total TFP shock
imply that the HP-filtered cyclical GDP of each country has a standard deviation of roughly
3 percent. We simulate the model for 300 periods with a global liberalization announced at
period 200 that takes all tariffs to zero in the long run. Initial tariffs are chosen to match
the initial tariffs in Mix (2020) for a global liberalization.
   After each simulation, we take the periods between 190 and 250 and estimate the implied
IRs for a country with ^ = 0.01 using the same method we applied in the data. Our expected

trade cost shocks are calculated using discounted future growth after the liberalization,
just as in the data. The lag structure on the expected trade cost shock begins the year
before the announcement (four years before implementation) and extends to four years after
implementation. We control for the global cycle using the cyclical component of U.S. and
European Union total GDP.
   We perform 100 simulations and take the mean over all IRs. Because TFP shocks are
quantitatively larger and have a more direct effect on macro aggregates in the model than the
trade cost shock, the standard deviation of these IRs is large, but the qualitative implications
of the IRs are consistently supportive of our analysis in the data: The investment rate, GDP,
and hours fall while the consumption rate rises in anticipation of the agreement more for
countries that expect a larger impact on trade. To show that these simulations do indeed
tell a consistent story, we perform the same 100­simulation exercise 100 times and calculate
the mean IR over all the individual mean IRs from each exercise. In Figure 14, we report
this "mean of means" and the 90 percent confidence interval.
   As in the data, the estimation on the model implies that the investment rate, GDP, and
hours fall in anticipation of the agreement. The contractionary effects on the investment
rate, GDP, and hours are significant, and the paths of the investment rate and GDP before
the liberalization look like a scaled-up version of the path in the data. The consumption


                                                54
rate also follows the same anticipatory path in both model and data IRs (scaled similarly to
the investment rate). All in all, our empirical method applied to the model produced IRs
that mirror those of the data. We know that the anticipatory effects exist in the model, so
these results strengthen our conviction that the same anticipatory movements occur in the
data, albeit on a smaller scale.




      Figure 14: Impulse responses in the model with 90 percent confidence intervals.




                                            55
E     Additional Model Sensitivity - Not for Publication

    In this section, we report the sensitivity of the model to three modeling features: firm
creation, an extensive margin of trade, and an input­output structure. Many analyses of
the effects of trade policy abstract from these three margins and thus this offers a glimpse
into the quantitative importance of these abstractions. We also discuss how the level and
variation in the interest rates influence our results.
Fixed Entry. Abstracting from endogenous firm creation substantially mitigates the con-
tractionary short-run effects and amplifies the long-run effects on labor supply. Specifically,
we assume that a fixed mass of firms replaces exiting firms every period. Without a firm
entry decision, we find that trade grows about 25 percent less in the long run and the
short-run contractionary effect on labor with trend trade costs shocks is about 1/2 as large.
Unanticipated shocks are now expansionary.
Krugman. We calibrate the model so that virtually all firms export (99.8 percent) so the
exporter margin is very inelastic. The response of trade to changes in trade costs closely
mimics the response in the static exporter model in that there are no endogenous trade
dynamics. With all firms exporting, we substantially mitigate the contractionary effects of
unanticipated and anticipated trade reforms.
    The model with all firms exporting is similar to other dynamic trade models in the
literature, such as Eaton et al. (2016). This analysis shows that a change in trade costs in
these models yields a smaller aggregate response in output and consumption than when the
export decision is endogenous and dynamic.
Input­Output Structure. We remove the input­output structure from the model by
getting rid of the material final goods. Previous work has found that this input­output
structure can magnify the aggregate effect of trade. Our work is consistent with the previous
work, as in the long run, the model without materials exhibits lower consumption and output
despite a similar transition in the trade share.
Discounting and IES. There are two additional ways in which preferences will affect the

                                               56
size of the wealth effects related to the level and variation in interest rates, which are governed
by the discount factor,  , and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/ . When we
make agents more patient, we substantially raise the present value of a phased-in reform and
increase the contractionary effects. Likewise, when we lower 1/ , the interest rate rises less
early in the reform thereby increasing the wealth effect and leading to a more contractionary
effect on employment. This type of experiment is what one might get in a partial equilibrium
model with a fixed interest rate.




                                                57
58
     Figure 15: IRF Trade Cost
59
     Figure 16: IRF Trend Trade Cost
