                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE ANATOMY OF CYBER RISK

                                        Rustam Jamilov
                                         Hélène Rey
                                        Ahmed Tahoun

                                      Working Paper 28906
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28906


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank our discussants, Jinfei Sheng and Ishita Sen, as well as Matteo Crosignani, Ralph
Koijen, Anna Kovner, Richard Portes, Elias Papaioannou and participants of the AFA 2021
Annual Meeting and the ECB-RFS Macro-Finance Conference for useful comments and
suggestions. Aakash Kalyani and especially Markus Schwedeler provided outstanding research
assistance. Jamilov acknowledges financial support from the Wheeler Institute for Business and
Development. Tahoun sincerely appreciates support from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (INET). The paper does not represent the view of the Haut Conseil de Stabilité
Financière. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Rustam Jamilov, Hélène Rey, and Ahmed Tahoun. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Anatomy of Cyber Risk
Rustam Jamilov, Hélène Rey, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 28906
June 2021
JEL No. F3, G0, G12, G14, G15, G30, G32

                                          ABSTRACT

We construct novel text-based measures of firm-level cyber risk exposure based on quarterly
earnings calls of 12,000+ firms from 85 countries over 20+ years. We categorize each cyber-
related discussion into topics that capture sentiment, monetary loss, country names, etc. We
document new facts on the worldwide rise of cyber risk and its industrial and geographical
composition. We characterize most affected firms and show that our indices can predict future
cyberattacks. Cyber risk exposure has significant direct and contagion effects on stock returns.
Finally, there is a factor structure in our firm-level measures and shocks to the common factor are
priced.

Rustam Jamilov                                   Ahmed Tahoun
London Business School                           London Business School
Regents Park                                     26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA                                   NW1 4SA London
United Kingdom                                   atahoun@london.edu
jamilovrustam@gmail.com

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and CEPR
and also NBER
hrey@london.edu
1     Introduction

    The World Economic Forum identifies systemic cyber risk as one of the most likely and
impactful risks for firms (WEF, 2016). Major institutions have lost nearly $500 billion from
operational risk events from 2011 to 2020, predominantly due to cyberattacks (ORX, 2020).
The European Systemic Risk Board has recently characterized cyber security as a systemic
risk to the European financial system (ESRB, 2020). According to the Center for Strategic
and International Studies, cyber-crime caused economic losses up to 1% of global gross output
as of 2014 (CSIS, 2014). Recent systemic risk surveys of financial market participants cite
cyber security as a Top 2 most challenging risk for managing a firm, falling behind only
political risk (BoE, 2020). There is rapidly escalating interest in cyber monitoring and
macroprudential regulation from financial market regulators around the world (Kashyap
and Wetherilt, 2019). Cyberattacks pose particularly large threats to trading and banking
systems, with new and unforeseen avenues for the propagation of idiosyncratic attacks into
systemic crises such as "cyber bank runs" (Duffie and Younger, 2019).
    Despite such continuous interest from both industry participants and policy makers,
empirical research on the economics of cyber security is very limited. The goal of this paper
is to fill this gap by constructing comprehensive text-based measures of firm-level exposure to
cyber risk by leveraging quarterly earnings calls and computational linguistics, in the spirit of
Hassan et al. (2019)1 . Our method relies on the application of recent advances in numerical
natural language processing (NLP) techniques to textual information from quarterly earnings
announcements data provided by Thomson Reuters Street Events.2 Conference calls usually
take place concurrently with an earnings release and grant a chance for management to
describe the overall business position of their company. Many interesting dialogues take
place during post-announcement Q&A sessions where investors, industry analysts, and other

    1 This general approach has been recently applied to the case of epidemic diseases like COVID-19 (Hassan
et al., 2020a), the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom (Hassan et al., 2020b), and climate change risk (Sautner
et al., 2020)
    2 See Gentzkow et al. (2021) for a general introduction to text-based modelling in economic research.



                                                      2
vested parties can ask questions about various pressing issues. The information contained
in these dialogues is much richer and more multidimensional than in standard regulatory
filings.
    We process all the text from earnings announcements and Q&A sessions and construct
firm-level measures of exposure to cyber risk and uncertainty by identifying and capturing
relevant "textual bigrams". These bigrams are ordered combinations of words that relate
to some topic of interest. For example, in the Hassan et al. (2019) study authors search
for bigrams that are related to political uncertainty. In our case, this flexible approach can
identify dialogues related to topics such as "cyber attack", "ransomware", "data breach",
etc. Our complete quarterly dataset is available for 12,000+ firms in 85 countries and from
2002 till the present at quarterly frequency.
    Our first and main measure is firm-level exposure to cyber risk. For each transcript, we
calculate the number of times each term of interest gets mentioned. The full list of cyber
terms is provided in Table 1 of the Online Appendix. We have over 30 unique terms that
include monograms and bigrams like "cyber attack", "data loss," "hack", "DDOS", "data
leak", etc. In order to construct this list of terms, we follow closely the documents and
studies by the Cyber Policy Initiative at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Firm-level total exposure is then defined as the sum of all of these mentions, normalized by
the number of words in each transcript. We then aggregate the firm-level measure to the
level of an individual industry, country, or the world.
    An advantage of observing the full text of each earnings call transcript is that we can
run conditional searches that identify cyber chatter that is concurrent to other topics of
interest. For example, we independently identify any mentions of such words as "loss",
"cost", "income", "monetary", etc. Terms like these belong to our "Monetary Loss" category.
Then, we flag instances when a monetary loss term appears within 50 words of any of our
cyber-related terms. We assign a value of 1 to each such instance and 0 otherwise. We repeat
this exercise for 11 different topics that cover country names, sentiment, insurance and legal


                                                3
claims, crypto platforms or currencies, political events, etc. With the help of the country
names topic, we are able to construct a global flowmap that identifies common geographical
origins and destinations for cyber risk exposure.
   Having constructed our indices and validated them with the data on reported cyber
attacks, we document several stylized facts on global cyber risk as follows:

   Fact 1: The fraction of conference calls worldwide that discuss cyber risk is growing. It
has more than tripled since 2002, with a sharp increase after 2013. The global intensity of
discussions, i.e. number of cyber mentions per call, has also gone up very significantly.

   Fact 2: The sentiment surrounding cyber risk is becoming increasingly negative. The
global cyber risk sentiment index has dropped roughly four-fold since 2002.

   Fact 3: Association of cyber-related discussions with uncertainty and risk is growing. The
global cyber risk uncertainty index has more than quadrupled since 2002, with a particularly
marked increase after 2013.

   Fact 4: Most cyber risk related discussions emanate from firms head-quartered in the
US. But, over time, and especially after 2013, the regional composition of global cyber risk
exposure is shifting to Europe, the UK, Australia and to Asia. The share of cyber risk
discussions taking place in the Americas excluding the US is also growing in the recent years
while the share of Africa is relatively constant. Within the US, we document strong clustering
of exposure along the West and East coast lines, and in the South. California and Virgina
(which includes DC) are the most exposed states followed by New York and Massachusetts.
The Midwest is less exposed except may be for Illinois.

   Fact 5: Sentiment is heterogeneous. It is volatile but generally positive in some countries
(Canada, India) and negative in others (US, UK). We also find rich heterogeneity in cyber
risk sentiment across US states: California is the most pessimistic state followed by Georgia
while Virginia and the District of Columbia are the most optimistic.

                                              4
   Fact 6: Industrial composition of global cyber risk exposure is shifting towards the finan-
cial sector. The finance industry exhibited very little exposure before 2014. It is now the
third most-affected sector after "IT" and "Professional Services" (the sector that includes
the cyber-sensitive IT consulting firms) and before "Manufacturing". Within the financial
sector, the breakdown of exposure across sub-industries is 40% financial intermediaries such
as banks, 40% insurance, 10% broker-dealers, and 10% all others.

   Fact 7: Cyber risk discussions frequently also include terms from the "Insurance and
Legal", "Monetary Loss", "Global Events", and "Country Names" topics. The "Crypto"
topic appears more frequently in recent years and spikes around local maxima in the price
of Bitcoin. The "Global events" topic is clustered around famous global cyberattacks such
as the Wannacry ransomware attack of 2017.

   We proceed by studying the determinants of cyber risk exposure at the firm level. We
estimate quarterly probit regressions of our measures of cyber risk on an array of balance
sheet and income statement characteristics. To that end, we manually merge the Street
Events firm announcements data with Compustat. We report three results. First, firm-level
cyber risk exposure is robustly positively correlated with firm size, the share of intangible
assets, and liquidity. This is also true for most of our topic-related indices. Second, the
explanatory power of fundamentals is strong in the finance, real estate, services, and health
sectors. Less so in manufacturing and trade. Within the finance sector, the explanatory
power is stronger for insurance companies and less so for banks. Third, the explanatory
power is stronger in the Americas (ex US), Europe, the UK, and Africa. Less so in the
United States and Asia.
   Can our text-based firm-level measures predict future cyberattacks? In order to answer
this question, we match our data with the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse database of reported
cyberattacks. We find that if a firm has positive exposure to cyber risk based on earnings call
data, then it is significantly more likely to report a cyberattack within the next 8 quarters.


                                              5
This result is robust to the inclusion of firm-level controls, time and industry fixed effects. We
find that if a cyber risk discussion also mentions terms from the "Insurance and Legal", "Net
Sentiment", or "Monetary Loss" topics, the probability becomes slightly greater. Finally,
we find that the intensive margin plays a role - the probability increases with the number of
times cyber risk gets mentioned per call, not just whether it does or not: it ranges from 1%
for <5 mentions to over 10% for >30 mentions.
   Our next major empirical exercise is on the asset pricing implications of cyber risk. We
merge the Street Events dataset with CRSP at the level of a CUSIP. Our empirical strategy
is to zoom in on weeks surrounding earnings calls with at least one positive firm-level cyber
risk exposure. We find that cyber risk exposure has a negative and significant effect on
stock returns of affected firms. Results are robust to the presence of country, week, and
industry fixed effects and whether returns are value-weighted or equally-weighted. Results
are significant not only for total exposure but also for the "Risk and Uncertainty", "Negative
Sentiment", "Insurance and Legal", and "Monetary Loss" topics.
   We then go beyond estimating direct effects and ask whether unaffected peer firms also
experience losses. In other words, are there systemic contagion effects from those who are
exposed to cyber risk onto those that are not? Formally, our left-hand-side variable is now
the average weekly stock return of firms that have no cyber risk exposure of any kind but
which are in the same country and industry as a firm that has had a positive exposure.
The right-hand-side variable is cyber risk exposure of affected firms. We find evidence of
spillover effects: high cyber risk exposure is associated with negative stock returns of firms
that have zero exposure but are in the same country and industry. This result is significant if
cyber discussions also include words from the "Risk and Uncertainty", "Negative Sentiment",
"Insurance and Legal", and "Monetary Loss" categories. For robustness, we also check
whether there is any effect on non-peers, i.e. firms that are from the same country but not in
the same industry as the affected firm. Reassuringly, we find zero association. We interpret
this broad result as new prima facie evidence that firm-level cyber risk can be a source of


                                                6
systematic risk in financial markets due to contagion effects or firm-to-firm networks.
   Some of the variation in our aggregate indices of cyber risk is driven by multinational if
not worldwide cyber attacks and incidents. Examples include the 2017 "WannaCry" and the
2016-2018 "NotPetya" ransomware attacks. This leads us to conjecture that there is a factor
structure in firm-level measures of cyber risk. We construct a novel pricing factor based on
aggregate cyber risk exposure - CyberE. We build our factor by extracting residuals from an
AR(1) model that is fitted into our baseline index. Our monthly factor runs from 2002:m1
until 2020:m12 and will be updated regularly.
   We construct 5 CyberE one-way sorted stock portfolios, as well as the high minus low
portfolio, by regressing firm-level stock returns on our factor and extracting CyberE betas.
We find that CyberE beta-sorted portfolios generate annualized spreads in average excess
returns of -3.30%. This shows that stocks which are in the lowest CyberE beta sorted portfo-
lio, i.e. suffer stock market losses when cyber risk is high, demand equilibrium compensation
for this additional source of risk. These return spreads cannot be readily explained away
with the CAPM or the Fama and French (1993) 3-factor models, nor the momentum factor.
The spread is also not correlated with quantile-specific average market values.
   In order to estimate the aggregate price of cyber risk, we perform the canonical Fama
and MacBeth (1973) exercise. We first construct 10 test assets - CyberE beta-sorted stock
portfolios from time-series regressions of returns on our factor. Then, we run the two-stage
Fama-MacBeth procedure and produce cross-sectional regressions of average portfolio excess
returns on the CyberE betas as well as the three Fama-French and momentum factor betas.
We find that our factor is priced with a positive price of risk that is always significant, even in
the presence of the market, size, book-to-market, and momentum pricing factors. Moreover,
on top of the market factor, CyberE can individually explain around 70% of the cross-section
of returns. The mean average pricing error with CyberE and the four canonical factors is
only 22 basis points per year.
   Literature Review There are several empirical studies that analyze the impact of cy-


                                                7
ber risk on economic and financial performance. Kamiya et al. (2020) employ the PRC
database and estimate the effects of reported cyber attacks on firm-level stock returns and
subsequent economic outcomes. Tosun (2019) performs a similar exercise and also reports
that short-term market reactions to cyberattacks correlate with increased investors' atten-
tion as measured by Google trends. Eisenbach et al. (2020) study how cyber attacks get
amplified through the U.S. financial system, with a focus on the wholesale payments net-
work. Crosignani et al. (2020) show that cyber attacks can propagate through firms' supply
chain networks. Woods et al. (2019) estimate the theoretical distribution of losses due to
cyber attacks by leveraging regulatory filings and data on cyber insurance pricing and pre-
mia. Biener et al. (2015) study the distinct characteristics of cyber risks compared to other
operational risks and emphasize significant problems resulting from interrelated losses, lack
of data, and information asymmetries.
   Relative to the aforementioned literature that employs reported cyber attack data, our
text-based approach offers several substantial refinements. There are considerable issues
when one analyses reported cyber attacks. First, there is a well known problem of significant
under-reporting of cyber attacks (Amir et al., 2018). Second, there is potentially a substantial
lag (days, if not weeks) between the day an attack gets reported to authorities and when it
actually took place. This implies that any sort of event study approach with daily asset prices
is problematic, particularly if information leaks prior to the disclosure. Under-reporting and
time lags are not a problem in our setting because (a) during the Q&A sessions investors
and analysts consistently pressure firm executives on issues that the latter could potentially
ignore or postpone otherwise, (b) earnings announcements get recorded and reported to the
general public immediately and (c) the Q&A sessions are non-rehearsed and questions are
unexpected, deeming information leakage much less likely.
   A study that is close to ours is Florakis et al. (2020) who use information in annual 10-K
filings of U.S. firms to construct cyber security risk proxies. But we differ for at least three
important reasons. First, the quarterly frequency of earnings calls (as opposed to annual


                                               8
data) allows for more robust cyber attack forecasting and asset pricing analyses. Second,
earnings calls feature Q&A sessions which make cyber-related chatter much richer, more
unrehearsed, multi-dimensional, and timely. Third, the international dimension of our data
set gives us a global view of cyber risk and of the key players and affected industries.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data and our
measurement approach. Section 3 presents new stylized facts and trends. Section 4 validates
our measure by providing excerpts of transcripts for several notable cases. Section 5 predicts
future cyberattacks with our text-based measures. Section 6 studies the determinants of
firm-level cyber risk exposure. Section 7 analyzes direct and contagion effects of cyber risk
exposure on stock market performance of publically listed firms. Section 8 conducts various
time-series and cross-sectional asset pricing tests using our text-based measures. Section
9 studies the determinants of several traded cybersecurity ETFs. Section 10 provides a
qualitative discussion of the importance of research on the economics of cyber risk with
potential directions for future work. Finally, Section 11 summarizes and concludes.



2    Data and Measurement

Data Our primary data source is quarterly earnings conference calls of publically listed
firms. We have collected the complete set of 334,438 English-language transcripts that
cover 12,381 unique firms from 85 countries over the 2002q1-2020q4 period. We adopt
computational linguistics algorithms to analyse the texts of quarterly earnings conference
calls and tag conversations that relate to cyber risk, data breaches, or hacks. Our general
approach follows closely the work of Hassan et al. (2019) on political risk and uncertainty.


Cyber Risk Exposure Our main firm-level measure is constructed by finding and count-
ing cyber-related textual bigrams. The list of all cyber terms is based on the documents and
studies by the Cyber Policy Initiative at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
and is provided in Table 1 of the Online Appendix. If our algorithm detects that any bigram

                                              9
from that list gets mentioned X times in a given conference call transcript, it assigns the
value of X to that particular transcript. We run a query on all transcripts in the database
for each cyber term. Formally, for a given transcript i and quarter t, with total words Nit ,
exposure to cyber risk term c is defined as:

                                               Nit
                             CyberTermc
                                      it =           1[j = Cyberc ]  c                     (1)
                                               j=1


   The baseline transcript-level total exposure index is then defined as the normalized sum
across all terms:
                                                  1
                           CyberExposureit =           CyberTermc
                                                                it                         (2)
                                                 Nit c

   We normalize by the number of words in each transcript to account for the length
of discussions.     We will be referring to the non-normalized version of the measure as
CyberExposureT
             it , which is simply the sum of all cyber terms mentioned per transcript.


Topics Our approach towards capturing the content of each cyber-related discussion in-
volves running joint-search queries between cyber bigrams and terms that we associate with
topics of special interest. We construct eight novel topics: "Country Names", "Crypto", "In-
surance and Legal", "Monetary Loss", "Pandemics", "Social Media", "Politics", and "Global
Events". As in Hassan et al. (2019) we also use the three topics "Risk and Uncertainty",
"Positive Sentiment", and "Negative Sentiment". All topics and their associated terms are
listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.
   We now briefly describe the reason for including each of the eight new categories. The
"Country Names" topic includes terms such as "Russia" and "North Korea" and helps us
locate cyber chatter that also includes spoken country names. This, in turn, will allow us to
identify potential geographical origins of cyber risk in Section 3. The "Crypto" topic includes
terms such as "crypto", "blockchain", and "bitcoin". Reported and anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that cyber ransomware incidents typically involve ransom demands in cryptocurrency.


                                                10
The "Monetary Loss" and "Insurance and Legal" topics include terms such as "loss" or
"reputation" and "insurance" or "liability", respectively, and flag cyber-related conversa-
tions that mention potential monetary and reputation losses or insurance and legal related
claims and settlements. The "Global Events" and "Politics" topics include terms such as
"Wannacry" or "Wiki leaks" and "election" or "Trump", respectively, and flag cyber-related
conversations with references to significant worldwide incidents such as global cyberattacks
or major political events and figures. The "Social Media" topic picks up terms such as
"Zoom", "Facebook", or "Twitter". Social media platforms are potential targets for cy-
berattackers given the breadth of sensitive private information that they collect and store.
Finally, the "Pandemics" topic includes terms like "corona" and "covid" in order to gauge
the rise of digital risks and incidents during the COVID-19 pandemic.
   Formally, for each term s of each topic k we count instances of cyber risk bigrams c being
within a 50 word distance from s(k). In other words, we assume that if s(k) and c are within
50 words of each other, then the particular exposure to cyber risk was in the context of
theme k. We construct topical indices in two steps. First, for a transcript i at time t with
Nit words we compute the count of each topical term s(k) in the neighbourhood of c:

                                   Nit
                          s(k)
            CyberTopicTermit =           {1[j = Cyberc ] × 1[|j ­ s(k)| < 50]}  s(k)      (3)
                                   j=1


   Then, we sum across all terms s(k) at the level of each topic k, thus constructing eleven
topical indices:
                                           1                         s(k)
                       CyberTopicit =                  CyberTopicTermit                   (4)
                                          Nit
                                                s(k)

   Henceforth, for simplicity we will be referring to our eleven topical indices as
CyberCountryit (for the "Country Names" topic), CyberCryptoit ("Crypto"), CyberLossit
("Monetary Loss"), CyberInsuranceit ("Insurance and Legal"), CyberGlobalit ("Global
Events"), CyberPoliticsit ("Politics"), CyberSocialit ("Social Media"), CyberPandemicsit



                                                11
("Pandemics"), CyberUncertaintyit ("Risk and Uncertainty"), CyberPosSentimentit ("Pos-
itive Sentiment"), and CyberNegSentimentit ("Negative"). The index of "Net Sentiment"
CyberNetSentimentit is constructed as CyberPosSentimentit ­CyberNetSentimentit . We will
be referring to the non-normalized version of this measure as CyberNetSentimentT
                                                                               it , which is
simply the sum of all cyber terms associated with the "Net Sentiment" topic (with similar
notation for the other topics).


Summary Statistics Aggregation, unless specified otherwise, is performed by taking un-
weighted averages of CyberExposureit to the level of an industry or country. Similarly for
every topical index. In the Online Appendix, Figure 20 plots the number of observations
in our dataset per quarter. For all but three quarters, we have at least 2,000 observations.
Starting from 2005q4 we have at least 4,000 observations per quarter. Table 4 provides sum-
mary statistics for every index by major industry, defined by the 2-digit NAICS classification
that we take from Compustat. Table 5 provides summary statistics by individual country,
defined by the firm headquarters location from Compustat. All numbers are reported as
total counts of each measure per category, i.e. not normalized by transcript length.



3     Cyber Risk Facts and Trends

3.1    Global Patterns

    We now present time-series and geographical facts on worldwide cyber risk exposure.
Figure 1 presents global heatmaps for 2010, 2015, and 2020. Strikingly, the intensity of
exposure has increased considerably for most countries. The most exposed regions are the
United States and Canada, Europe, UK, Australia and some parts of Asia such as India,
Japan and China. In Africa, we do not cover many countries but among those for which we
have data the most affected one is South Africa. In Latin America, Brazil is most at risk
followed by Chile and Mexico.


                                             12
   Figure 2 shows the regional heatmap for the United States. We observe much dispersion
in both exposure and sentiment to cyber risk across individual US states. In particular, there
is noticeable clustering of exposure along the east and west coast lines, with some exposure
in the South as well especially in Texas, followed by Georgia and Arizona. In the Midwest
only Illinois stands out as relatively exposed. The most exposed states overall are California,
Virginia (which includes the District of Columbia), New York, Massachusetts and Maryland.
They concentrate a large share of high-tech companies and of the IT industry. Interestingly,
the two most exposed states, California and Virginia do not share the same net sentiment:
California is the most pessimistic and Virginia is the most positive state regarding cyber
risk. We conjecture this could be linked to the relative densities of IT security firms in the
two states.
   Figure 3 presents a flowmap of CyberExposureit by geographical origin and destination.3
We identify destinations with the location of firm headquarters in Compustat. We distinguish
between six major destinations: Africa, Americas (ex US), Asia, Europe, United States, and
United Kingdom. We identify origins with the terms behind the "Country Names" topic.
Specifically, we distinguish between eight geographical origins: China, Europe, Iran, Israel,
North Korea, Russia, United States, and United Kingdom. For example, if country X is
mentioned in proximity to some cyber term for firm i with headquarters in region Y, then we
assume that an association was made between that particular form of cyber risk and country
X (Y ) as the origin (destination) of that risk.4
   We find that, in absolute terms, the United States is the biggest origin of cyber risk
exposure for the world economy, followed by Europe, the United Kingdom, and China. In
relative terms, Russia's main "destinations" for cyber risk exposure are the US (56%) followed
by Europe and the UK (taken together they account for 21%) and then Asia (17%). China's
main "destinations" are the US (56%), then Asia (22%) before Europe and the UK (16%).

   3 Table 6 of the Online Appendix shows all the numbers behind the flowmap.
   4 Our  procedure can only identify associations, which in turn could carry multiple contexts. We do not
claim to establish the identity of "attackers".

                                                   13
North Korea concentrates on the US (64%) and the UK (32%). In contrast, Israel's main
"destinations" are Africa (60%, excluding Israel) and Europe and the UK (20%). Iran focuses
overwhelmingly on the US (94%). The United States' main "destinations" are itself (62%)
and Europe and the UK almost equally and totalling a 22% share. Europe concentrates on
the US (50%) and itself (27%), while the United Kingdom's main "destinations" are the US
and itself, both around 35% followed by Europe (21%). Table 7 of the Online Appendix
provides the origin-destination decomposition at the industry level. Industries for which the
"Country Names" topic is particularly prevalent are Manufacturing, IT, and Services. The
financial sector as well as services are predominantly exposed to the US and Europe as origins
of exposure. China and Russia as origins of exposure are concentrated in the manufacturing
and IT sectors.


3.2    Time Series Trends

   Figure 4 plots the time series of global unweighted average of cyber risk exposure
1/M    i CyberExposureit , with M the number of transcripts per quarter. The series has

been normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample. We document that aver-
age CyberExposureit has multiplied by at least a factor of six from 2002q1 to 2020q4. The
increase is particularly marked after 2013. This is the intensive margin. Furthermore, the
percent of all conference calls with at least one mention of cyber-related terms has increased
from roughly 1% in 2002 to 5% in 2020, with also a large increase after 2013. This is the
extensive margin. Overall, both the intensive and extensive margins of global exposure to
cyber risk have increased between 2002 and 2020 with a larger rate of growth after 2013.
   Figure 4 also highlights notable reported cyber attacks and how their timing correlates
with local spikes in our index. In 2004q3, service provider AOL reported to seek legal action
as BuddyLinks - a type of spyware - penetrated users' computers through instant messaging
programs, collected private data, and modified software on affected machines. In 2007q4,
McAfee released a Virtual Criminology Report, in which experts warned that based on all


                                             14
emerging statistics and trends cyber risk would become the following decade's biggest security
threat. To the best of our knowledge, this was one of the first documented recognitions of
cyber risk as a new source of systemic risk. In 2010q4, Tencent reported a cyber attack from
a malware called "Kou Kou Bodyguard", which was allegedly developed and distributed by
China.
   Starting from 2013, we begin to notice an increase in the rate of growth of many of our
cyber risk measures. One possible explanation is that 2013 is the year of the Snowden leaks
and a year where hackers operated on a massive scale: Target was attacked in 2013q4 by the
POS malware and 40 million clients were affected. Adobe was also hacked in 2013q4 (153
million people were affected). Furthermore, 2014q4 saw the high profile hacking of Sony by
North Korea. It is therefore possible that these very salient events were both the symptoms
of and increased the awareness of cyber risk going forward.
   The infamous Anthem medical data breach took place in 2015q1 in which criminal hackers
reportedly stole identifiable information from 75+ million medical records. In 2016, the so-
called "Petya" family of encripted malware was first discovered. The malware prevented
Microsoft-based Windows systems from booting and subsequently demanded payments in
Bitcoin for reinstating access to the machine. The creator of Petya was eventually arrested
and fined. In 2017, a new variant of Petya, which was labelled "NotPetya" by the Kaspersky
lab, was used in a series of international cyber attacks, including the June 2017 attacks on
Ukraine. Multiple official sources in the U.S., Canada, and Australia attributed the attacks
to Russia-linked entities (Kovacs, 2018).
   In 2017 we additionally witnessed two of the most infamous cyber incidents in recent
memory. First, in 2017q3 the American credit bureau Equifax reported that private records
of about 150 million American and 15 million British citizens were stolen. Equifax eventually
agreed in a settlement with the United States Federal Trade Commission to provide affected
individuals with compensation and free credit score monitoring. To this day, the Equifax
breach remains one of the biggest data compromises in history. Second, in May 2017 the


                                             15
world was shocked by the "WannaCry" global ransomware attack. One of the most affected
agencies was the National Health Services (NHS) in the UK. Tens of thousands of devices,
including MRI scans and computers, were compromised by the cryptoworm (Bodkin et al.,
2017). Numerous non-critical emergencies had to be canceled and ambulance visits had to be
reduced. The US and the UK formally blamed North Korea for the attacks (Corera, 2017).
   Finally, the Covid-19 pandemic and the Great Lockdown have been associated with
an unprecedented rise in cyber attacks. World Economic Forum reported that in 2020
the number of global cyber attacks had increased by 22% (Greenberg, 2021). Moreover,
the healthcare industry experienced a 45% year-on-year rise in attacks, the highest across
all sectors. It is also reported that phishing attacks were 600% more common in 2020
relative to the previous year. Attacks on the Microsoft Remote Desktop protocol have also
increased. The average ransomware payment in the second half of 2020 was $170,000, a
reported 60% year-on-year increase (Lallie et al., 2021). The total economic toll from Covid-
related cybercrime for the global economy is thus likely to be in trillions of US dollars.
   We continue the presentation of results with figure 5, which compares average
CyberExposureit with other salient indices of uncertainty and volatility. Panel (a) plots
our index alongside average PRiskit - the firm-level political risk measure from Hassan et al.
(2019). The Pearson correlation coefficient between the two series is 0.40. Hassan et al.
(2019) also construct measures of political risk based on specific topics such as "technology",
"trade", "tax policy", "health care", etc. Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 compare average
CyberExposureit with average PRisk(Technology)it and PRisk(Trade)it indices, with the
Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.35 and 0.61, respectively. Finally, panel (b) plots the
Cboe Volatility Index (VIX) whose correlation with average CyberExposureit is a noisy -0.12
with a p-value of (0.32).
   Based on the comparison with other indices of aggregate uncertainty, we document two
main observations. First, at least in the minds of conference call participants, cyber risk is
generally perceived differently from fundamental drivers of political risk or market volatility.


                                              16
This bolsters the view that cyber risk is a unique and new source of risk for firms. Second,
trade- and technology-based sub-measures of PRiskit seem to pick up similar fundamentals
as CyberExposureit , as evidenced by their relatively high correlations. However, after around
2014q1 the series diverge significantly with a sustained growth of cyber risk.
   We now analyze time-series properties of our topical indices. All time-series aggregates
are unweighted averages, normalized by the standard deviation of their respective samples.
Figure 6 plots the average of CyberUncertaintyit . The index has been trending up over
the past decade, particularly post 2013. It has spikes in 2015-2017, potentially mirroring
cyber attacks on the Democratic National Convention (June and July 2016), the WannaCry
ransomware attack (May 2017), and the NotPetya virus attack (June 2017). It also spikes
in 2020 where the Covid-19 lockdowns have created vulnerabilities in working environments
with a large increase in the use of softwares for remote work purposes. These spikes can be
interpreted as a persistent negative second moment shock in the spirit of Bloom (2009). In
addition to the rise in the frequency of idiosyncratic and aggregate cyber incidents, conference
call participants have an increasingly more uncertain view of the future with regards to cyber
security.
   Figure 7 presents the average of CyberPoliticsit . The plot suggests that the politics topic
has a strong positive association with cyber risk.5 This relationship potentially reflects the
growth of occurrences and uncertainty about state-sponsored cyber incidents. In addition,
this index seems to track the US political cycle, around which cyber incidents tend to cluster.
   Figure 8 plots the averages of three sentiment indices:                      CyberPosSentimentit ,
CyberNegSentimentit , and CyberNetSentimentit for net sentiment. We observe that both
positive and negative sentiment towards cyber risk have increased. However, net sentiment
has fallen roughly fourfold since 2002q1. Our latest observation - 2020q4 - seems to be a
local minimum for the index, potentially coinciding with the pandemic-related spike in cyber
attacks. The large negative spike around 2017q4 could be related to several major incidents:
   5 The  Pearson correlation coefficient of average CyberPoliticsit with average CyberExposureit over the
entire sample is 0.71.

                                                   17
NotPetya (2017q3), the Equifax data breach (2017q3), the Uber databreach (2017q4), and
the admission by Yahoo (2017q3) that a previous data breach had in fact affected an as-
tonishing 3 billion accounts. Meanwhile, on the political side, the hacking of Deep Root
Analytics in 2017q3 led to the data of 198 million US voters being stolen.
   Overall, a priori it is not obvious that the rise in cyber exposure is necessarily a detri-
mental, negative phenomenon. It is possible that there are just as many winners from the
rise of cyber risk and uncertainty as there are losers. The winners in this situation could
be firms with a negative cyber risk beta: IT consulting firms, cloud security providers, etc.
However, the fact that net sentiment towards cyber risk is increasingly negative suggests
that the fraction of losers is large and growing, and particularly fast over the past 3 years.
   Figures 9 and 10 plot the averages of CyberInsuranceit and CyberLossit , respectively.
Both have increased considerably, suggesting that cyber risk exposure is becoming increas-
ingly costly to firms; these costs manifest in insurance and legal claims, monetary, and non-
pecuniary (reputational) losses. Figure 11 of the Online Appendix presents the time-series
average of CyberCountryit . Panel (a) shows the total across all countries/terms and pan-
els (b)-(f) depict individual country-specific plots. Overall, occasions when specific country
names are mentioned whenever cyber risk gets discussed are increasing.
   Figure 11 reveals that association between discussions of cyber risk and the "Social
Media" topic has been somewhat positive and rising over the past several years. Figure 12
shows that the average of CyberCryptoit spiked in 2017q4-2018q2 and 2019q2. Interestingly,
these episodes coincide with the two local maxima in the market price of Bitcoin. A possible
explanation for this relationship is that the frequency of malware attacks correlates with
the value of cryptocurrencies, which are normally the currency in which attackers demand
ransom for releasing data or information systems. While the sample size is not large enough
for drawing more definitive conclusions, this association is nevertheless potentially interesting
and worthy of further exploration.
   Figure 13 shows that the joint search for cyber and global incidents peaked in 2017, the


                                               18
period that corresponds to two massive worldwide cyberattacks: Wannacry and Notpetya, as
well as Yahoo's disclosure of a past massive breach. Finally, Figure 14 shows that pandemics-
related cyber chatter only spikes in the four quarters of 2020 - as it should.


3.3    Heterogeneity by Geography and Industry

   We now provide decompositions of global cyber risk exposure by region and industry.
Figure 15 decomposes our total exposure index by region, defined as the location of firms
headquarters. Panel (a) in the Figure depicts the percent of all transcripts, per year, with
cyber-related discussions, i.e. the extensive margin. Panel (b) shows the regional composition
of all cyber risk discussions, in percent. We observe that the vast majority of cyber chatter
originates in US-based firms. However, this trend has been going through a structural change
since about 2014. Since then, cyber risk is becoming an increasingly global phenomenon
affecting all continents, in particular Europe and the UK and Asia.
   Section E of the Online Appendix provides detailed country-level time-series data for the
US, UK, France, Germany, Japan, China, India, Canada, Israel, Russia, Spain, and Italy.6
   Figure 16 decomposes CyberExposureit by industry, proxied by two-digit NAICS codes.
Panel (a) reports the fraction of all transcripts with non-zero cyber risk related discussions
and panel (b) shows the industrial composition of all discussions in percent. We document
that the IT and services sectors (which include various IT-related consulting companies)
have historically dominated our exposure measures, and understandably so. However, since
about 2013 the percentage of cyber risk discussions attributed to the finance sector has been
steadily growing and currently stands at about 20%. In other words, one fifth of all worldwide
cyber risk related discussions now occurs in the finance industry. This compositional change
has taken place seemingly at the expense of the decline in manufacturing.
   Table 17 offers a more granular look at the financial industry. The breakdown of global
cyber exposure based on 4-digit NAICS codes appears to be broadly in terms of 40% for

   6 Additional   countries are available upon request.

                                                      19
financial intermediaries, 40% for insurance companies, 10% for broker-dealers, and 10% for
all the rest. Interestingly, the insurance sector has been increasingly exposed to cyber risk
in the recent years. Within the financial intermediary sector, the most exposed types are
depository institutions (banks), followed by other intermediaries (e.g. mortgage companies)
and non-bank intermediaries.



4    Validation

    In this section we validate our text-based measures of cyber risk. It is important to
confirm that our indices are informative about the dangers of actual cyber attacks. We
therefore manually merge earnings call announcement data with the Privacy Rights Clear-
inghouse (PRC) database on reported cyber incidents. Because there is no common firm
identifier, we employ a variant of the fuzzy search algorithm. Specifically, we create a vector
of integers for each firm name in the PRC and earnings datasets. Then, for each firm in
PRC data, we take the cosine distance from each firm in the earnings call data and keep the
closest match. To create the vector of integers for a firm name, we count all unique letters,
adjacent two-letter, and adjacent three-letter combinations. Finally, we compute a measure
of semantic distance (normalized to lie in the [0,1] interval) between firm names in the two
datasets. We impose a reasonable cutoff for good and bad matches.
    We find that out of the roughly 9000 non-public, non-governmental, and non-medical
cyber attacks in the PRC dataset (the latest available quarter was 2019q4), 2600+ unique
firm-incident pairs can be matched to the earnings call data with the average cosine distance
of 0.75, with 1 indicating a perfect match. As a final step, we identify some of the most
salient realized cyberattacks in recent memory and tag them in both datasets. The goal
of this exercise is to check whether our textual algorithms indeed pick up economically
meaningful chatter when we know that an actual attack is taking place.
    Section A of the Online Appendix presents earnings call text snippets and our com-



                                              20
mentary for 8 major known and reported past cyber incidents. For each event, we provide
the company name, the date of the closest conference call, values for CyberExposureit and
CyberNetSentimentit , a precise excerpt from the conference call texts, and additional com-
mentary. Overall, we find that these widely known realized cyber attacks are picked up very
well by our indices. For example, the 2017 Equifax data breach has an CyberExposureit
(CyberNetSentimentit ) score of 10 (-10), implying large exposure and very negative market
sentiment. Another example is the 2014 Target data breach, when over 100 million individ-
uals lost sensitive information including credit card account data. This event corresponds to
an CyberExposureit (CyberNetSentimentit ) value of 19 (-19): both are outliers in the overall
distribution.
    Of course, not every spike in our measures must be associated with an actual cyber
incident. Most of the time, firm executives and other call participants express concerns
about potential events, which may or may not ever materialize.7 However, this does not
take away the fact that mere anticipation of an attack could significantly impact present-day
franchise and market values and economic decision-making. In Section 5 we ask whether we
can predict actual future cyber attacks using our text-based measures.



5      Predicting Future Cyberattacks

    Can our text-based firm-level measures of cyber risk predict actual future cyberattacks
on firms? In order to answer this question we use the merged datasets of PRC's reported
cyber-attack data and quarterly earnings calls. Our left-hand-side is an indicator variable
which takes on the value of 1 if a firm suffers a cyberattack at any time within the next
8 quarters. Our right-hand-side variables include a cyber risk measure and additional firm
controls: intangible assets / total assets, capex spending / total assets, PP&E spending /
total assets, cash flow / assets, long-term debt / total debt, log(total assets), total debt /

    7 In
      spirit, our paper is thus related to the literature on the impact of uncertainty shocks (Bloom, 2009;
Bloom et al., 2018)

                                                    21
total assets, liquidity, log of age, ROA, equity issuance, turnover ratio, credit rating, Tobin's
Q, book-to-market ratio, operational costs / assets, and the market beta.8 In addition, we
include year and industry fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the firm level. All right-
hand-side variables except the cyber risk indices are normalized by their standard deviations.
Because the PRC data covers predominantly cyberattacks that were reported on U.S. soil,
we restrict our sample to U.S. firms.
   Results from logit regressions are reported in Table 1. We see that if a firm has positive
cyber risk exposure in quarter t, then it is much more likely to report a cyberattack within the
next 8 quarters. In terms of economic significance, a one-unit increase in CyberExposureit
raises the probability of a cyberattack by 6.6-8%. Relative to the baseline exposure index,
an attack is more likely if cyber-related chatter is of negative net sentiment or includes terms
from the CyberInsuranceit and CyberLossit topics.
   Does the intensive margin of cyber risk exposure matter? Figure 18 shows the margins
plot from the baseline logit regression of CyberExposureit on the cyberattack indicator, in-
clusive of all controls and fixed effects. We see that the intensity of cyber risk exposure does
matter for forecasting future attacks. The probability of an attack ranges from roughly 1.3%
for <5 cyber risk mentions to over 20% for  60 mentions. The relationship remains statis-
tically significant at the 5% level for  20 mentions and at the 10% level for  30 mentions.
Estimates are understandably noisier for the very right tail of the exposure distribution since
the frequency of such incidents (transcripts with CyberExposureit  30) is low.
   Overall, our results suggest that time-varying text-based measures of exposure to cyber
risk can be viewed as robust early warning indicators for actual future cyber attacks.




   8 Table   3 of the Online Appendix provides a detailed definition and source for each variable used.

                                                      22
6     Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure

    What are the characteristics of firms that have high cyber risk exposure? In order to
answer this question, we merge the quarterly earnings call data with Compustat and CRSP
and construct an array of firm-level balance sheet and income statement characteristics.
Table 3 in the Online Appendix provides detailed definitions of every variable that we use.
Our main model is a probit regression of firm characteristics on indicators of cyber risk
exposure. An indicator takes the value of 1 if a transcript records CyberExposureit > 0.
The same exercise is run on all of our topical indices.
    Results are reported in Table 2. Overall, we see that firms which have a higher likelihood
of having positive exposure to cyber risk typically fit into the following profile: high ratio
of intangible assets to total assets, high liquidity ratio, and large size (as mentioned by
total assets). For most of our topical indices, we see that these three firm characteristics
are the most robust predictors of exposure. This implies that either large firms with lots
of intangibles and liquidity worry about being cyber attacked (as seen from column (4) on
CyberNegSentiment) and that the attackers target those firms more than the average firm;
or that the business of a subset of these particular firms potentially benefits from cyber
risk (since the CyberPosSentiment is also strongly related to those characteristics as seen in
column (3)). In terms of explanatory power, we see that the pseudo-R2 of our regressions is
just about 0.2; a large fraction of cyber risk exposure is left puzzlingly unexplained.
    Table 8 of the Online Appendix shows heterogeneity by region. Regions are defined based
on the location of firm headquarters, taken from Compusat. For most areas, size or age are
positively correlated with cyber risk exposure. The best predictors of exposure in the US
seem to be intangible assets, size, liquidity and cash flow. In the Americas (ex US), the
best predictors are size and Tobin's Q. In Europe: intangible assets and equity issuance. In
the UK: debt maturity ratio, size, age, the market beta, and book-to-market ratio. In Asia:
PP%E expenditures, age, and equity issuance. Finally, in Africa: CAPEX over assets, age,
market beta, and debt to assets ratio. Some reasons for this heterogeneity can be traced

                                              23
back to sectoral composition, to which we now turn.
    Table 9 of the Online Appendix shows heterogeneity by industry. Industries are defined
based on 2-digit NAICS codes. The highest number of firms is in manufacturing where
the liquidity ratio, size, leverage and age are the main determinants of cyber-risk exposure.
The most exposed sectors to cyber risk tend to be IT and services. For those, exposure
increases significantly with liquidity ratios and size and intangible assets (for services). For
the financial sector, which is increasingly exposed to cyber risk, determinants are intangibles,
size and Tobin's Q. In trade, size, cash flow, equity net issuance, return on assets and PP&E
expenditures correlate with exposure.
    Table 10 of the Online Appendix shows heterogeneity within the financial sector. Finance
sub-sectors are defined based on 4-digit NAICS codes. The three largest categories are banks,
insurance and broker dealers. For banks (regular depository financial intermediaries), the
best predictors of cyber risk exposure are PP&E expenditure, size, and book-to-market
equity; larger institutions seem more at risk. Insurance companies are important targets
and their cyber exposure is positively correlated with intangibles, age, and Tobin's Q but
negatively correlated with their CAPEX to assets ratio. Interestingly, for broker-dealers,
some correlates are similar to banks and insurance (size, age) while others also appear but
with an opposite sign (intangibles, PP&E). Two new variables seem very important: turnover
(positively correlated) and operational costs over assets (negatively correlated).



7     Firm-Level Cyber Risk and Stock Returns

7.1    Direct Effects

    In this section we explore asset pricing implications of our measures of cyber risk. We
employ an event study approach and focus on stock market outcomes of affected, peer, and
non-peer firms. First, we identify events in terms of calendar weeks w during which earnings
call announcements recorded positive cyber risk exposure CyberExposureT
                                                                      iw . We discard


                                              24
weeks with no exposure. Second, in order to build our main shock variable, we take the sum
of CyberExposureT
                iw across firms in a given event week w, country (firm headquarters), and
a tightly defined industry (6-digit NAICS code). Our first dependent variable is the weekly
average of day-to-day stock returns for the affected firms during event weeks. Affected firms
are defined as those whose earning call transcripts recorded CyberExposureT
                                                                          iw > 0. All our
specifications include country, industry, and week fixed effects. We also control for firm size,
proxied by stock market valuation.
   We begin the discussion of results with Table 3. In columns (1)-(2) we focus on equally
and value-weighted stock returns of affected firms for weeks with positive CyberExposureT
                                                                                        iw .
We find that cyber risk exposure carries negative and significant effects on returns of affected
firms. Economic significance of the estimates is large: each additional mention of cyber
risk terms reduces weekly returns by around 4.3 basis points. By extension, more than 23
mentions cause losses equalling roughly 1 percentage point.


7.2    Contagion Effects

   We now move beyond estimating direct effects on affected firms and ask whether there
are contagion effects from firm-level cyber risk exposure. To that end, we define peer firms
as those which belong to the same industry and country as affected firms but recorded
CyberExposureT
             iw = 0 during the event weeks. Industries are still defined at a very granular
6-digit NAICS level. Countries are still defined as firms' headquarter locations, taken from
Compustat. Our new dependent variable is now the weekly average of day-to-day returns of
peers for the weeks when affected firms experienced CyberExposureT
                                                                 iw > 0.
   Results of contagion regressions are reported in columns (3)-(4) of Table 3. We find
that cyber risk exposure has a statistically significant negative effect on unaffected peer
firms. In other words, idiosyncratic exposure to cyber risk has the potential of propagating
to corporate peers in financial markets and to cause "systemic" events. Economically, one
additional cyber term decreases returns of peer firms by 2.76 bps. Roughly 36 mentions or


                                              25
more cause losses equalling 1 percentage point. These results are also robust to the presence
of country, industry, and week fixed effects. We include valuations of both affected and peer
firms as additional controls.
   In order to nail down the precision of our definition of peer firms, we now check whether
cyber risk exposure has any impact on non-peers. We define non-peers as firms that are from
the same location but not from the same industry as affected firms. We continue to define
industries and countries as 6-digit NAICS codes and headquarter locations, respectively.
Our left-hand-side variable is now weekly averages of day-to-day stock returns of all non-
peer firms for the same event weeks as before. Results are shown in columns (5)-(6) of Table
3. Reassuringly, we find a noisy zero effect of cyber risk exposure on non-peers, suggesting
that belonging to the same tightly defined industry cluster is a good proxy for financial
market connectedness.
   So far our analysis has included only our baseline measure CyberExposureT
                                                                           iw as the main
covariate. We now look at our topical indices as potential causes of direct and conta-
gion stock market effects. We focus on the CyberUncertaintyiw , CyberNegSentimentiw ,
CyberInsuranceiw , and CyberLossiw topics. For each topical index, we compute weekly
totals for weeks surrounding earnings calls with positive topical exposure. As before, our
dependent variables are weekly averages of day-to-day stock returns for affected, peer, and
non-affected firms, each defined accordingly.
   Table 4 reports the results. Each topical index has a negative and significant effect on
affected firms' performance, as can be seen from columns (1)-(4). The economic effect is
more than 50% higher for the "Negative Sentiment", "Insurance and Legal" and "Monetary
Loss" topics than for the baseline exposure measure. In other words, when cyber risk chatter
is pessimistic or also includes discussions of potential material economic loss or insurance
and legal claims, the stock market impact becomes more severe. Columns (5)-(8) present the
results for peer firms. All coefficients are negative and statistically significant. Relative to
the baseline total exposure measure, they are also economically more potent. For example,


                                                26
discussions of insurance and legal topics increase the impact on peers by 100% (-5.4 bps)
relative to the baseline estimate in Table 3 (-2.7 bps). Finally, columns (9)-(12) report
results for the non-peers. There are no economically or statistically significant effects of
topical cyber risk exposure on non-connected, non-peer firms.
    The average ratio of the number of peers to the number of affected firms, per country
and industry, is 23.17 with a standard deviation of 37 and the 1st and 99th percentiles equal
to 1 and 234, respectively. This implies that for every one firm with CyberExposureiw > 0
roughly 23 unaffected peer firms get exposed to cyber risk through financial market linkages.
Because the distribution of peer-to-affected firm ratios is very right-skewed, the scope for
downside risk is potentially significant.
    To sum up, results of this section suggest that "cyber risk shocks" can cause signifi-
cant stock market disruptions for the affected firms. Moreover, idiosyncratic cyber risk can
propagate through the network of peers in stock markets and cause ripple effects across the
financial system. We consider this finding as prima facie evidence for the systemic nature of
firm-level cyber risk.



8     Factor Structure in Cyber Risk and the Cross-Section

      of Stock Returns

    In this section we show that there is a factor structure in firm-level measures of cyber risk
exposure. Common cyber risk exposure is a factor that can help price the cross-section of
asset prices. We conjecture that firms that covary more negatively with the cyber risk latent
factor are more likely to experience higher excess returns, on average. That is, firms that earn
less in states of the world where aggregate cyber risk is high (i.e. low cyber risk beta stocks)
must demand higher excess returns in equilibrium. The economic cause of this mechanism
is that (a) some firms are fundamentally more reliant on business technologies that are more
prone to data breaches and malware attacks and (b) some firms are individually less able to


                                               27
insure against idiosyncratic or aggregate cyber attacks with operational risk capital.


8.1    CyberE Pricing Factor

   We begin by constructing our main pricing factor. We focus on cyber risk total ex-
posure, which is our main baseline measure. First, we compute the monthly average of
CyberExposureT   9
             it . Second, we fit an AR(1) model onto the time series and extract resid-
uals. This ensures that we capture shocks to cyber risk. Finally, we standardize these
residuals across the full sample, i.e. we subtract the mean and divide by the standard devi-
ation. Figure 19 plots the resulting time series of our factor which we label CyberE (Cyber
Exposure).


8.2    Portfolio Sorting

   Our first asset pricing test involves first running trailing-window 30-month time-series
regressions of firm-level excess returns on the CyberE factor and a constant. We require at
least 30 observations in these regressions. We extract the distribution of firm-level CyberE
betas and truncate it at the 1% and 99% levels. For each month, we perform a one-way beta
sort with either equal- or value-weighted average excess returns. Five portfolios are formed
and held for one month. Table 5 reports the results. We see that average portfolio returns
are decreasing in CyberE betas. Stocks in the first CyberE quantile have negative CyberE
betas and thus on average lose value when aggregate cyber risk exposure is high. In contrast,
stocks in the highest quantile hedge CyberE growth, paying off precisely when high cyber risk
states realize. The long-short portfolio built on CyberE beta sorted stocks pays an average
of -3.3% in returns per year. This excess returns spread cannot be readily explained away
by the market, size and book-to-market (Fama-French), and momentum pricing factors, as
evidenced by model alphas that are large and significantly different from zero.


   9 Whether   we normalize by transcript length or not doesn't affect the results.

                                                     28
8.3       Fama-MacBeth and the Price of Cyber Risk

   Our second asset pricing test is the Fama and MacBeth (1973) exercise. We formally
test whether the CyberE factor can explain abnormal returns of CyberE-beta sorted port-
folios. We repeat the time-series step from before and now form 10 cyber beta single-sorted
portfolios. In the second stage, we run cross-sectional regressions of average excess returns
of the 10 test assets on factor betas plus a constant. A good model features a sizable R2 ,
small constants, and small pricing errors (mean average pricing error, or MAPE).
   Table 6 reports the results from the cross-sectional estimation step. Columns (1) and (5)
show that the CAPM cannot price CyberE-beta sorted portfolios. R2 are low and MAPEs
are very large. When we introduce our factor in columns (2) and (6) we see that R2 increases
by 65+ percentage points. Pricing errors fall substantially. For example, the value-weighted
CyberE specification exhibits MAPE of just 50 basis points per year when just CyberE
and market factors are used in the estimation. The R2 of that specification is 0.74. We
also highlight that point estimates for the price of risk are always positive and statistically
significant at the 5% level.
   In columns (3) and (7) we add the Fama-French size and book-to-market factors and
observe that our factor is still economically and statistically significant. MAPEs drop to as
low as 25.5bps per year and the R-squared is 94%. Finally, in columns (4) and (8) we add
the momentum factor.10 The price of cyber risk is still positive and statistically significant.
The R2 reaches 95.8% and the MAPE drops to 22 bps per year.
   We conclude this section by emphasizing that there appears to be a strong factor structure
in firm-level exposure to cyber risk. In addition to the findings of Section 7.2 on contagion
effects, this is our second evidence in favor of cyber risk being a source of systemic risk for
financial markets.




  10 We   obtain the time-series for the momentum factor from the Kenneth French online data repository.

                                                    29
9      Determinants of Cybersecurity ETF Prices

     Our last exercise is to try and explain monthly movements in returns on some of the most
popular cybersecurity ETFs. We focus on the ETFMG Prime Cyber Security ETF (HACK)
and the First Trust NASDAQ Cybersecurity ETF (CIBR). We construct monthly returns on
the full available time-series of both indices and correlate them with our measures of firm-
level cyber risk exposure and the Fama-French three factors. Our goal is to understand if the
market price of cybersecurity ETFs reflects the fundamentals of cyber risk. Furthermore, we
wonder whether the two instruments could act as a hedge against cyber risk shocks.
     Figure 12 in the Online Appendix plots monthly returns on the S&P500 and on the two
cybersecurity ETFs. The three series are hardly quantitatively distinguishable; the Pearson
correlation coefficients between the HACK and CIBR ETFs with the market are 0.63 and
0.64 with p-values of (0.00) and (0.00), respectively. Table 11 in the Online Appendix
presents the full correlation heatmatrix. The two ETFs are correlated with the size factor
but, surprisingly, not with our text-based measures. Among our topical indices, the best
correlates are CyberPoliticsit , CyberInsuranceit , and CyberCryptoit . But the absolute values
of these correlation coefficients are low and they are all smaller than 25% (as a comparison
point, the coefficient with the size factor is about 48%11 . Interestingly, HACK and CIBR
ETFs do not appear to price the information contained in our baseline CyberExposureit
measure.
     We conclude that neither HACK nor CIBR cybersecurity ETF price movements can be
readily explained by microeconomic, text-based fundamental measures of cyber risk expo-
sure. This finding suggests that these instruments mostly reflects aggregate market returns,
are potentially mispriced and cannot not credibly serve as a hedge against cyber risk shocks.




    11 Recall
           that in our firm level panel regressions, the size of firms is a positive correlate of our cyber
exposure variable albeit one with a low explanatory power.

                                                    30
10      Discussion: Why Economics of Cybersecurity?

   In this section we supplement our empirical analysis with a general-interest discussion
on the importance of research on cyber security going forward.

   Among the Most Challenging Risks for Firms
   In recent surveys of financial market participants, firms consistently rank cyber risk as
second only to political or climate risk. According to the "Systemic Risk Survey" (SRS)
of the Bank of England, cyber threat is the second most cited risk in the UK financial
system (BoE, 2020). The SRS is conducted by the BoE on a biannual basis to estimate and
track market participants' views of risks to financial stability and resilience. The 2020H1
survey cites cyber uncertainty as the fastest rising form of risk. Roughly 50% of respondents
currently view cyberattacks as one of the most challenging risks for the management of a
firm.

   A New Type of Disasters
   The growing number of cyber breaches could complement the empirical disaster risk
literature. An important feature of cyber attacks is targeted ill will and presence of a
malignant attacker/criminal. This feature is shared with other forms of acts of terror such
as physical terrorism and related disasters (Kashyap and Wetherilt, 2019). In this sense,
cyber risk could be treated as a new type of disaster risk (Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006)) -
aggregate or sectoral. Equilibrium models with disasters help to rationalize some financial
and macroeconomic puzzles and facts.12 An important difficulty of the empirical disaster
risk literature is the relatively low number of actual international disasters. The direct effect
of disasters, as a result, potentially underestimates its expectational impact on risk premia.
Cyber risk exposure and realized incidents are likely to continue their rapid growth over the
next decades. To the extent that cyber risk exposure causes direct economic and financial

  12 Gabaix (2012) and Gourio (2012) are important contributions to disasters in business cycle research.
See Wachter and Tsai (2015) for a review of recent work on disaster risk in financial economics.

                                                   31
harm, a new generation of models with disaster risk could be calibrated with estimates of
cyber disaster risk and uncertainty.

   Both Idiosyncratic and Aggregate Shocks
   Cyber attacks can be viewed as proxies of negative idiosyncratic or aggregate shocks to
financial net worth. In February 2016, it was reported that 30+ fraudulent instructions
were issued by cyber criminals via the SWIFT network to transfer over $1 billion from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York accounts belonging to the Central Bank of Bangladesh
(Gopalakrishnan and Mogato, 2016). Over $50 million were successfully transferred and
never recovered, while the rest was either recovered or prevented via inspections and moni-
toring. The "Bangladesh Bank Robbery" is a peculiar form of a negative shock to bank net
worth. Because it involved only a single institutional victim, was essentially unforecastable,
and did not trigger mass second-order spillover effects on the Bangladeshi economy, we can
label this event as an uninsurable idiosyncratic negative net worth shock.
   In May 2017, a worldwide cyberattack took place that targeted hundreds of thousands
of computers in 150 countries (Bodkin et al., 2017). Attackers paralyzed computers with
the WannaCry ransomware cryptoworm that took private data hostage and demanded a
timely ransom for data release. Hundreds of millions of dollars in damages were lost due
to this event. Because the attack was international in nature, affected multiple institutions
simultaneously, this incident can be categorized as an aggregate negative net worth shock.
   In May of 2018, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) apparently warned banks of
an imminent large-scale operation attempting to empty ATMs of their holdings, a coordi-
nated cyber crime that would cause large losses for financial institutions (Kirk, 2018). Once
penetrated into banks' financial systems, attackers can install malware that removes limits
on payment card accounts and modifies internal ATM systems. Cyber criminals proceed
with payment card cloning using data from compromised point-of-sales. Stolen data is then
encoded into magnetic stripes on the backs of credit cards. Massive international coordi-
nated cashouts can trigger systemic bank runs. Small-scale attacks have already taken place

                                             32
in Japan, South Africa, and Turkey.
   Going forward, the frequency of both idiosyncratic and aggregate cyber shocks to net
worth may well outnumber the more traditional firm-level or global operational risks like
factory malfunctions, accounting scandals, weather disasters, etc.

   An Automation-Cyber Risk Trade-Off
   If we believe in automation as a trend, then the size and persistence of negative cyber
shocks is likely to grow in the future. Autor et al. (2003), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017),
Martinez (2021) among others study the intricate role that automation will play in the
evoluation of aggregate factor shares and labour income in the 21st century. Trend growth
of automation and its net impact on the number and nature of distinct labour tasks as well
as on productivity is likely to be very substantial.
   On one hand, trend growth in automation can be viewed as a persistent positive pro-
ductivity shock. On the other hand, advances in digital technology create new avenues
for malicious attackers, thieves, and cyber criminals to exploit the digital architecture and
disrupt proper functioning of financial transactions. For example, the emergence of cloud
technologies enables firms to store and access huge amounts of data that is crucial for their
operation. However, cyber attacks on security protocols of firms that manage such cloud
technologies (internally or through outsourcing) is a source of systemic risk - all firms that
are linked to the same cloud provider could be affected. Quantitatively, the cost of cyber risk
should be taken into count in models of automation-driven growth. In addition, Moll et al.
(2021) argue that new technologies accrue to the owners of capital in the form of higher
capital incomes, which feeds inequality. Disruptions to automation, caused by cyber risk
exposure or actual cyber attacks, could thus have immediate implications for income and
wealth inequality.

   Cyber Networks
   Digital innovation and the emergence of Fintech as a form of payment creates a new


                                              33
channel for the escalation and propagation of cyber attacks. On June 20, 2019 the Bank
of England announced that it intended to allow financial technology companies access to
bilateral payment systems on a level playing field with major commercial banks (Giles and
Binham, 2019). Technically, new payment providers such as Facebook would be allowed to
store funds overnight in interest-bearing accounts at the Central Bank. This would facilitate
the spread and adoption of Diem (formerly Libra), Facebook's digital currency, as a novel
form of payment. The end goal of this move would be to enable the BoE to regulate the
fintech sector more efficiently.
   This, of course, would make fintech firms a target for cyber criminals. Traditionally,
commercial banks have been a routine target of cyber attacks and even some Central Banks
have been hit. In the Bank of Bangladesh heist of 2016, criminals stole over $50+ million
via fraudulent transfers from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York accounts belonging
to BoB (Gopalakrishnan and Mogato, 2016). But commercial banks are now more heavily
invested in IT security and are, generally, better prepared for such cyber incidents both in
terms of security management and regulatory liquidity buffers (Duffie and Younger, 2019).
It remains to be seen how fintech companies will withstand future cyber threats, because
access to central banking vaults would put a bounty target on their backs.



11     Conclusion

   We build novel text-based firm-level measures of cyber risk exposure. We classify content
of cyber risk discussions based on various topics of interest such as monetary loss, legal and
insurance claims, sentiment, etc. Our approach leverages state-of-the-art techniques from
computational linguistics and identifies cyber risk related textual bigrams in the texts of
quarterly corporate earnings call announcements. We document an important increase of
exposure to cyber risk around the world, in particular post 2013, affecting in relative terms
more and more Europe and Asia. There are interesting correlates, worthy of further inves-



                                             34
tigation, between cyber risk intensity and political cycles or the value of crypto currencies.
While still mainly hitting the IT and services sectors, our evidence suggests that cyber risk is
spreading towards the financial sector, in particular insurance companies. We also find that
firms that are large or are older, have a high ratio of intangible assets, and lots of liquidity
are more likely to be exposed to cyber risk than the median firm.
    We validate our measure by cross-referencing with databases containing reported cyber
attacks and show that our text-based measures can predict future realized cyber attacks.
Exposure to cyber risk has an economically and statistically significant negative effect on
stock market performance of affected firms. Moreover, we find strong evidence of contagion
effects - we trace out the impact on firms that did not discuss anything related to cyber risk
but are in the same country and industry as the affected firm. Idiosyncratic firm-level cyber
risk thus has the potential of spreading through interconnected financial markets.
    There is a factor structure in firm-level discussions of and references to cyber risk. We
construct a new pricing factor - CyberE - which is based on our text-based cyber risk
exposure measure. Our factor can help price the cross-section of stock returns. Firms
that are more sensitive to spikes in aggregate cyber risk, proxied by our factor, require
equilibrium compensation via higher excess returns. Finally we find that existing cyber
ETFs reflect much more market risk and the conventional size factor than exposure to cyber
risk.



References

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017): "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
  Markets," NBER Working Paper, 23285.

Amir, E., S. Levi, and T. Livne (2018): "Do firms underreport information on cyber-
  attacks? Evidence from capital markets," Review of Accounting Studies, 23.




                                              35
Autor, D., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): "The Skill Content of Recent Techno-
  logical Change: An Empirical Exploration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4).

Barro, R. (2006): "Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(3).

Biener, C., M. Eing, and J. H. Wirfs (2015): "Insurability of Cyber Risk: An Empirical
  Analysis," Working Paper, 151.

Bloom, N. (2009): "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 77(3), 623­685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry
  (2018): "Really Uncertain Business Cycles," Econometrica, 86(3).

Bodkin, H., B. Henderson, L. Donnelly, and R. Mendick (2017): "Government
  under pressure after NHS crippled in global cyber attack as weekend of chaos looms," The
  Telegraph.

BoE (2020): "Bank of England Systemic Risk Survey," .

Corera, G. (2017): "Cyber-attack: US and UK blame North Korea for WannaCry," BBC,
  December 19.

Crosignani, M., M. Macchiavelli, and A. F. Silva (2020): "Pirates without Borders:
  The Propagation of Cyberattacks through Firms' Supply Chains," Federal Reserve Bank
  of New York staff report No 937.

CSIS (2014): "Net Losses: Estimating the Global Cost of Cybercrime," Report.

Duffie, D. and J. Younger (2019): "Cyber Runs," Hutchins Center Working Paper, 51.

Eisenbach, T., A. Kovner, and M. J. Lee (2020): "Cyber Risk and the U.S. Financial
  System: A Pre-Mortem Analysis," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff report, 909.

ESRB (2020): "Systemic Cyber Risk," Report, February.

                                           36
Fama, E. and K. French (1993): "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds," Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1).

Fama, E. and J. MacBeth (1973): "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 81(3).

Florakis, C., C. Louca, R. Michaely, and M. Weber (2020): "Cybersecurity Risk,"
  NBER Working Paper 28196.

Gabaix, X. (2012): "Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles
  in Macro-Finance," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2).

Gentzkow, M., B. T. Kelly, and M. Taddy (2021): "Text as Data," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, Forthcoming.

Giles, C. and C. Binham (2019): "BoE to grant tech companies access to overnight
  accounts," Financial Times.

Gopalakrishnan, R. and M. Mogato (2016): "Bangladesh Bank official's computer was
  hacked to carry out $81 million heist," Reuters.

Gourio, F. (2012): "Disaster Risk and Business Cycles," American Economic Review,
  102(6).

Greenberg, I. (2021): "Fifth-generation cyberattacks are here. How can the IT industry
  adapt?" WEF, February 12.

Hassan, T., S. Hollander, L. v. Lent, and A. Tahoun (2019): "Firm-Level Political
  Risk: Measurement and Effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4).

------ (2020a): "Firm-Level Exposure to Epidemic Diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1,"
  Working Paper.

------ (2020b): "The Global Impact of Brexit Uncertainty," Working Paper.

                                            37
Kamiya, S., J. Kang, J. Kim, A. Milidonis, and R. Stulz (2020): "Risk Management,
  Firm Reputation, and the Impact of Successful Cyberattacks on Target Firms," Journal
  of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Kashyap, A. and A. Wetherilt (2019): "Some Principles for Regulating Cyber Risk,"
  AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109, 482­487.

Kirk, J. (2018): "FBI Warns Of Pending Large Scale ATM Cashout Strike," Bankinfosecu-
  rity.

Kovacs, E. (2018): "U.S., Canada, Australia Attribute NotPetya Attack to Russia," Secu-
  rity Week, February 16.

Lallie, H. S., L. A. Shepherd, J. R. Nurse, A. Erola, G. Epiphaniou, C. Maple,
  and X. Bellekens (2021): "Cyber security in the age of COVID-19: A timeline and
  analysis of cyber-crime and cyber-attacks during the pandemic," Computers Security,
  105.

Martinez, J. (2021): "Putty Clay Automation," CEPR Discussion Paper 16022.

Moll, B., L. Rachel, and P. Restrepo (2021): "Uneven Growth: Automation's Impact
  on Income and Wealth Inequality," 28440.

ORX (2020): "2020 Annual Banking and Insurance Operational Loss Reports," .

Rietz, T. (1988): "The equity risk premium: a solution," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  22(1).

Sautner, Z., L. van Lent, G. Vilkov, and R. Zhang (2020): "Firm-level climate
  change exposure," SSRN Working Paper, 3642508.

Tosun, O. K. (2019): "Cyber Attacks and Stock Market Activity," Working Paper.




                                             38
Wachter, J. and J. Tsai (2015): "Disaster Risk and Its Implications for Asset Pricing,"
  Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7.

WEF (2016): "Understanding Systemic Cyber Risk," World Economic Forum: Global
  Agenda Council on Risk and Resilience.

Woods, D., T. Moore, and A. Simpson (2019): "The County Fair Cyber Loss Distri-
  bution: Drawing Inferences from Insurance Prices," Working Paper.




                                           39
                                    Figures and Tables
                    Figure 1: Global Heatmap of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                                   2010




       500 - 1800
       100 - 500
       50 - 100
       25 - 50
       10 - 25
       5 - 10
       0-5
       No data




                                                   2015




       500 - 1800
       100 - 500
       50 - 100
       25 - 50
       10 - 25
       5 - 10
       0-5
       No data




                                                   2020




       500 - 1800
       100 - 500
       50 - 100
       25 - 50
       10 - 25
       5 - 10
       0-5
       No data



Notes: Country-level totals of CyberExposureTit for different years. Higher values correspond to darker shades
of brown. The legends show five ranges for values of CyberExposureT   it and their corresponding colors on the
map.                                                  40
      Figure 2: US Heatmaps of Cyber Risk Exposure and Sentiment
                                             (a) Total Exposure


            WA
            151                                                                                  NH, 107
                                 MT             ND                                               VT, 0      ME
                                 11              0                                                           8
        OR                                                 MN
        66             ID                                  119                                          MA, 1321
                        8                                              WI
                                                SD                                                NY       RI, 7
                                                12                     67                        1414
                                   WY                                          MI
                                    0                                          83
                                                             IA                              PA           CT, 191
                                                NE           15                              252         NJ, 372
             NV                                 14                                  OH
             13             UT                                           IL   IN    104                  DE, 22
      CA                    48         CO                               459   38          WV            MD, 1100
     4699                              167        KS                                      15 VA
                                                                 MO             KY          2698
                                                  169            219            42
                                                                              TN             NC
                                                                              119             99
                       AZ                             OK
                       562         NM                 55         AR                        SC
                                    3                            31                        54
                                                                        MS    AL     GA
                                                                         5    10     778
                                                TX                LA
                                                966               23
                  AK                                                                       FL
                   1                                                                       322
                                             (372,4699]           (107,372]          (38,107]
                                             (10,38]              [0,10]

Notes: State-level totals of CyberExposureT
                                          it over 2002q1-2020q4. Higher values correspond to
darker shades of brown. The legend shows five ranges for values of CyberExposureTit and their
corresponding colors on the map.


                                             (b) Net Sentiment


           WA
           -18                                                                                  NH, -67
                                 MT            ND                                               VT, 0      ME
                                 -14            0                                                           2
       OR                                                  MN
       -4          ID                                      -32                                          MA, -145
                   -2                                                  WI
                                               SD                                                 NY       RI, 2
                                                0                      18                        -205
                                  WY                                           MI
                                   0                                           -5
                                                            IA                              PA           CT, -25
                                                NE          -6                              -26         NJ, -68
             NV                                 -3                              OH
              1         UT                                            IL  IN    23                      DE, -1
     CA                  6             CO                            -59 -25        WV                  MD, -15
    -598                               -21        KS                                 2 VA
                                                                 MO          KY        307
                                                 -116            52          10
                                                                           TN          NC
                                                                          -33           -6
                    AZ                               OK
                   -171            NM                -23         AR                  SC
                                   -4                             7                  -15
                                                                     MS AL -361  GA
                                                                      -3   0
                                                TX               LA
                                               -146               10
                  AK                                                                       FL
                   0                                                                       -2
                                              (2,307]            (-2,2]             (-15,-2]
                                              (-59,-15]          [-598,-59]

Notes: State-level totals of CyberNetSentimentT
                                              it over 2002q1-2020q4. Higher values correspond
to darker shades of brown. The legend shows five ranges for values of CyberNetSentimentTit and
their corresponding colors on the map.
               Figure 3: Global Flowmap of Major Cyber Risk Exposure




Notes: This figure visualizes the flow of CyberExposureT   it by major origin and destination. Origins (destina-
tions) are unfilled (filled) circles. The six destination regions are United States, United Kingdom, Europe,
Americas (ex US), Africa, and Asia. Destination regions are defined as headquarter locations of firms with
CyberCountryT  it > 0. Origin countries are the underlying terms/countries behind CyberCountryit . The
                                                                                                        T
numbers behind this flowmap are summarized in Table 6 of the Online Appendix. This flowmap was created
on the open source platform Flowmap.blue which was developed by Ilya Bolodin and is freely available under
the MIT license.




                                                      42
                                         Figure 4: Firm-Level Cyber Risk - Global Exposure




                          4
                                                                                                                       Covid-19
                                                                                                           WannaCry




                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                       Equifax




                                                                                                                                        Percent of Calls with CyberExposure>0, %
                                   3


                                                                                                   Petya




                                                                                                                                    4
             Mean of CyberExposure




                                                                                       Anthem, Sony


                                                                                  Adobe, Target
                       2




                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                            Tencent


                                           BuddyLinks    McAfee report
                          1




                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                    1
                          0




                                       2002q1           2005q4           2009q3          2013q2            2017q1          2020q4

                                                    Mean of CyberRisk                  Fraction of Calls Disucssing Cyber Risk, %


Notes: Time series average of CyberExposureit over all firms in each quarter, normalized by the standard
deviation of the entire sample, and the time-varying percentage of all earnings calls with CyberExposureit >
0. All underlying cyber risk terms are listed in Table 1 of the Online Appendix.




                                                                                  43
                          Figure 5: Correlations with other Indices of Risk and Volatility




                                                                                             12
          4




                                                                                                                                          4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
                                                                                             10
          3




                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
 Mean of CyberRisk




                                                                                                                                 Mean of CyberRisk
                                                                                             Mean of PRisk




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIX
         2




                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
          1




                                                                                             6




                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
          0




                                                                                             4




                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                 2002q1    2005q4         2009q3        2013q2         2017q1           2020q4                                                   2002q1   2005q4        2009q3         2013q2            2017q1         2020q4

                                    Mean of CyberRisk            Mean of PRisk                                                                                         Mean of CyberRisk                 VIX




                          (a) Firm-Level Political Risk                                                                                                                    (b) VIX
                                                                                             12
          4




                                                                                                                                          4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                       10
          3




                                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                             Mean of Prisk (Technology)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean of Prisk (Trade)
 Mean of CyberRisk




                                                                                                                                 Mean of CyberRisk
         2




                                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4        5
          1




                                                                                             6




                                                                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
          0




                                                                                             4




                                                                                                                                          0




                 2002q1    2005q4         2009q3        2013q2         2017q1           2020q4                                                   2002q1   2005q4        2009q3         2013q2            2017q1         2020q4

                              Mean of CyberRisk            Mean of Prisk (Technology)                                                                          Mean of CyberRisk                Mean of Prisk (Trade)




                 (c) Firm-Level Political Risk (Technology)                                                                                          (d) Firm-Level Political Risk (Trade)
Notes: Time series average of CyberExposureit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample,
and three external indices of uncertainty. Panel (a) plots the firm-level political risk (PRiskt ) index from
Hassan et al. (2019). The Pearson correlation coefficient with the cyber risk measure is 0.4040 with the
p-value of (0.003). Panel (b) plots the Cboe Volatility Index (VIX). The Pearson correlation coefficient
with the cyber risk measure is -0.1159 with the p-value of (0.3221). Panel (c) plots the technology topic of
firm-level political risk from Hassan et al. (2019). The Pearson correlation coefficient with the cyber risk
measure is 0.3492 with the p-value of (0.003). Panel (d) plots the trade topic of firm-level political risk from
Hassan et al. (2019). The Pearson correlation coefficient with the cyber risk measure is 0.6096 with the
p-value of (0.000).




                                                                                                                            44
                                              Figure 6: Risk and Uncertainty




                         3
             Mean of CyberUncertainty
             1           0    2




                                    2002q1   2005q4     2009q3        2013q2   2017q1      2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberUncertaintyit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample.
All terms behind the "Risk and Uncertainty" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                      Figure 7: Politics
                         5
                         4
             Mean of CyberPolitics
               2         1
                         0  3




                                    2002q1   2005q4     2009q3        2013q2   2017q1      2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberPoliticsit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample.
All terms behind the "Politics" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                                 45
                                                                                             Figure 8: Sentiment




                                                                                                                                 4
               4




                                                                                                                                             3
                           3




                                                                                                                   Mean of CyberNegSentiment
 Mean of CyberPosSentiment




                                                                                                                               2
            2




                                                                                                                                 1
               1
               0




                                                                                                                                 0
                           2002q1   2005q4   2009q3                                2013q2    2017q1       2020q4                             2002q1       2005q4    2009q3    2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                      (a) Positive Sentiment                                                                                               (b) Negative Sentiment
                                                                    1
                                                                    0
                                                      Mean of CyberNetSentiment
                                                             -2     -3
                                                                    -4  -1




                                                                                  2002q1    2005q4       2009q3                                  2013q2    2017q1    2020q4



                                                                                                     (c) Net Sentiment
Notes: Time series average of CyberPosSentimentit , CyberNegSentimentit , and CyberNetSentimentit , each
normalized by the standard deviation of the respective sample. All terms behind the three sentiment topics
are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.




                                                                                                              46
                                               Figure 9: Insurance and Legal




                         4          3
             Mean of CyberInsurance
                      2  1
                         0




                                    2002q1   2005q4     2009q3        2013q2   2017q1    2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberInsuranceit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample.
All terms behind the "Insurance and Legal" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                  Figure 10: Monetary Loss
                         4
                         3
             Mean of CyberLoss
                  2      1
                         0




                                    2002q1   2005q4     2009q3        2013q2   2017q1    2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberLossit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample. All
terms behind the "Monetary Loss" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                                 47
                                                   Figure 11: Social Media




                        6
             Mean of CyberSocial
                        2
                        0     4




                                 2002q1   2005q4        2009q3        2013q2   2017q1     2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberSocialit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample. All
terms behind the "Social Media" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                     Figure 12: Crypto
                        6        4
              Mean of CyberCrypto
             2          0




                                 2002q1   2005q4        2009q3        2013q2   2017q1     2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberCryptoit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample.
All terms behind the "Crypto" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                                 48
                                                    Figure 13: Global Events




                        5
                        4
             Mean of CyberGlobal
               2        1
                        0  3




                                  2002q1   2005q4         2009q3        2013q2   2017q1   2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberGlobalit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample. All
terms behind the "Global Events" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                     Figure 14: Pandemics
                        8
                        6
             Mean of CyberPandemics
                        4
                        2
                        0




                                  2002q1   2005q4         2009q3        2013q2   2017q1   2020q4


Notes: Time series average of CyberPandemicsit , normalized by the standard deviation of the entire sample.
All terms behind the "Pandemics' topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                                   49
        Figure 15: Global Cyber Risk Exposure - Decomposition by Region



            5
            4
            3
            2
            1
            0




                  2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


                         US             UK            Europe            Americas            Africa          Asia


                      (a) Percent of All Calls Discussing Cyber Risk, by Region
            1
            .8
            .6
            .4
            .2
            0




                  2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


                         US             UK            Europe            Americas            Africa          Asia


                           (b) % of Global Cyber Risk Discussions, by Region
Notes: Region-specific totals of CyberExposureT
                                              it . Regions are defined by the location of firm headquarters
from Compustat. On each bar, regional categories are in the following order from bottom to top: US, UK,
Europe, Americas (ex US), Africa, Asia.
                                                             50
       Figure 16: Global Cyber Risk Exposure - Decomposition by Industry


             5



             4



             3



             2



             1



             0   2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


                           Mining              Manufacturing          Trade               IT                Finance

                           Real Estate         Services               Education           Health            Other




                    (a) Percent of All Calls Discussing Cyber Risk, by Industry



             1



            .8



            .6



            .4



            .2



             0    2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


                           Mining               Manufacturing         Trade               IT                Finance

                           Real Estate          Services              Education           Health            Other




                         (b) % of Global Cyber Risk Discussions, by Industry
Notes: Industry-specific totals of CyberExposureT it . Industries are defined based on the 2-code NAICS
classification. On each bar, industry categories are in the following order from bottom to top: Mining,
Manufacturing, Trade, IT, Finance, Real Estate, Services, Education, Health, Other.
                                                                51
Figure 17: Global Cyber Risk Exposure - Decomposition by Finance Sub-
Industries


              1



             .8



             .6



             .4



             .2



              0    2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


                            Monetary Authorities        Banks               Non-Banks                Other Intermediaries

                            Brokerage and Dealing       Insurance           Funds and Trusts




Notes: Financial industry-specific totals of CyberExposureTit . Finance industries are defined based on the
4-code NAICS classification. On each bar, industry categories are in the following order from bottom to top:
Monetary Authorities, Banks, Non-Banks, Other Intermediaries, Brokerage and Dealing, Insurance, Funds
and Trusts.




                                                                52
                                                  Figure 18: Predicting Realized Cyberattacks




                               1         .8
              Probability of a Cyberattack
                0     .2      .4
                               -.2
                               -.4 .6




                                              0   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
                                                                 Cyber Risk Exposure

Notes: This figure plots the margins plot from a firm-level logit regression of the realized cyberattack indicator
on our text-based cyber risk total exposure measure, firm-level controls, and fixed effects. The cyberattack
indicator captures whether a firm reports an actual cyberattack at least once within the next 8 quarters.
Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                      53
        Figure 19: Cyber Risk Exposure (CyberE) - Monthly Pricing Factor




                           6            4
             Cyber Risk Exposure Factor
                          20
                           -2




                                      2002m1   2005m10   2009m7        2013m4   2017m1    2020m10


Notes: The monthly pricing factor is defined as residuals from an AR(1) process which is fit onto the monthly
sum of CyberExposureTit . The series is then standardized over the entire 2002:m1-2020m12 sample.




                                                                  54
Table 1: Predicting Future Cyberattacks with Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure

   Logit Model             Dependent Variable: Firm-Level Indicator of Reporting a Cyberattack within t+8 Quarters

                              (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)

   CyberExposure           0.0802***   0.0660**
                            (0.0272)   (0.0275)
   CyberUncertainty                                -0.2001
                                                  (0.4068)
   CyberPosSentiment                                             0.0984
                                                                (0.0996)
   CyberNegSentiment                                                       0.0624**
                                                                           (0.0271)
   CyberNetSentiment                                                                  -0.0808**
                                                                                       (0.0353)
   CyberInsurance                                                                                 0.0844**
                                                                                                  (0.0358)
   CyberLoss                                                                                                 0.0759**
                                                                                                             (0.0368)

   Firm Controls              No         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   Year Fixed Effect          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   Industry Fixed Effect      Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   Observations             151706      60610      60610         60610      60610      60610       60610      60610
   pseudo R2                 0.083      0.171      0.170         0.170      0.170      0.171       0.170      0.170

Notes: Probability of reporting a cyberattack anytime over the next 8 quarters as a function of our text-
based cyber risk measures. The quarterly sample is 2002:q1-2019q4, ending on the last quarter for which
realized cyberattack data was available as of March 2021. Realized cyberattack data is from PRC. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                           55
                             Table 2: Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure

Probit Model                                         Dependent Variable: Firm-level Indicator of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)                 (4)                   (5)             (6)

                             CyberExposure   CyberUncertainty   CyberPosSentiment    CyberNegSentiment     CyberNetSentiment   CyberCountry

PP&E / Assets                     0.3170          -0.0148           0.7723**                0.3048                 0.5219         -0.1575
                                (0.2731)         (0.5662)            (0.3099)              (0.2884)              (0.3217)        (0.3297)
Intangibles / Assets           1.0656***        1.0501***           1.2684***             0.9479***             1.1552***       0.9374***
                                (0.1960)         (0.3505)            (0.2328)              (0.2444)              (0.2308)        (0.2439)
CAPEX / Assets                  -0.3971*          -0.1583           -0.5134**               -0.3653             -0.4926**       -0.6993**
                                (0.2365)         (0.4226)            (0.2617)              (0.3090)              (0.2406)        (0.3205)
Cash Flow / Assets              -2.4574*          -1.9694             -1.0709               -0.9215               -0.5686         -0.7299
                                (1.2874)         (1.7505)            (2.1063)              (1.8691)              (1.8384)        (1.5214)
Long-Term Debt / Assets           0.0646           0.1342             0.0816                0.0772                 0.0662          0.2175
                                (0.0837)         (0.2098)            (0.1035)              (0.1093)              (0.1045)        (0.1411)
Liquidity Ratio                0.6482***           0.6850           0.8028***             0.8670***              0.6274**         0.5598*
                                (0.2412)         (0.4432)            (0.2672)              (0.2706)              (0.2728)        (0.3133)
Log (Size)                     0.1261***        0.1013***           0.1204***             0.1101***             0.1070***       0.1245***
                                (0.0181)         (0.0326)            (0.0209)              (0.0229)              (0.0191)        (0.0252)
Debt / Assets                    -0.1336           0.3481             -0.0741               0.1261                -0.1327         0.1720
                                (0.1525)         (0.3101)            (0.1980)              (0.1953)              (0.2161)        (0.2207)
Log (Age)                        -0.0058          -0.0622             -0.0647               -0.0793               -0.0303          0.1129
                                (0.0826)         (0.1510)            (0.0974)              (0.1087)              (0.0856)        (0.1012)
Equity Net Issuance               0.0825           0.0068             -0.1659                0.2240               -0.1375         0.7099*
                                (0.3656)         (0.7952)            (0.4778)              (0.4809)              (0.4862)        (0.4118)
ROA                               1.2804           2.0515             -0.0949               0.7725                -0.8002        2.2110*
                                (1.2491)         (1.7329)            (2.0688)              (1.8494)              (1.7801)        (1.1620)
S&P Rating                        0.0122           0.0198              0.0176                0.0139                0.0082        0.0510**
                                (0.0177)         (0.0368)            (0.0207)              (0.0206)              (0.0217)        (0.0259)
Sales / Assets                   1.4588*          -0.8862             0.9613                1.0599                 1.2531          0.9551
                                (0.8074)         (1.9782)            (0.9506)              (1.1672)              (0.9534)        (1.2560)
Tobin's Q                         0.0107           0.0219              0.0050               -0.0260                0.0087          0.0095
                                (0.0201)         (0.0372)            (0.0248)              (0.0329)              (0.0238)        (0.0265)
Book to Market Equity            -0.0733          -0.1492             -0.0979               -0.1021               -0.1049         -0.0079
                                (0.0597)         (0.1685)            (0.0705)              (0.0800)              (0.0760)        (0.0863)
Operational Costs / Assets       -1.0813           1.0824             -0.4043               -0.7853               -0.7199         -0.6086
                                (0.8197)         (1.9928)            (0.9541)              (1.1812)              (0.9522)        (1.2630)
Market Beta                      -0.0082          0.0630              -0.0131               0.0137                0.0190          0.0247
                                (0.0354)         (0.0677)            (0.0462)              (0.0446)              (0.0501)        (0.0494)

Quarter Fixed Effect              Yes              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes             Yes
Country Fixed Effect              Yes              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes             Yes
Industry Fixed Effect             Yes              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes             Yes
Observations                     74341            34651                 68414               69344                 66589           59617
pseudo R2                        0.229            0.234                 0.219               0.228                 0.187           0.208

             Notes: Probit regression of firm-level cyber risk measures on various balance sheet and income statement
             characteristics. All variables are defined in Table 3 of the Online Appendix. The quarterly sample is 2002:q1-
             2020q4. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%
             and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                   56
                 Table 2: Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure (Continued)

Probit Model                                     Dependent Variable: Firm-level Indicator of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                  (7)             (8)               (9)           (10)         (11)           (12)           (13)

                             CyberPandemics   CyberCrypto    CyberInsurance    CyberLoss    CyberSocial   CyberGlobal    CyberPolitics

PP&E / Assets                     0.2755           1.6551      1.1885***          0.4799        1.4708        -1.7795        0.0550
                                (0.7028)         (1.0169)       (0.3892)        (0.3617)      (1.3305)       (4.8683)      (0.5169)
Intangibles / Assets              0.5889          0.9188*      1.4566***       1.1284***        1.4681        -1.7261     1.3470***
                                (0.5979)         (0.4695)       (0.2817)        (0.2844)      (0.9225)       (1.6316)      (0.4020)
CAPEX / Assets                   -0.2783         -0.9455*        -0.1366         -0.3968       -0.3297        1.5874        -0.2781
                                (0.5882)         (0.5663)       (0.4055)        (0.3231)      (0.8617)       (1.9690)      (0.4097)
Cash Flow / Assets                2.9098      -13.9126***        -3.1388       -3.6773**    -7.9161***       91.6411        1.3686
                                (2.1704)         (4.4872)       (2.5667)        (1.5217)      (2.9609)      (67.0790)      (1.9407)
Long-Term Debt / Assets          -0.5250           0.5117         0.0758          0.0522     2.9201***        7.0916*     0.4958**
                                (0.3461)         (0.3293)       (0.1656)        (0.1350)      (0.9385)       (3.7475)      (0.2056)
Liquidity Ratio                 1.2783*           -0.8107         0.4828        0.7086**        0.9902        -2.1304      1.6391**
                                (0.7083)         (1.0592)       (0.3591)        (0.3139)      (1.0153)       (2.5588)      (0.7106)
Log (Size)                      0.0803*            0.1619      0.1243***       0.0922***     0.1504***         0.3710        0.0617
                                (0.0441)         (0.1118)       (0.0272)        (0.0238)      (0.0583)       (0.2311)      (0.0382)
Debt / Assets                     0.4522           0.4846        -0.0380         -0.2552       -0.1622         1.9382       -0.0658
                                (0.5498)         (0.5493)       (0.3033)        (0.2286)      (0.5277)       (2.3499)      (0.3257)
Log (Age)                         0.4325          -0.3044         0.0267          0.0784       -0.1356         1.1454        0.1190
                                (0.3042)         (0.2670)       (0.1490)        (0.1072)      (0.2218)       (0.7845)      (0.1964)
Equity Net Issuance              -1.7183           1.2072        -1.4871         -0.7007        0.2979      -45.4788*        0.1151
                                (1.0660)         (2.0502)       (1.1426)        (0.6512)      (1.1943)      (23.8438)      (0.6612)
ROA                              -1.2907           5.1689       3.5552*         2.5753*      7.0065**        -94.5802        1.3733
                                (1.9882)         (3.7912)       (1.9534)        (1.4506)      (2.8152)      (72.6328)      (1.4708)
S&P Rating                        0.0534          -0.0905       0.0503*         0.0505**       -0.0217         0.1260       -0.0134
                                (0.0533)         (0.0742)       (0.0263)        (0.0247)      (0.0607)       (0.1269)      (0.0303)
Sales / Assets                   -3.1632        9.4180**         1.8274          0.5807        -0.9744        5.2041        0.5860
                                (3.0236)         (4.5974)       (1.8713)        (1.5519)      (4.1410)      (12.0847)      (2.2870)
Tobin's Q                        -0.0765        -0.3513**         0.0096         -0.0350       -0.0818      -0.4446**       -0.0019
                                (0.0484)         (0.1712)       (0.0376)        (0.0447)      (0.0781)       (0.1840)      (0.0452)
Book to Market Equity            -0.3716       -1.1101***        -0.1218         -0.1272       -0.6619     -15.4518***    0.1086**
                                (0.2283)         (0.3843)       (0.1422)        (0.1088)      (0.4416)       (4.0433)      (0.0528)
Operational Costs / Assets        3.9248         -8.7336*        -1.4798         -0.4025        2.4465        5.7803        -0.1161
                                (3.0691)         (4.7470)       (1.8901)        (1.5581)      (4.1919)      (14.0201)      (2.3677)
Market Beta                      0.0854           -0.1035         0.0196         -0.0247        0.0113       0.5231*        0.1042
                                (0.1596)         (0.1699)       (0.0775)        (0.0503)      (0.1229)       (0.3112)      (0.0723)

Quarter Fixed Effect              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Country Fixed Effect              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Industry Fixed Effect             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                     3430            2612            38005           58847         3897            714          22198
pseudo R2                        0.221           0.195           0.206           0.189         0.193          0.482         0.165

       Notes: Probit regression of firm-level cyber risk measures on various balance sheet and income statement
       characteristics. All variables are defined in Table 3 of the Online Appendix. The quarterly sample is 2002:q1-
       2020q4. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%
       and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                               57
                              Table 3: Cyber Risk and Stock Market Effects


                         Dependent Variable: Average Daily Returns for Weeks Surrounding Earnings Calls
                               Affected Firms                        Peers                          Non-Peers
                         Unweighted       Weighted       Unweighted       Weighted       Unweighted          Weighted
                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
CyberExposure            -0.0355***      -0.0430***        -0.0239*      -0.0276***        -0.00385          -0.000468
                          (0.0107)        (0.0102)         (0.0119)       -0.00903         -0.00323           -0.00135
Additional controls           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Industry fixed effect         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Week fixed effect             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Country fixed effect          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes                Yes
Observations                 2782            2782            2782            2782            2782              2782
R2                           0.113           0.108           0.346           0.316           0.93              0.858

       Notes: Regressions of average daily stock returns for calendar weeks surrounding earnings calls with positive
       CyberExposureit . Affected firms are those who record CyberExposureit > 0. Peers are defined as firms with
       CyberExposureit = 0 but which are from the same country and industry (defined by the 6-digit NAICS
       classification) as the affected firms. Non-peers are defined as firms with CyberExposureit = 0 and which are
       from the same country but not the same industry (defined by the 6-digit NAICS classification) as the affected
       firms. Columns (2), (4), and (6) report results for value-weighted returns. Standard errors are clustered at
       the 2-digit NAICS level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The
       sample is over 2002w4-2020w52.




                                                            58
                                  Table 4: Cyber Risk Topics and Stock Market Effects

                                              Dependent Variable: Average Daily Returns for Weeks Surrounding Earnings Calls

                                   Affected Firms                                          Peers                                   Non-Peers

                         (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)             (7)      (8)        (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)

CyberUncertainty      -0.041***                                    -0.045***                                           0.017
                       (0.010)                                      (0.006)                                           (0.017)
CyberNegSentiment                 -0.066***                                      -0.054***                                       0.001
                                   (0.008)                                        (0.009)                                       (0.002)
CyberInsurance                                -0.074*                                          -0.054***                                   0.003
                                              (0.033)   -0.064**                                (0.010)    -0.046**                       (0.008)    -0.017
CyberLoss                                                (0.028)                                            (0.016)                                 (0.015)

Additional controls      Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry FE              Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Week FE                  Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country FE               Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations             338        1200       285        481         338          1719             285      481       338      1719       285       481
R2                      0.106       0.108     0.046      0.214       0.460         0.325           0.414    0.420     0.818     0.853     0.874     0.910

               Notes: Regressions of average daily stock returns for calendar weeks surrounding earnings calls with a
               positive cyber risk topical exposure. Affected firms are those who with positive exposure. Peers are defined
               as firms with zero exposure but which are from the same country and industry (defined by the 6-digit NAICS
               classification) as the affected firms. Non-peers are defined as firms with zero cyber risk exposure and which
               are not from the same country and industry (defined by the 6-digit NAICS classification) as the affected
               firms. All results are for value-weighted returns. Standard errors are clustered at the 2-digit NAICS. *, **,
               and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. The sample is over 2002w4-2020w52.




                                                                            59
                            Table 5: Cyber Risk Sorted Portfolios


                    Panel A: CyberE-Beta-Sorted Value Weighted Portfolios
                                           L                                               H         H-L
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)
Average Excess Returns (%)               0.978      0.850   0.801           0.755       0.708     -0.269**
Volatility (%)                            5.349    4.304    4.112           4.309        5.267      1.892
Alpha CAPM                               -0.174     0.018   0.099           0.115        0.088    -0.262**
Alpha Fama-French                        -0.060     0.101 0.166**          0.191**       0.192    -0.251**
Alpha Fama-French, Momentum             -0.0493    0.113* 0.196***        0.212***     0.231**    -0.280**
Average Market Cap ($bn)                 20.734    21.182 21.043           20.844       20.330
Cyber Exposure beta                      -3.523    -1.188  -0.034           1.119        3.579
Number of Months                           186       186     186             186          186        186
                    Panel B: CyberE-Beta-Sorted Equal Weighted Portfolios
                                           L                                               H         H-L
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)
Average Excess Returns (%)               0.987      0.852   0.799           0.759       0.712     -0.275**
Volatility (%)                            5.355    4.299    4.097           4.279        5.260      1.897
Alpha CAPM                               -0.168     0.029   0.103           0.121        0.100    -0.268**
Alpha Fama-French                        -0.051     0.115 0.172**          0.201**      0.209*    -0.261**
Alpha Fama-French, Momentum             -0.0402    0.127* 0.204***        0.224***     0.249**    -0.290**
Average Market Cap ($bn)                 20.734    21.182 21.043           20.844       20.330
Cyber Exposure beta                      -3.523    -1.188  -0.034           1.119        3.579
Number of Months                           186       186     186             186          186        186

Notes: CyberE-sorted stock portfolios. Firm-level monthly excess returns are regressed on the CyberE pricing
factor in 30-month rolling regressions. Five value- and equal-weighted tradeable portfolios are formed based
on the cyber beta. The H-L portfolio is long high- and short low-CyberE beta stocks. Price data is from
CRSP. Betas are scaled by 100 for readability. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively. Estimations are run on the 2002:m1-2019m12 sample.




                                                    60
  Table 6: Fama-MacBeth Regressions - Pricing 10 Cyber Risk Sorted Portfolios


                                Unweighted                                       Weighted
                  (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
Market          0.228      0.164        0.390        0.698     0.203      0.111        0.394       0.724
CyberE                   0.952***      0.543**     0.706**              0.989***     0.530**     0.705**
HML                                   -1.541**     -2.280**                          -1.540**    -2.260**
SMB                                     0.0537      -0.0612                           0.0151      -0.105
MOM                                                  1.922                                        1.969*
Constant        0.577    0.484***       0.558        0.492     0.599    0.538***      0.561*       0.471
Observations   10            10           10          10         10         10          10           10
R2           0.080         0.733        0.922       0.934      0.064      0.742       0.943        0.958
MAPE         0.915         0.502        0.301       0.275      0.924      0.500       0.255        0.221

 Notes: The table reports results from Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regressions. Firm-level monthly excess
 returns are regressed on the CyberE pricing factor in 30-month rolling regressions. Ten value- and equal-
 weighted tradeable portfolios are formed based on the cyber beta. For each portfolio, average returns are
 computed. Cross-sectional regressions of average returns on the factor betas are then run. HML and SMB
 refer to the book-to-market and size factors from Fama and French (1993). MOM is the momentum factor
 from the Kenneth French data repository. MAPE is the mean average pricing error, in annualized percentage
 terms. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Estimations are run
 on the 2002:m1-2019m12 sample.




                                                     61
        Online Appendix for "The Anatomy of Cyber Risk"

                 Rustam Jamilov   Hélène Rey   Ahmed Tahoun




Contents
A Snippets from Earnings Calls Transcripts                     1

B Variable Definitions                                        4

C Summary Statistics                                           7

D Decomposition by Origin and Destination                     10

E Additional Time-Series Plots                                12

F Additional Firm-Level Results by Industry and Region        24

G Cybersecurity ETFs                                          27


A    Snippets from Earnings Calls Transcripts




                                      1
                                 Table 1: Earnings Calls Snippets around Reported Cyberattacks

    Company         Call Date     CyberExposure   CyberNetSentiment     Excerpt of Discussion                                           Call summary
    Name

    Equifax         10.11.2017    10              -10            I have to admit given the impact of ­cyber­ it is a little more        In March 2017, personally identifying data be-
                                                                 ((difficult)) right now to give . . . of the cybersecurity incident    longing to 147+ million of people was stolen.
                                                                 These costs were generally for legal ­cyber­ forensic investi-         Incident lead to the company agreeing to a
                                                                 gations and other professional services million in accrued ex-         global settlement with the Federal Trade Com-
                                                                 penses . . . do we have insurance to cover costs in connection         mission, the Consumer Financial Protection
                                                                 with the ­databreach­ ((breach)) ((incidents)) with limits in          Bureau, and 50 U.S. states and territories. By
                                                                 excess of the current amount . . . as ((opposed)) to being . . . the   most accounts, the largest data breach in U.S.
                                                                 type of cost that we've incurred                                       commercial history.
    State Bank of   19.05.2017    4               -3             the SBI is doing to check any impact on recent ­cyberattack­           It was reported that 3.2 million debit cards
    India                                                        attack in view of reports about of ATMs in India . . . is putting      were compromised in late 2016, affecting ma-
                                                                 together the technology to prevent any kind of ­malware­               jor Indian banks including the SBI which was
                                                                 or cyberhacking to come inside our system to either ((dis-             among the worst hit. The breach underwent
                                                                 rupt)) . . . ((difficult)) to say that we are ready to prevent         for several months. SBI announced the block-
                                                                 of ­cyber­ attacks So if an ((incident)) happens how do we             ing and replacement of 500,000+ debit cards
                                                                 manage . . . apart from reporting to the regulators and to the
                                                                 governments ­cyber­ emergency response team we also share
                                                                 amongst each other to




2
    Bank of Mon-    30.05.2018    5               -1             continued (good) performance Now on the topic of the re-               Canada's 4th largest financial services institu-
    treal                                                        cent ­cyber­ ((incident)) As Darryl said we are focused on             tion reported that more than 50,000 accounts
                                                                 our customers . . . for industries like ours Within this chang-        across the country were in the hands of hack-
                                                                 ing landscape information and ­cybersecurity­ security has             ers. Following the incident disclosure, shares
                                                                 been an ongoing priority for some time and . . . nexus between         traded down by 1%, as per reports.
                                                                 this accelerated digital transformation and the ((breach)) the
                                                                 ­databreach­ ((breach)) Ive always thought of this digital
                                                                 transformation as (enhancing) . . . is As the technology people
                                                                 will describe it or the ­cyber­ people describe it as the attack
                                                                 surface increases so is . . . we got to be (better) prepared for
                                                                 it Now this ­databreach­ ((breach)) as far as I can tell and
                                                                 whatever it
    Capital One     24.10.2019    6               -5             And finally we recognized million of charges associated with           An outside individual gained unauthorized ac-
                                                                 the ­cyber­ ((incident)) that we announced at the end of July          cess and obtained certain types of personal in-
                                                                 These . . . to million in certain incremental direct costs associ-     formation about Capital One credit card cus-
                                                                 ated with the ­cyber­ ((incident)) response and that we ex-            tomers and individuals who had applied for
                                                                 pected to record these costs . . . expect to make incremental in-      our credit card products. The event affected
                                                                 vestments in cybersecurity related to the ­cyber­ ((incident))         approximately 100 million individuals in the
                                                                 and we expect to absorb the estimated incremental invest-              United States and approximately 6 million in
                                                                 ments . . . Sanjay with respect to the public cloud and then           Canada.
                                                                 the ­cyber­ ((incident)) while the event occurred in the cloud
                                                                 the ((vulnerability))
                  Table 2: Earnings Calls Snippets around Reported Cyberattacks (Continued)

    Company   Call Date    CyberExposure   CyberNetSentiment     Excerpt of Discussion                                            Call summary
    Name

    Target    26.02.2014        19              -19       performance along with costs related to our recent ((restruc-           Over 100 million individuals were exposed in
                                                          turing)) and ­databreach­ ((breach)) along with small ac-               the attack. Target reported that the informa-
                                                          counting and tax matters As weve . . . of the recent ((slow-            tion compromised in the attack included mail-
                                                          down)) in growth weve seen following the ­databreach­                   ing addresses, names, email addresses, phone
                                                          ((breach)) In Canada in we generated just over billion in               numbers, and credit and debit card account
                                                          . . . headwind and we continue to see the impact of the ­               data.
                                                          databreach­ ((breach)) on guest sentiment and traffic We be-
                                                          lieve that well . . . (beneficial) interest asset and any potential
                                                          costs related to the ­databreach­ ((breach)) While this has
                                                          been a ((challenging)) year we are
    Maersk    07.11.2017        31               5        third quarter of As youre well aware we had a ­cyberattack­             The NotPetya ransomware attack had a "dev-
                                                          attack that impacted the business ((severely)) in July and into         astating" effect on Maersk. As per Adam
                                                          August mainly in Maersk Line and Damco This ­cyberattack­               Banks - head of technology and global trans-
                                                          attack caused volume and revenue ((loss)) as well as additional         port - all end-user devices including 50,000 lap-
                                                          . . . a quarter with solid global demand growth And adjusting           tops were destroyed. 1,200 applications were
                                                          for ­cyber­ ((loss)) we would have had a flat development in            destroyed or inaccessible. More than 50%
                                                          volumes . . . is of course temporary working capital elements re-       of company servers were destroyed. Any re-
                                                          lated to a ­cyberattack­ attack We were somewhat ((slower))             covered data or devices got immediately re-




3
                                                          on invoicing and therefore our operations were significantly            infected.
                                                          ((hampered)) in the third quarter by the ­cyberattack­ at-
                                                          tack and were certainly not (pleased) with
    Merck     28.07.2017        18               5        on our second quarter results Overall full recovery from the            In June 2017, the NotPetya ransomware at-
                                                          ­cyberattack­ attack will take some time but we are mak-                tack crippled more than 30,000 computers
                                                          ing steady . . . As Ken has outlined the ­malware­ that in-             at Merck, as well as 7,500 servers (per
                                                          fected our computational environment had a very substantial             Bloomberg). Affected screens froze and the
                                                          effect . . . resources behind our ongoing launches remediation          following message appeared: "Ooops, your im-
                                                          expenses related to the ­cyberattack­ attack as well as addi-           portant files are encrypted. . . . We guarantee
                                                          tional RD costs associated with our gears for a moment Let me           that you can recover all your files safely and
                                                          speak briefly about the ­cyberattack­ attack on June which              easily. All you need to do is submit the pay-
                                                          as you know affected Merck along                                        ment". The cost was 300 bitcoins or roughly
                                                                                                                                  $600,000.
    Tencent   10.11.2010        17               2        attack by a program which we believe to be a ­malware­ and              More than 70 victims dating back to 2006 were
                                                          its called Kou Kou Bodyguard The malware was created Qihoo              affected, allegedly, by Chinese hacking opera-
                                                          which also operates the most (popular) Internet security soft-          tions that lasted up until 2011. The series of
                                                          ware Security Guard in China The ­malware­ (encouraged)                 attacks was orchestrated by Elderwood Group
                                                          users to install it by offering functions such as . . . the fact that   based in Beijing, China. The codeword for
                                                          an Internet security software company actually developed ­              the incidents was Operation Aurora. Google
                                                          malware­ targeting and affecting an application software We             was the first company to publically disclose
                                                          intend to seek . . . government authorities However the ensu-           the cyberattack, followed by a series of disclo-
                                                          ing ((investigation)) took time while the ­malware­ spread              sures across dozens of organizations. (source:
                                                          quickly with s (strong) promotion support In a matter                   Economist.com, Forbes.com, Wired.com)
B    Variable Definitions

                                   Table 1: Cyber Risk Terms

                Sub-Category                            Terms
                Cyber              "cyber", "cybersecurity", "network security",
                                   "cyberattack", "cybercrime", "cyber threat",
                                   "cyber incident", "cyber event"
                Data               "data loss", "data integrity", "data security",
                                   "information theft", "data breach", "data
                                   theft", "data leak", "data compromise", "data
                                   fraud"
                Malware            "worm", "spyware", "phishing", "trojan",
                                   "malware", "ddos attack", "ransomware"
                Fraud              "hacker", "hack", "hacked", "card fraud",
                                   "card breach", "system outage", "email com-
                                   promise"
    Notes: All cyber risk related terms that we search for in the quarterly earnings calls transcripts.




                                                    4
                                            Table 2: Topics of Joint Searches

           Topic         Terms                                                                                                      Source

Country Names            Russia, Russian, China, Chinese, North Korea, North Korean, Israel, Israelian, Iran, Iranian,            This paper
                         United States, the US, America, American, Europe, European, the EU, United Kingdom,
                         Great Britain, British, the UK
Crypto                   crypto, crypto currency, cryptocurrency, ledger, cryptography, blockchain, bitcoin, alt-                 This paper
                         coin,token, ethereum, rupple, litecoin, tether, libra, monero, diem

Insurance and Legal      insurance, liability, coverage, cover, policy, legal, law, settle, settlement                            This paper


Monetary Loss            loss, cost, income, reputation, monetary, damage, recover                                                This paper


Pandemics                corona, coronavirus, corona virus, covid, sars                                                           This paper


Social Media             Zoom, webex, hangouts, Facebook, Google, Twitter, Bing, Snapchat,                       Linkedin,        This paper
                         MailChip,Baidu, Tencent, Weibo, Yandex, Rambler, Line, whatsapp

Politics                 election, state, sponsor, state sponsored, state-sponsored, espionage, democratic national               This paper
                         committee, DNC, Trump, Clinton, Assange

Global Events            GDPR, Cambridge, Cambridge Analytica, Notpetya, Wannacry, Wikileaks, Wiki leaks,                         This paper
                         Panama papers

Risk and Uncertainty     risk, risks, uncertainty, variable, chance, possibility, pending, uncertainties, uncertain, doubt,   Hassan et al. (2019)
                         prospect, bet, variability, exposed, likelihood, threat, probability, unknown, varying, unclear,
                         unpredictable, speculative, fear, reservation, hesitant, gamble, risky, instability, doubtful,
                         hazard, tricky, sticky, dangerous, tentative, hazardous, queries, danger, fluctuating, un-
                         stable, vague, erratic, query, jeopardize, unsettled, unpredictability, dilemma, skepticism,
                         hesitancy, riskier, unresolved, unsure, irregular, jeopardy, suspicion, risking, peril, hesitat-
                         ing, risked, unreliable, unsafe, hazy, apprehension, unforeseeable, halting, wager, torn, pre-
                         carious, undetermined, insecurity, debatable, undecided, dicey, indecision, wavering, iffy,
                         faltering, endanger, quandary, insecure, changeable, riskiest, hairy, ambivalent, dubious,
                         riskiness, treacherous, oscillating, perilous, tentativeness, unreliability, wariness, vagueness,
                         dodgy, equivocation, indecisive, chancy, menace, qualm, vacillating, gnarly, disquiet, am-
                         bivalence, imperil, vacillation, incalculable, untrustworthy, equivocating, diffident, fickleness,
                         misgiving, changeability, undependable, incertitude, fitful, parlous, unconfident, defenseless,
                         unsureness, fluctuant, niggle, diffidence, precariousness, doubtfulness,
Positive Sentiment       good, strong, great, better, opportunities, able, positive, progress, opportunity, best, im-         Hassan et al. (2019)
                         provement, benefit, improve, pleased, improved, improving, success, effective, profitability,
                         successful, greater, stronger, strength, advantage, leadership, achieve, despite, confident,
                         improvements, achieved, excited, favorable, stable, leading, efficiency, gain, happy, opti-
                         mistic, gains, profitable, innovation, excellent, encouraged, attractive, win, efficient, ben-
                         efited, highest, tremendous, enhance, exciting, achieving, enable, successfully, efficiencies,
                         easy, strengthen, enhanced, encouraging, strengthening, innovative, stability, excellence,
                         satisfaction, pleasure, winning, superior, gaining, perfect, easier, alliance, collaboration, en-
                         abled, advantages, exceptional, stabilize, gained, strongest, accomplished, enhancing, en-
                         ables, valuable, impressive, progressing, strengthened, enjoy, positively, efficiently, exclusive,
                         achievement, strengths, enabling, easily, stabilized, satisfied, accomplish, benefiting, accom-
                         plishments, transparency, diligently
Negative Sentiment       loss, decline, difficult, against, negative, restructuring, challenges, force, late, closing, de-    Hassan et al. (2019)
                         clined, losses, critical, challenging, weak, closed, problem, claims, break, slow, recall, chal-
                         lenge, delay, concerned, bad, cut, concern, problems, litigation, weakness, volatility, diffi-
                         culty, lost, crisis, concerns, declines, weaker, delays, impairment, opposed, recession, slow-
                         down, downturn, slower, closure, lack, unfortunately, missed, declining, adverse, negatively,
                         unemployment, worse, lag, wrong, bridge, delayed, severe, dropped, volatile, lose, disclosed,
                         shut, complicated, breakdown, slowing, serious, difficulties, disclose, losing, slowed, stress,
                         caution, disruption, discontinued, failure, challenged, downward, poor, deficit, suspect,
                         slowly, nonperforming, unfavorable, deterioration, opportunistic, termination, miss, inves-
                         tigation, breaking, shortage, attrition, damage, chargeoffs, worst, drag, hurt, disappointed,
                         bankruptcy, shutdown

             Notes: All topic-specific terms that we search for in the quarterly earnings calls transcripts.

                                                                      5
                                     Table 3: Variable Definitions

      Variable                                                Description                                        Source

PP&E                                   Property, planet, and equipment expenditures (ppent)                     Compustat
Intangibles                                           Intangible assets (intan)                                 Compustat
CAPEX                                               Total invested capital (icapt)                              Compustat
Cash flow              Income before extraordinatory items (ib) + depreciation and amortization (dp) / assets   Compustat
Debt                                  Long-term debt (dltt) + debt in current liabilities (dlc)                 Compustat
Liquidity                                     Cash and short-term investments / assets                          Compustat
Firm size                                                 Log (total assets)                                    Compustat
Equity net issuance                                 Common shares issued (cshi)                                 Compustat
Total equity                                         Stockholders equity (seq)                                  Compustat
ROA                                                   Net income (ni) / assets                                  Compustat
S&P Rating                                         S&P quality ranking (spcsrc)                                 Compustat
Tobin's Q                      Total assets - common equity + market equity (at-ce+prcc*csho) / at              Compustat
Book to market ratio                     Common equity (ceq) / market equity (prcc*csho)                        Compustat
Operational expenses                                 Operating expense (xopr)                                   Compustat
Market beta                Market beta of stocks estimated using monthly returns over rolling 30 months           CRSP

                              Notes: Firm variables used throughout the paper.




                                                          6
C   Summary Statistics

                                                       Figure 20: Observations per Quarter
                        6000
      Number of Observations per Quarter
        2000            0    4000




                                           2002q1        2005q4        2009q3         2013q2        2017q1        2020q4


                                           Notes: Number of observations per quarter in the earnings calls dataset.




                                                                                7
                                               Table 4: Statistics by Industry

                                                                 Cyber Risk Measure

Industry         Cyber     Cyber      Cyber       Cyber      Cyber    Cybre      Cyber     Cyber    Cyber   Cyber   Cyber    Cyber
                 Expo-     Uncer-     Pos Sen-    Neg Sen-   Coun-    Pan-       Crypto    Insur-   Loss    So-     Global   Poli-
                 sure      tainty     timent      timent     try      demics               ance             cial             tics

Mining              88          6         26        24         14        0            0        2     11      0       0         3
Manufacturing      4770       152       1754       1447       984       69            19     199    604     20        3        49
Trade               959        13        312       586        189       25            4      143    276     39       2        16
IT                 6210       536       1893       2949        773       96           24     447    798     116      87       130
Finance            2268       399        659        916        346       63           25     859    635      16      27        31
Real Estate         427        16        118       106         36        2             1     28      23      3       1         9
Services           8984       498       2899       3276       1100      154           31     487    987     68       50       147
Education           76          1         26        11         13        0            0      14       6      0       0         0
health              164        13         62         65         6        7             0      30     52      2        0         2
Other              1416        77        441        897        259      42             5     457    449     20        6        63

Total             25362      1711       8190       10277      3720      458       109        2666   3841    284      176      450

           Notes: Total count of each cyber risk exposure measure by industry, pooled over the entire sample. Industries
           are defined by the 2-digit NAICS classification.




                                                                 8
                                              Table 5: Statistics by Country

                                                                       Cyber Risk Measure

                 Cyber    Cyber    Cyber      Cyber      Cyber     Cybre         Cyber      Cyber    Cyber   Cyber    Cyber    Cyber
                 Expo-    Uncer-   Pos Sen-   Neg Sen-   Country   Pan-          Crypto     Insur-   Loss    Social   Global   Politics
                 sure     tainty   timent     timent               demics                   ance

UAE                 1        0         0          0        0             0          0          0       0        0        0         0
Argentina           7        0        2          0         2             2          0          0       1        0        0         0
Austria             7        0        2          1         0             0          0          1       4        0        0         0
Australia          206       21       77         66        14           12          0          13      40       4        0         0
Belgium             22        1       3          4          7            1          0           1       5       0        0         1
Bermuda            158       31       50         41        54            2          1          92      25       0        0         0
Brazil              63        2       10         42         6           16          0           3       6       0        0         4
Canada             738       42      277        217       140           19          3          66      99       4        2        17
Switzerland        221       12       70         39        67            3          4          47      63       5        2         2
Chile               72       13       31         29         9            0          0          16      31       0        0         0
China              121        8       35         37        37            0          1           6      24      14        0         0
Colombia             5        0        2          1         2            0          0           0       2       0        0         0
Cyprus               3        0        0          2         0            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
Czechia             12        0        3          3         5            2          0           0       1       0        0         0
Germany            283       25       63         95        86            8          3         105      82       0        2         1
Denmark            152        8       43         70        16           23          3          31      60      35        0         0
Egypt                1        0        0          0         0            0          0           0       1       0        0         0
Spain               64        0       19         10         4            7          0           7       1       3        0         0
Finland            198        5       78         61        15           15          0           9      16       0        1         4
France             507       21      139        134       158            9          1          38      77       9        9         4
United Kingdom    1368      165      488        528       437           23          4         206     287       9       32         7
Guernsey             6        0        2          3         3            2          0           0       0       0        1         0
Gibraltar            1        0        0          0         0            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
Grece                4        4        3          1         0            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
Hong Kong           53        9       15         30        12            0          2           9      16       1        1         0
Indonesia            4        0        2          0         0            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
Ireland            101        7       42         46        40            2          4           3      16       2        0         1
Israel            1225       90      363        543       192           24          5          41     113      19       12        13
Isle of Man          4        0        0          2         1            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
India              430       34      135         87        35           19          1          32      36       7        3         4
Italy               69        6       24         18        26            4          0           2      12       0        0         3
Jersey               2        0        0          0         0            0          0           0       0       0        0         0
Japan              360       24       94        129        47            3          13         45      54       7        1         1
South Korea         31        1        2         36         2            0           0          4      32       1        0         0
Kuwait               7        0        0          0         0            0           0          0       3       0        0         0
Cayman Islands       6        1        3          1         1            1           0          0       2       0        0         0
Kazakhstan           1        0        0          0         0            0           0          0       0       0        0         0
Luxemburg           48        0       18         30         3            4           0          8      22       0        0         0
Malta                5        0        2          1         0            0           0          0       0       0        1         0
Mexico              46        4        7         22         0            2           1          0      13       0        0         0
Malaysia             8        2        1          3         0            0           0          0       3       0        0         0
Nigeria              1        0        0          0         0            0           0          0       2       0        0         0
Netherlands        120        5       49         43        39            4           4          6      12      10        0         1
Norway             268        9       58        101        89           10           0         42      24       0        1         1
New Zealand         18        3        8          1         1            1           0          0       5       2        0         0
Oman                 3        4        0          9         0            0           0          0       0       0        0         0
Panama               1        1        0          0         0            0           0          0       0       0        0         0
Peru                 2        0        0          2         0            0           0          0       0       0        0         0
Philippines         34        2        6          8         2            1           0          0       0       1        0         0
Pakistan             1        0        0          0         0            0           0          0       0       0        0         0
Poland              15        0        4          1         0            0           0          4       1       0        0         0
Puerto Rico          4        0        3          1         1            0           0          0       1       0        0         0
Portugal            26        0        9          0        11            0           0          0       0       0        0         2
Qatar                3        0        3          2         0            1           0          0       0       0        0         0
Russia              36        0        9          4         9            2           0          0       3       0        0         0
Saudi Arabia         3        0        0          1         0            0           0          1       9       0        0         0
Sweden             153        9       45         79        30           14           0         28      20       1        0         3
Singapore          351        3       98         54        27            2           3          6      79       2        0         0
Thailand            13        0        2          1         0            0           0          1       6       0        0         0
Turkey              10        0        1          2         0            1           0          1       0       0        0         0
Taiwan              25        1       19         17         5            0           0          2       9       0        0         2
United States     17602     1119     5756       7587      2083          211         56        1788    2502     148      107       379
Virgin Islands       1        0        0          0         0            0           0          1       0       0        0         0
South Africa        52       19       15         32         2            8           0          1      21       0        1         0

Total             25362     1711     8190      10277      3720          458         109       2666    3841     284      176       450


         Notes: Total count of each cyber risk exposure measure by country, pooled over the entire sample.


                                                                   9
D        Decomposition by Origin and Destination

     Table 6: CyberExposure by Country of Origin and Regional Destination

                                                                   Origin

 Destination      Russia   China   North Korea   Israel     Iran     United States   Europe   United Kingdom   Total

 Africa             0        4          0         36         0               99       49             6         194
 Americas           4       10         1          2         0               148       27            22         214
 Asia              13        62         0         3         0                81        28            4         191
 Europe             6        31         0         10        1               256       224           68         596
 United Kingdom    10       14          7         2         0               207       95           107         442
 United States     42       158        14         7         15              1318      419          110         2083

 Total             75       279        22         60        16              2109      842          317         3720

Notes: Decomposition of CyberExposureT by country of origin and regional destination. Destination regions
are defined as headquarter locations of firms with a positive CyberCountryT realization. Origin countries
are the underlying terms/countries behind the CyberCountryT topical index.




                                                       10
         Table 7: Cyber Risk by Country of Origin and Industry Destination

                                                                Origin

 Destination     Russia   China   North Korea   Israel   Iran     United States   Europe   United Kingdom   Total

 Mining            0        3         0           0        0               9        2             0          14
 Manufacturing    23       102        5          16       2              554       183           99         984
 Trade             6        16        5           4       0              89        47            22         189
 IT               21       89         3          29        2             423       161           45         773
 Finance           0        12        3           1        1             182       116           31         346
 Real Estate       0        1         0           0       0               35        0             0          36
 Services         13        49        6          10       11             621       306           84         1100
 Education         0        0         0           0        0              13        0             0          13
 Health            0         0        0           0        0               4        0             2          6
 Other            12        7         0           0       0              179        27           34         259

 Total            75       279        22         60       16             2109      842          317         3720

Notes: Decomposition of CyberExposureT by country of origin and sectoral destination. Destination in-
dustries are defined by the 2-digit NAICS code of firms with a positive CyberCountryT realization. Origin
countries are the underlying terms/countries behind the CyberCountryT topical index.




                                                         11
E                                  Additional Time-Series Plots

                                                                     Figure 1: United States
                 4




                                                                                                        4
                          3




                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                        Mean of CyberUncertainty, US
Mean of CyberExposure, US
            2




                                                                                                     2
                 1




                                                                                                        1
                 0




                                                                                                        0
                                2002q1   2005q4    2009q3   2013q2    2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4




                                              (a) CyberExposure                                                                 (b) CyberUncertainty
                 1




                                                                                                        4
                 0
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, US




                                                                                                              3
                                                                                        Mean of CyberLoss, US
                   -1




                                                                                                2
       -2




                                                                                                        1
                 -3
                 -4




                                                                                                        0




                                2002q1   2005q4    2009q3   2013q2    2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4




                                          (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                         (d) CyberLoss
                 4




                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                        4
                           3
Mean of CyberInsurance, US




                                                                                        Mean of CyberCountry, US
                                                                                                         3
            2




                                                                                             2
                 1




                                                                                                        1
                 0




                                                                                                        0




                                2002q1   2005q4    2009q3   2013q2    2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4




                                              (e) CyberInsurance                                                                       (f) CyberCountry



                                                                                   12
                  4
                                                                      Figure 2: United Kingdom




                                                                                                         4
                          3




                                                                                          Mean of CyberUncertainty, GB
Mean of CyberExposure, GB




                                                                                                                   3
            2




                                                                                                    2
                  1




                                                                                                         1
                  0




                                                                                                         0
                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2     2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (a) CyberExposure                                                                (b) CyberUncertainty
                  2




                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                         4
                              0
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, GB




                                                                                          Mean of CyberLoss, GB
                                                                                                          3
              -2




                                                                                             2
 -4




                                                                                                         1
                  -6




                                                                                                         0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2     2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                            (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                       (d) CyberLoss
                  6




                                                                                                         4         3
Mean of CyberInsurance, GB




                                                                                          Mean of CyberCountry, GB
                       4




                                                                                                    2
  2




                                                                                                         1
                  0




                                                                                                         0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2     2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (e) CyberInsurance                                                                     (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                     13
                                                                          Figure 3: France




                                                                                                        8
                  5
                  4




                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                        Mean of CyberUncertainty, FR
Mean of CyberExposure, FR
                 3




                                                                                                     4
     2




                                                                                                        2
                  1
                  0




                                                                                                        0
                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (a) CyberExposure                                                                (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                        8
                  2           0
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, FR




                                                                                                        6
                                                                                        Mean of CyberLoss, FR
                 -2




                                                                                                 4
      -4




                                                                                                        2
                  -6
                  -8




                                                                                                        0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                            (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                       (d) CyberLoss
                  8




                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                        4
                           6
Mean of CyberInsurance, FR




                                                                                        Mean of CyberCountry, FR
                                                                                                         3
            4




                                                                                             2
                  2




                                                                                                        1
                  0




                                                                                                        0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (e) CyberInsurance                                                                     (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                   14
                 4
                                                                     Figure 4: Germany




                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                     4
                          3




                                                                                      Mean of CyberUncertainty, DE
Mean of CyberExposure, DE




                                                                                                         3
            2




                                                                                             2
                 1




                                                                                                     1
                 0




                                                                                                     0
                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (a) CyberExposure                                                              (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                     6
                 2
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, DE
                         0




                                                                                      Mean of CyberLoss, DE
                                                                                                          4
           -2




                                                                                      2
                 -4
                 -6




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                          (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                     (d) CyberLoss
                 6




                                                                                                     6
Mean of CyberInsurance, GB




                                                                                      Mean of CyberCountry, DE
                       4




                                                                                                            4
  2




                                                                                       2
                 0




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (e) CyberInsurance                                                                   (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                 15
                                                                          Figure 5: Japan




                                                                                                       8
                 8




                                                                                                                    6
                          6




                                                                                       Mean of CyberUncertainty, JP
Mean of CyberExposure, JP




                                                                                                   4
           4




                                                                                                       2
                 2
                 0




                                                                                                       0
                                 2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                               (a) CyberExposure                                                                (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                       6
                 0
 Mean of CyberNetSentiment, JP
                           -2




                                                                                                           4
                                                                                       Mean of CyberLoss, JP
             -4




                                                                                       2
-6               -8




                                                                                                       0




                                 2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                           (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                       (d) CyberLoss
                 8




                                                                                                       8
                           6




                                                                                                               6
Mean of CyberInsurance, JP




                                                                                       Mean of CyberCountry, JP
            4




                                                                                                4
                 2




                                                                                                       2
                 0




                                                                                                       0




                                 2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                               (e) CyberInsurance                                                                     (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                  16
                                                                         Figure 6: China




                                                                                                     6
                 8




                                                                                      Mean of CyberUncertainty, CN
                         6
Mean of CyberExposure, CN




                                                                                                              4
          4




                                                                                        2
                 2
                 0




                                                                                                     0
                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (a) CyberExposure                                                              (b) CyberUncertainty
                 2




                                                                                                     8
                 0
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, CN




                                                                                                     6
                                                                                      Mean of CyberLoss, CN
                   -2




                                                                                               4
        -4




                                                                                                     2
                 -6
                 -8




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                          (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                     (d) CyberLoss
                 6




                                                                                                     8
Mean of CyberInsurance, CN




                                                                                                             6
                                                                                      Mean of CyberCountry, CN
                     4




                                                                                               4
 2




                                                                                                     2
                 0




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (e) CyberInsurance                                                                   (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                 17
                 5
                                                                             Figure 7: India




                                                                                                         8
                 4




                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                          Mean of CyberUncertainty, IN
Mean of CyberExposure, IN
                 3




                                                                                                     4
     2




                                                                                                         2
                 1
                 0




                                                                                                         0
                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                               2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (a) CyberExposure                                                                   (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                         8
                 6
                 4




                                                                                                         6
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, IN




                                                                                          Mean of CyberLoss, IN
                  2




                                                                                                   4
       0




                                                                                                         2
                 -2
                 -4




                                                                                                         0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                               2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                          (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                          (d) CyberLoss
                                                                                                         8
                 8




                                                                                                                   6
Mean of CyberInsurance, IN
                         6




                                                                                          Mean of CyberCountry, IN
                                                                                                    4
          4




                                                                                                         2
                 2
                 0




                                                                                                         0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                               2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (e) CyberInsurance                                                                        (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                     18
                 5
                                                                       Figure 8: Canada




                                                                                                     6
                 4




                                                                                      Mean of CyberUncertainty, CA
Mean of CyberExposure, CA




                                                                                                            4
      2          3




                                                                                        2
                 1
                 0




                                                                                                     0
                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (a) CyberExposure                                                              (b) CyberUncertainty
                 4




                                                                                                     6
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, CA




                                                                                      Mean of CyberLoss, CA
                       2




                                                                                                          4
   0




                                                                                      2
                 -2




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                          (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                     (d) CyberLoss
                 5




                                                                                                     6
                 4
Mean of CyberInsurance, CA




                                                                                      Mean of CyberCountry, CA
                                                                                                            4
      2            3




                                                                                       2
                 1
                 0




                                                                                                     0




                                2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                              (e) CyberInsurance                                                                   (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                 19
                                                                               Figure 9: Israel




                                                                                                           6
                  5
                  4




                                                                                            Mean of CyberUncertainty, IL
Mean of CyberExposure, IL




                                                                                                                   4
    2           3




                                                                                              2
                  1
                  0




                                                                                                           0
                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (a) CyberExposure                                                                  (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                           5
                  1




                                                                                                           4
                              0
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, IL




                                                                                            Mean of CyberLoss, IL
                                                                                                           3
        -2        -1




                                                                                               2
                  -3




                                                                                                           1
                  -4




                                                                                                           0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                            (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                         (d) CyberLoss
                  8




                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                           4
                  6
Mean of CyberInsurance, IL




                                                                                            Mean of CyberCountry, IL
                                                                                                           3
           4




                                                                                               2
                  2




                                                                                                           1
                  0




                                                                                                           0




                                  2002q1   2005q4   2009q3   2013q2   2017q1       2020q4                              2002q1   2005q4       2009q3   2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                (e) CyberInsurance                                                                       (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                       20
                          3  4
                                                                               Figure 10: Russia




                                                                                             Mean of CyberUncertainty, RU
Mean of CyberExposure, RU
           2                 1
                             0




                                  2002q1     2005q4     2009q3    2013q2   2017q1   2020q4           2002q1                          2005q4        2009q3    2013q2    2017q1   2020q4



                                                    (a) CyberExposure                                                                     (b) CyberUncertainty


                                                                                                                            8
                             5




                                                                                                                            6
Mean of CyberNetSentiment, RU




                                                                                             Mean of CyberLoss, RU
                0




                                                                                                       4                    2
                             -5




                                                                                                                            0




                                  2002q1     2005q4     2009q3    2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                                  2002q1     2005q4       2009q3    2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                               (c) CyberNetSentiment                                                                             (d) CyberLoss
                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                            6
Mean of CyberInsurance, RU




                                                                                             Mean of CyberCountry, RU
                                                                                                        4                   2
                                                                                                                            0




       2002q1                              2005q4      2009q3    2013q2    2017q1   2020q4                                  2002q1     2005q4       2009q3    2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                                    (e) CyberInsurance                                                                          (f) CyberCountry




                                                                                        21
                                                                          Figure 11: Country Names Topic




                                                      4         3
                                           Mean of CyberCountry
                                                   2  1
                                                      0




                                                                2002q1            2005q4       2009q3                               2013q2        2017q1            2020q4



                                                                                           All Country Names

                                                                                                                      8
           4




                                                                                                                      6
           3




                                                                                                          Mean of CyberChina
 Mean of CyberUS




                                                                                                                   4
       2




                                                                                                                      2
           1
           0




                                                                                                                      0




                   2002q1   2005q4       2009q3                          2013q2       2017q1     2020q4                         2002q1       2005q4        2009q3        2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                     (a) United States                                                                                                     (b) China
                                                                                                                      5
           5




                                                                                                                      4
           4




                                                                                                          Mean of CyberNorthKorea
 Mean of CyberRussia




                                                                                                                           3
               3




                                                                                                              2
   2




                                                                                                                      1
           1
           0




                                                                                                                      0




                   2002q1   2005q4       2009q3                          2013q2       2017q1     2020q4                         2002q1       2005q4        2009q3        2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                        (c) Russia                                                                                                    (d) North Korea
Notes:    Time-series averages of CyberCountryit , CyberUSit , CyberChinait , CyberRussiait , and
CyberNorthKoreait , each normalized by the standard deviation of the respective sample. All terms be-
hind the "Country Names" topic are listed in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.

                                                                                                     22
                                              Figure 11: Country Names (Continued)




                                                                                    5
           5




                                                                                    4
           4
 Mean of CyberEurope




                                                                           Mean of CyberUK
                                                                                        3
               3




                                                                            2
   2




                                                                                    1
           1
           0




                                                                                    0
                   2002q1   2005q4   2009q3     2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                   2002q1   2005q4   2009q3     2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                     (e) Europe                                                         (f) United Kingdom


                                                                                    8
           6




                                                                                    6
 Mean of CyberIsrael
                  4




                                                                           Mean of CyberIran
                                                                                   4
           2




                                                                                    2
           0




                                                                                    0




                   2002q1   2005q4   2009q3     2013q2   2017q1   2020q4                   2002q1   2005q4   2009q3     2013q2   2017q1   2020q4



                                     (g) Israel                                                              (h) Iran
Notes: Time-series averages of CyberEuropeit , CyberUKit , CyberIsraelit , and CyberIranit , each normalized
by the standard deviation of the respective sample. All terms behind the "Country Names" topic are listed
in Table 2 of the Online Appendix.




                                                                      23
F      Additional Firm-Level Results by Industry and Region

         Table 8: Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure: Regions

 Probit Model                                 Dependent Variable: Firm-level Indicator of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                   (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)         (6)

                              United States     Americas Ex-US      Europe      United Kingdom        Asia        Africa

 PP&E / Assets                     0.2693             -0.0179         0.5791          -0.2006      -1.6575***     -10.0078
                                 (0.2527)            (0.8350)        (1.4275)        (1.9750)        (0.6008)     (6.6569)
 Intangibles / Assets           0.8568***             -0.3332        2.5381**         -0.4393          0.0636      -4.4473
                                 (0.1729)            (0.8208)        (1.2149)        (1.7011)        (0.9247)     (4.2783)
 CAPEX / Assets                  -0.3800*           2.5689***      -2.3027***         -1.8759         -1.2944   9.6864***
                                 (0.2142)            (0.9540)        (0.8268)        (1.5130)        (0.7886)     (3.6581)
 Cash Flow / Assets            -1.6122***             -4.4656         4.5874          8.0047           9.3740     14.4234
                                 (0.6204)            (6.5324)        (7.7241)       (12.9419)       (11.4642)    (29.7561)
 Long-Term Debt / Assets           0.0501             -0.2102         0.3873       1.7834***         0.7845**      0.1472
                                 (0.0823)            (0.3044)        (0.3651)        (0.6655)        (0.3753)     (1.2680)
 Liquidity Ratio                0.5881***              0.6337          1.1695         -1.0207         -0.6485       3.2307
                                 (0.2057)            (0.6837)        (1.4689)        (2.4572)        (0.8527)     (3.1007)
 Log (Size)                     0.1106***           0.2240***          0.1253      -0.5650***         -0.1117       0.1816
                                 (0.0174)            (0.0739)        (0.0952)        (0.2018)        (0.0897)     (0.1855)
 Debt / Assets                    -0.0188          -3.0907***         1.5974           0.3946         -0.2939     -7.9700*
                                 (0.1441)            (0.8114)        (1.0172)        (0.8592)        (0.8180)     (4.2668)
 Log (Age)                         0.0006            0.4917**         -0.1952       1.0450***       0.8430***    1.8205***
                                 (0.0479)            (0.2127)        (0.2375)        (0.3503)        (0.2731)     (0.4466)
 Equity Net Issuance               0.0454             -0.8501       2.5557***       -10.1795*       4.0236***     2.5552*
                                 (0.3317)            (1.7632)        (0.9726)        (5.6462)        (1.0263)     (1.4864)
 ROA                               0.6658              1.5203         -4.4939         -3.2787         -6.0291     -27.2869
                                 (0.4716)            (6.0834)        (7.1255)       (13.7385)       (10.1332)    (34.9933)
 Sales / Assets                    0.9709              3.8150          2.3760         -4.7598         -3.0906      12.7727
                                 (0.7419)            (4.2300)        (4.5949)        (8.7368)        (4.9551)     (9.5821)
 Tobin's Q                         0.0154          -0.2282***        -0.0911*        0.1670*           0.0541      -0.4571
                                 (0.0161)            (0.0757)        (0.0546)        (0.0919)        (0.0524)     (0.9531)
 Book to Market Equity            -0.0723             -0.2536         -0.2241       -2.8033**        -0.3983*      -8.5383
                                 (0.0602)            (0.2111)        (0.2790)        (1.2463)        (0.2149)     (6.2104)
 Operational Costs / Assets       -0.6881             -3.1742          0.6274         -1.3108          1.6506   -27.3944**
                                 (0.7529)            (4.4633)        (5.1788)        (9.8665)        (4.8935)    (13.5214)
 Market Beta                      -0.0302             -0.1808          0.0458       -0.4378**         -0.3113   -2.9950***
                                 (0.0326)            (0.1773)        (0.1059)        (0.2191)        (0.1918)     (0.8183)

 Quarter Fixed Effect             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
 Industry Fixed Effect            Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
 N                               74844               2535             991             875            2153          564
 pseudo R2                       0.227               0.365           0.294           0.291           0.265        0.642

Notes: Probit regression of firm-level indicators of positive cyber risk total exposure on various balance sheet
and income statement characteristics. Each column corresponds to a case where all but the relevant region
are dropped. Regions are defined by the locations of firm headquarters. All variables are defined in Table 3
of the Online Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                             24
                       Table 9: Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure: Industries

Probit Model                                               Dependent Variable: Firm-level Indicator of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                 (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)

                               Mining      Manufacturing       Trade            IT      Finance     Real Estate    Services    Health        Other

PP&E / Assets                    0.4261        -0.9766        -0.9012**      -0.7443      -0.7800      -1.2688       0.5156      -1.4666        0.0773
                                (1.1174)      (0.7408)         (0.3582)     (0.5222)     (0.8379)     (1.1550)     (0.8465)     (1.2345)      (0.2836)
Intangibles / Assets            3.4610**        0.4925          -0.2132       0.3066    0.8724***       0.4205    2.7902***      -0.0502        0.5116
                                (1.6515)      (0.3347)         (0.5405)     (0.4061)     (0.2888)     (0.7122)     (0.6483)     (1.3208)      (0.4965)
CAPEX / Assets                 -2.8259**    -1.4222***          -0.5881    -1.5391***      0.0574      -0.1351      -0.6924    -2.5569**      -0.7312*
                                (1.1464)      (0.4074)         (0.5090)     (0.5144)     (0.2538)     (1.7931)     (0.6153)     (1.1545)      (0.4205)
Cash Flow / Assets            15.9067**        1.2269        15.3783**       4.3228        8.5459      3.4542      -1.9119*      4.6469    -17.2684***
                                (6.9316)      (2.9654)         (6.5651)     (3.9409)     (9.4167)    (10.2867)     (0.9776)     (4.9785)      (5.6825)
Long-Term Debt / Assets         1.7727*         0.2017          0.1711        0.3063       0.0534       2.4799      -0.1473   1.4109***         0.0833
                                (0.9071)      (0.1465)         (0.2198)     (0.2357)     (0.1609)     (1.8060)     (0.1606)     (0.5056)      (0.3074)
Liquidity Ratio                   0.2437      0.7886**          -0.6375     1.2806**      -0.4919       1.0079    1.7040***      -1.7507       -0.8004
                                (1.6840)      (0.3770)         (0.6746)     (0.5028)     (0.4235)     (2.0852)     (0.6388)     (1.3316)      (0.7177)
Log (Size)                    -0.6957***      0.0966**        0.1891***       0.0376    0.1303***       0.2819    0.2432***       0.0897     0.1482***
                                (0.2598)      (0.0379)         (0.0588)     (0.0303)     (0.0293)     (0.2153)     (0.0608)     (0.0948)      (0.0438)
Debt / Assets                    -0.9360     -0.5540**          -0.3011       0.0706      -0.1695      -0.4701      -0.2812      -0.0442      -0.7059*
                                (0.7688)      (0.2685)         (0.3759)     (0.2599)     (0.2258)     (1.3578)     (0.3872)     (0.8555)      (0.4056)
Log (Age)                         0.2701      0.1865*           0.3603*       0.0082       0.1219       0.1354       0.0569       0.0616        0.0369
                                (0.2012)      (0.0977)         (0.2040)     (0.1069)     (0.0807)     (0.4757)     (0.1463)     (0.2160)      (0.1221)
Equity Net Issuance           -4.0706***       0.1035          1.8419**       0.4730      -0.0362      -3.5114      -1.0812     3.3807**        0.7668
                                (1.4240)      (0.4752)         (0.9036)     (0.4988)     (0.9786)     (7.2626)     (0.8604)     (1.5486)      (0.8052)
ROA                          -20.4156***       -0.9962       -14.5807**      -5.1689      -7.8394      -2.5313      0.8468*       1.7939    15.9682***
                                (7.5097)      (2.8670)         (6.5285)     (3.6397)     (9.3878)    (10.0717)     (0.4620)     (3.6183)      (4.8366)
Sales / Assets                   3.6349        0.0467           2.7496        0.1309      1.5701        1.3771       2.0246      -8.0008       3.7970
                                (2.2894)      (1.2660)         (1.6946)     (2.0726)     (2.9560)    (10.2076)     (1.3741)     (7.2250)      (3.1351)
Tobin's Q                       0.3706*        -0.0525           0.0105      -0.0103    0.1831***       0.0200       0.0389      -0.0847        0.0063
                                (0.2107)      (0.0319)         (0.0641)     (0.0285)     (0.0467)     (0.2757)     (0.0271)     (0.1441)      (0.0584)
Book to Market Equity            -0.3077       -0.0637          0.0832        0.0547      -0.1099      -0.1146       0.1394   -1.0706***      -0.3355*
                                (0.3341)      (0.1178)         (0.1218)     (0.0811)     (0.1040)     (0.2673)     (0.1794)     (0.3754)      (0.1993)
Operational Costs / Assets    -7.9272***       -0.0325         -2.9209*      -0.8500      -1.9283       2.0938       0.0519       5.9477       -3.7146
                                (2.3918)      (1.0790)         (1.7108)     (1.9146)     (2.9729)    (12.0442)     (1.4640)     (7.1584)      (3.0948)
Market Beta                      0.0279        0.0021           0.0001       0.0208       -0.1185      -0.4013      -0.1266       0.0880        0.1206
                                (0.1377)      (0.0653)         (0.0900)     (0.0916)     (0.0819)     (0.2604)     (0.0807)     (0.2158)      (0.1068)

Quarter Fixed Effect             Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Country Fixed Effect             Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Observations                    1473          32374            8777            5382       8904          310         5991         416          7104
pseudo R2                       0.405         0.098            0.108           0.148      0.159        0.199        0.204       0.149         0.121

 Notes: Probit regression of firm-level indicators of positive cyber risk total exposure on various balance sheet and income statement
 characteristics. Each column corresponds to a case where all but the relevant industry are dropped. Industries are defined by the
 NAICS 2-digit classification. All variables are defined in Table 3 of the Online Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the
 firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                          25
  Table 10: Determinants of Firm-Level Cyber Risk Exposure:                                             Finance Sub-
  Industries

Probit Model                                Dependent Variable: Firm-level Indicator of Cyber Risk Exposure

                                (1)          (2)                 (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)

                               Banks      Non-Banks    Other Intermediaries   Broker-Dealers   Insurance   Funds and Trusts

PP&E / Assets                18.9672***      -0.8489           3.8343           -8.4711**        -0.4905          3.5857
                               (5.3082)     (1.5323)         (2.9196)            (3.5930)       (3.0650)        (4.3517)
Intangibles / Assets            -4.6806      -2.5572        1.5396***            -0.6894*      2.3110***          0.5445
                               (3.2251)     (1.9411)         (0.4135)            (0.3547)       (0.4669)        (2.0341)
CAPEX / Assets                   0.9850      -0.2973           0.1091              0.3106      -1.7334**         -0.5995
                               (1.6204)     (1.8141)         (0.7489)            (0.4574)       (0.7243)        (1.0531)
Cash Flow / Assets             -18.3614       5.8184          24.7099             21.7942        18.8505       -456.0154
                              (42.4829)    (18.1018)        (15.7052)           (23.1973)      (15.2930)      (285.2190)
Long-Term Debt / Assets          0.1564       1.2387           0.0974              0.0388        -0.2629          0.4733
                               (0.2331)     (1.7844)         (0.3604)            (0.3423)       (0.3843)        (0.6530)
Liquidity Ratio                  0.9609       0.0017         2.3114**             -0.7863        -0.2236        -6.2763*
                               (0.6115)     (0.8209)         (0.9160)            (0.7560)       (0.6618)        (3.3330)
Log (Size)                    0.1486***      -0.0392        0.2374***            0.1027**        -0.0470      0.2457***
                               (0.0422)     (0.1519)         (0.0889)            (0.0437)       (0.0746)        (0.0946)
Debt / Assets                   -0.0078       1.6538         1.2113**           -1.1188**      2.6198***       -2.6467**
                               (1.2667)     (1.2835)         (0.5567)            (0.5033)       (0.7882)        (1.1466)
Log (Age)                        0.0564       0.1236           0.1397            0.2422**      0.5623***         -0.1106
                               (0.0618)     (0.2289)         (0.1373)            (0.1083)       (0.1726)        (0.2020)
Equity Net Issuance             -8.5545    -8.0881**          -1.6306             -0.1693       -10.0841         -4.7447
                              (16.5671)     (3.8399)         (1.7780)            (1.2016)       (6.5200)        (5.0365)
ROA                             23.3743      -9.9734         -20.1027            -22.0776       -25.7502        458.7112
                              (45.8820)    (17.7114)        (12.3781)           (22.9903)      (17.7464)      (285.5782)
Sales / Assets                  -5.9635   -34.3853**         -9.5958*            6.5481**        9.3171        -30.9828*
                              (31.1042)    (15.2753)         (5.6564)            (3.3235)       (6.5670)       (17.9186)
Tobin's Q                       -0.9130      -0.0890        0.2744***             0.0289       0.5436***         1.0259
                               (1.2631)     (0.2491)         (0.0870)            (0.1230)       (0.1860)        (0.7011)
Book to Market Equity         -0.5981**      -0.3296        0.5503**            0.2214**         0.1445        0.7030**
                               (0.2790)     (0.2345)         (0.2806)            (0.0965)       (0.2064)        (0.2767)
Operational Costs / Assets     -50.9772   45.8612**         12.5184**           -6.5073**      -12.0841*       33.5803*
                              (40.3495)    (20.4040)         (5.8542)            (3.2787)       (7.0718)       (19.6969)

Quarter Fixed Effect            Yes          Yes               Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
Country Fixed Effect            Yes          Yes               Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                   4543          184               594                1018           1235            409
pseudo R2                      0.107        0.205             0.223               0.125          0.367          0.247

  Notes: Probit regression of firm-level indicators of positive cyber risk total exposure on various balance sheet
  and income statement characteristics. Each column corresponds to a case where all but the relevant industry
  are dropped. Industries are defined by the NAICS 4-digit classification. All variables are defined in Table 3
  of the Online Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** indicate significance
  at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                            26
G              Cybersecurity ETFs

                        Figure 12: Cybersecurity ETFs and Market Returns
        20
        10
   Return, %
        0
        -10
        -20




               2015m7   2016m3   2016m11   2017m7   2018m3   2018m11    2019m7     2020m3    2020m11

                                    HACK ETF             CIBR ETF                 S&P500


Notes: Monthly returns on the HACK and CIBR ETFs and the S&P500. The Pearson correlation coefficients
between the HACK and CIBR ETFs with the market factor are 0.6299 and 0.6440 with the p-values of (0.000)
and (0.000), respectively.




                                                    27
                           Table 11: Determinants of Cybersecurity ETF Returns

                          (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)     (5)    (6)    (7)     (8)    (9)    (10)   (11)    (12)   (13)   (14)

(1)    HACK ETF           100%    98%   61%     14%   49%     0%     6%      -6%    14%    8%      20%    6%      23%    1%
(2)    CIBR ETF            98%   100%   64%     13%   48%     -1%    9%      -6%    15%    7%      14%    2%      23%    5%
(3)    Market              61%    64%   100%    22%   34%     4%     6%      -5%    8%     4%      6%     1%       1%    6%
(4)    HML                 14%    13%   22%    100%   18%     -5%   -10%     2%     -6%   -10%     -4%    -1%     -3%    -1%
(5)    SMB                 49%    48%   34%     18%   100%    -2%    -5%     1%     -6%    -5%     0%     -3%     10%    3%
(6)    CyberExposure        0%    -1%    4%     -5%    -2%   100%    70%    41%     19%   30%      73%   82%      36%    24%
(7)    CyberUncertainty     6%    9%     6%    -10%    -5%    70%   100%    21%     17%   20%      54%   59%      26%    13%
(8)    CyberCountry         4%    2%     -7%    22%   13%     67%    28%    100%   -13%    0%      39%   62%      43%    -4%
(9)    CyberCrypto         14%    15%    8%     -6%    -6%    19%    17%     4%    100%   42%      22%   21%      23%    3%
(10)   CyberGlobal          8%    7%     4%    -10%    -5%    30%    20%     7%     42%   100%     40%   34%       4%    12%
(11)   CyberInsurance      20%    14%    6%     -4%    0%     73%    54%    32%     22%   40%     100%   75%      16%    9%
(12)   CyberLoss            6%    2%     1%     -1%    -3%    82%    59%    51%     21%   34%      75%   100%     39%    16%
(13)   CyberPolitics       23%    23%    1%     -3%   10%     36%    26%    14%     23%    4%      16%   39%     100%    44%
(14)   CyberSocial          1%    5%     6%     -1%    3%     24%    13%     9%     3%    12%      9%    16%      44%   100%

         Notes: HACK and CIBR ETF pricing data was obtained from Bloomberg on March 09, 2021. The two daily
         time series of prices are aggregated to the monthly frequency and log-differenced. Market, HML, and SMB
         are the Fama and French (1993) three factors. All other variables are our cyber risk exposure indices, which
         we aggregate to the monthly frequency and log-difference.



         References
         Fama, E. and K. French (1993): "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
           bonds," Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1).

         Hassan, T., S. Hollander, L. v. Lent, and A. Tahoun (2019): "Firm-Level Political
          Risk: Measurement and Effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4).




                                                             28
