                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                FUNDING RISKY RESEARCH

                                       Chiara Franzoni
                                        Paula Stephan
                                      Reinhilde Veugelers

                                      Working Paper 28905
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28905


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




This paper was written for the NBER Entrepreneurship and Innovation Policy and the Economy
(EIPE) meeting held April 27, 2021. The authors wish to thank the organizers, Josh Lerner and
Scott Stern, for thoughtful comments on an earlier version. Comments from participants at the
meeting are also highly appreciated. The authors also thank Katalin Karikó for helpful responses
to our emails and her willingness to review our discussion of mRNA research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Chiara Franzoni, Paula Stephan, and Reinhilde Veugelers. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Funding Risky Research
Chiara Franzoni, Paula Stephan, and Reinhilde Veugelers
NBER Working Paper No. 28905
June 2021
JEL No. I23,O31,O38

                                         ABSTRACT

The speed with which Covid-19 vaccines were developed and their high-performance underlines
how much society depends on the pace of scientific research and how effective science can be.
This is especially the case for vaccines based on the new designer mRNA technology. We draw
on this exceptional moment for science to reflect on whether the government funding system is
sufficiently supportive of research needed for key breakthroughs, and whether the system of
funding encourages sufficient risk-taking to induce scientists to explore transformative research
paths. We begin with a discussion of the challenges faced by scientists who did pioneering-
research related to mRNA-based drugs in getting support for research. We describe measures
developed to distinguish risky from non-risky research and their citation footprint. We review
empirical work suggesting that funding is biased against risky research and provide a framework
for thinking about why principal investigators, panelists and funding agencies may eschew risky
research. We close with a discussion of interventions that government agencies and universities
could follow if they wish to avoid a bias against risk.

Chiara Franzoni                                 Reinhilde Veugelers
Department of Management, Economics             KU Leuven
and Industrial Engineering                      MSI & ECOOM
Politecnico di Milano                           Naamsestraat 69
20133 Milan                                     3000 Leuven
Italy                                           Belgium
chiara.franzoni@polimi.it                       and Bruegel and PIIE and CEPR
                                                reinhilde.veugelers@kuleuven.be
Paula Stephan
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
pstephan@gsu.edu
          1. Introduction

          The Covid-19 pandemic has underlined how much society depends on the pace of
scientific research and how effective science can be. The speed with which Covid-19
vaccines were developed and their high performance surpassed even the most optimistic
expectations. This is especially the case for those based on the new designer mRNA
technology which enabled the identification of a vaccine with high efficacy in less than three
months after sequencing of the virus and holds huge promise for the future of vaccines and
medicine more broadly.1

          We draw on this exceptional moment for science to reflect on an important and
pressing theme. Is the government funding system sufficiently supportive of the science
needed for key breakthroughs, such as mRNA-based drugs? If the science needed for such
breakthroughs requires transformative research, particularly in its early phases, does our
system of science funding encourage sufficient risk-taking to induce scientists to explore
transformative research paths?

          In this contribution, we discuss risk-taking and the funding of risky science. We start
in Section 2 by describing problems faced by Katalin Karikó, a scientist who did pioneering-
research related to mRNA-based drugs. In section 3 we briefly describe measures developed
to distinguish risky from non-risky research and the extent to which the citation footprint of
risky research differs from that of non-risky research. We then review empirical work
concerning the funding of research, which suggests that funding is biased against risky
science. Section 4 provides a framework for thinking about why funding agencies may
eschew funding risky research. We focus first on how factors within the research system,
such as pressure to show results in a short time period and the widespread use of
bibliometrics, contribute to risk aversion. We then focus on three key players affecting
research funding and the role the three play in determining the amount of risky research that
is undertaken: (1) principal investigators, (2) panelists and (3) funding agencies. Section 5
closes with a discussion of interventions that government agencies and universities could do
if they wish to avoid a bias against risk.




1
    https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-00019-w. Accessed March 4, 2021.

                                                                                                 3
        2. mRNA-design: difficulties encountered advancing a risky agenda

        We begin by describing the development of designer messenger RNA (mRNA), the
breakthrough technology used by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna to develop the first two
vaccines against Covid 19 to obtain FDA approval in the US and EMA approval in the EU.

        The mRNA is a protein-coding-single-stranded molecule, produced by cells during
the transcription process, when the genes encoded in DNA are copied into the molecule of
RNA. The discovery of mRNA was reported in Nature in May of 1961, a result of scientists'
search concerning the synthesis of proteins coded in DNA. The path to synthesize mRNA in
a test tube was made possible in 1984 when Paul Krieg and Doug Melton, scientists at
Harvard, identified that, by using SP6 RNA polymerase, functional mRNA can be produced
in vitro. By 1990, a group of scientists demonstrated that injection of synthetic, in vitro
transcribed mRNA into animals led to expression of the encoded protein (Wolff et al. 1990).
Soon, the scientific world realized that this system could potentially be used to turn human
bodies into medicine-making factories and treat a variety of diseases, ranging from infection,
to cancer to rare diseases and possibly mend such things as damaged heart tissue (Sahin,
Karikó, and Türeci 2014). But, at the time, mRNA was not the only conceivable way to
introduce protein expression into cells: other nucleic acid-based technologies were under
investigation. Moreover, there remained two critical problems that needed to be addressed.
In vitro-transcribed mRNA, when delivered to animals, could either be destroyed by the body
as the body fielded an immune response before reaching its target, or worse yet, cause serious
side effects (Sahin et al. 2014). No one knew how to make mRNA effective in humans
despite years of interest on the part of scientists.

        Katalin Karikó was determined, by all accounts, on finding a way to make synthetic
mRNA applicable to treat human diseases. Born and educated in Hungary, she came to the
US in 1985, first as a postdoctoral fellow to Temple University, then to USUHS. In 1989,
she moved to a faculty position at the Medical School of the University of Pennsylvania. 2
She submitted more than 20 grants, initially for smaller sums, to the University of
Pennsylvania and the American Heart Association, then for larger sums to NIH. 3 As hard as
she tried, she repeatedly failed to get funding for her research. "Every night I was working:



2
  For a summary of Karikó's early career see https://www.wired.co.uk/article/mrna-coronavirus-vaccine-pfizer-
biontech. Accessed May 27, 2021.
3
  Emails from Kariko to coauthors, March 17, 2021 and March 18, 2021.

                                                                                                            4
grant, grant, grant," recounts Karikó. "And it came back always no, no, no." 4 Her inability
to support her research on grants eventually resulted in her being taken off her faculty
position by the university. In 1995 she accepted a non-faculty position, that she describes as
"more like a post-doc position" at the University of Pennsylvania, without any prospect of
advancing. 5

        Two years later, Drew Weissman, an MD PhD immunologist, moved from NIH
(where he had worked with Anthony Fauci) to the University of Pennsylvania. The same
year, Karikó and Weissman met at the school's photocopy machine. While chatting
informally, they recognized that they shared an interest in developing a synthetic mRNA
vaccine against HIV.      They realized the potential of combining their biochemistry,
molecular biology and immunology expertise and decided to begin working together.                   At
the time, Karikó was focused on mRNA-based therapy for treating cerebral diseases and
strokes. With Weissman, Karikó switched focus to mRNA-based vaccines. Weissman
supported the early-stage work partly on one of his existing NIH grants, which had no direct
connection to mRNA research. 6 Their breakthrough occurred when they recognized that
uridine was the nucleoside in the mRNA that provoked the human immune system. They
discovered that, when replacing uridine with pseudouridine, another naturally occurring
nucleoside in the mRNA, it could enter into cells without alerting the RNA sensors. Their
research was eventually published in Immunity in 2005, after being rejected by several
leading journals. 7 Karikó was the first author, Weissman the senior author. It eventually
became a highly cited paper, receiving to date more than 1000 Google-Scholar citations,
although it took until 2015 to reach its first 500 citations. They disclosed their joint work to
the University of Pennsylvania, which filed and obtained patents. Karikó and Weissman were
listed as co-inventors. These patents, in line with the Bayh-Dole act, acknowledge NIH
grants, including the grant that had no direct connection to mRNA research. The patents
were licensed exclusively to CellScript by the University of Pennsylvania. CellScript
sublicensed the University's patent to the German-based firm BioNTech, incorporated in
2008, and US-based Moderna, incorporated in 2010. The subsequent development of the


4
  https://www.statnews.com/2020/11/10/the-story-of-mrna-how-a-once-dismissed-idea-became-a-leading-
technology-in-the-covid-vaccine-race/. Accessed March 4, 2021
5
  Correspondence with Kariko and https://www.ae-info.org/ae/Member/Karikó_Katalin for Karikó's CV.
Accessed May 27, 2021.
6
  The grant was for the Role of gp-340 in HIV Infection and Transmissions.
7
  Gina Kolata, "Kati Kariko Helped Shield the World from the Coronavirus," New York Times, April 8, 2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/08/health/coronavirus-mrna-kariko.html. Accessed May 27, 2021.

                                                                                                            5
mRNA-based drugs was conducted by these companies with equity investments, but also
with a large involvement of public money.8

          Even after the 2005 discovery, the two found funding for mRNA research difficult to
obtain. According to Weissman "We both started writing grants. We didn't get most of
them. People were not interested in mRNA. The people who reviewed the grants said,
"mRNA will not be a good therapeutic, so don't bother." 9 Weismann, however, continued to
receive funding from NIH, some, but not all of which, was for mRNA research; Karikó
continued to have difficulty getting funding.10 A 2007 R01 application that Karikó submitted
to NINDS at NIH, for example, was not discussed at the study section meeting, having been
judged by reviewers to be in the lower half of the applications. The proposal focused on the
anti-inflammatory effects of neurotropics in ischemia stroke. Two reviewers described the
proposed work as "novel," the third described the proposal as suffering from a "relative lack
of novelty." Other comments from reviewers included statements such as: "Preliminary data
should be provided to support that the proposed experiments can be carried out," "insufficient
preliminary data." The work related to one of the aims was described as "very preliminary
and, there is high likelihood, that these experiments, especially in vivo, will not work." 11 An
application submitted in 2012 with Drew Weismann, with the goal of developing "a new
therapeutic approach to treat ischemic brain injury by delivering specific mRNAs" was
scored, but neither it nor the resubmission received a sufficiently strong score to be funded.
Concerns included: "preliminary data presented are insufficient to suggest that this approach
is worthy of in-depth evaluation in a stroke model" and that the first aim of the study was
"largely descriptive." 12

        In 2006 Karikó and Weissman founded the company RNARx, with the intention of
using mRNA to treat anemia. Karikó was the CEO of the company from 2006 to 2013. In




8
   E.g. in 2013 DARPA awarded Moderna a grant for up to $25M for developing mRNA-based therapeutics.
https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/darpa-awards-moderna-therapeutics-grant-
25-million-develop. Accessed May 27, 2021.
9
  Gina Kolata, "Kati Kariko Helped Shield the World from the Coronavirus," New York Times, April 8, 2021.
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/08/health/coronavirus-mrna-kariko.html. Accessed May 27, 2021.
10
   Drew Weissman appears as the principal investigator on a total of 10 projects funded by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) between 1998 and 2021. Retrieved from https://reporter.nih.gov/ in March 2021.
11
   Reviews provided to the authors by Karikó March 18, 2021.
12
   The application was for the continuation of an R01 that Karikó "inherited" from Frank Welsh when he retired.

                                                                                                             6
her role, she applied-for and received one STTR grant from NIH. 13 In 2013, Karikó became
Senior Vice President at BioNTech.

        We have no way of knowing what would have played out in terms of research
outcomes if Karikó's early applications for funding had not been turned down or if she had
gotten research support from the University of Pennsylvanian in the early period. Perhaps
mRNA-based vaccines would have been available for Swine Flu in 2009. But, without the
casual meeting with Weissman at the photo copy machine, she could also have given-up
researching a way to make designer mRNA technology effective for drug development in
humans. What we do know is that her early proposals were not funded and that the University
of Pennsylvania moved her out of her soft-money faculty position. This could reflect a failure
to address the problem of the immune system response, which later on was facilitated by her
collaboration with Weissman. It could also reflect risk aversion on the part of review panels,
that considered the area too risky to be fundable at the time, especially since Karikó had, at
that time, few publications and citations, few preliminary results and no prior record of
funding. More generally, the example tells us that the early-funding of designer mRNA
research, now considered a promise of future medicine, was difficult.

        Karikó is not the only scientist to hear "no, no, no." Similar anecdotal evidence is not
difficult to find. A researcher at a top research institution in the US, in speaking of NASA
and NSF, said: "programs are not very adventurous." And "what I experienced was that I
couldn't get any new idea or anything I was really excited about funded by NSF. It never
worked...the feedback is `well this is too new: we don't know whether it's going to work'."
(Franzoni and Stephan 2021). James Rothman, the day after he shared the Nobel Prize in
Medicine or Physiology in 2013 told an interviewer that "he was grateful he started work in
the early 1970s when the federal government was willing to take much bigger risks in
handing out funding to young scientists." Rothman went on to say "I had five years of
failure, really, before I had the first initial sign of success. And I'd like to think that that kind
of support existed today, but I think there's less of it. And it's actually becoming a pressing
national issue, if not an international issue." (Harris 2013).




13
  Katalin Karikó was the principal investigator of an STTR award project funded by the NIH between 2007 and
2011: https://www.sbir.gov/sbirsearch/detail/294077; https://grantome.com/grant/NIH/R42-HL087688-02.
Accessed March 4, 2021.

                                                                                                         7
         3. Risk aversion in science funding: A review of empirical evidence

         Concerns that the selection of grant proposals is overly conservative has been growing
in recent years. Commentators on science policy have long lamented that science funders
are too conservative and risk averse and skimp on supporting breakthrough research (e.g.,
Laudel 2017; Mazzucato 2015; Viner, Powell, and Green 2004). Funding agencies are
accused of placing too much emphasis on the downside of avoiding failure and too little
emphasis on the upside potential of supporting truly courageous ideas (Azoulay, Graff Zivin,
and Manso 2012; Nicholson and Ioannidis 2012). But do we have more than anecdotal
evidence on risk bias by science funding agencies? Do we have any science of science
funding insights on this?

         Although research in the area is limited, a handful of recent empirical works have
begun to address the topic. The results support the view of risk aversion in funding. Before
we review this evidence, it is important to note that risk remains an ill-defined concept
(Althaus 2005; Aven 2011; Franzoni and Stephan 2021; Hansson 2018). Moreover, it is
difficult to measure. Here we follow Franzoni and Stephan (2021) and use the term risk in
its speculative meaning, in the sense that risk refers to uncertainty concerning the outcomes
of research, where the outcomes vary predominantly in the spectrum of gains and potentially
lead to exceptional results, but also to no results. 14 We preface the literature review with
ways to measuring risky research.


         Measures of risky research

         Empirically identifying risky research is challenging (Franzoni and Stephan 2021).
Most researchers who study risk depend on partial measures that look at the degree to which
research results deviate from past results and/or look at the building blocks upon which the
research is based. Foster and colleagues (2015) adopt the first approach and distinguish
between three types of papers based on the chemical relationships described in the work.
Research that makes a jump explores previously unexplored chemical relationships -jumping
beyond current knowledge-. Such research arguably is more likely to fail but, if the research
succeeds, is more likely to make a breakthrough. Research that explores relationships
between previously studied entities is subdivided into research that tests a new relationship,


14
   We do not use the term risk in the preventive meaning, to mean the possibility of a negative event (e.g., a loss
or harm), a use that is common in the Risk Analysis literature.

                                                                                                                  8
not published before, or research that repeats an analysis of a previously studied relationship.
Foster and colleagues (2015) find that jump papers (reporting highly innovative chemical
combinations) receive 52% more citations on average than "repeat" papers (reporting known
combinations), while new papers (reporting moderately-innovative combinations) enjoy 30%
more citations than those reporting known combinations. Their findings suggest that taking
the risk associated with jump and new research makes it more likely to achieve high impact.
But they also find this research is more likely to "fail." The authors thus find that the citation
distribution associated with jump papers and new papers has a higher mean than that of
repeat papers. They also find that the distribution has a higher variance, both characteristics
that we expect in risky research, suggesting their measure correlates with risk. The additional
rewards associated with jump papers are, however, relatively small and may not compensate
sufficiently for the possibility of failing, suggesting higher expected returns of a safer
research path. 15

        Wang et al. (2017) view scientific research as a combinatorial process and measure
novelty in science by examining whether a published paper makes first time ever
combinations of scientific knowledge components as proxied by referenced journals,
accounting for the difficulty of making such combinations. Almost all new combinations
made by novel papers cross subject categories. While recognizing that novelty is but one
dimension of risk, they show that novel papers have patterns consistent with risky research of
a higher mean and higher variance in citation performance; they also have a higher
probability of becoming a highly cited paper, but at the same time a higher probability to be a
no/low cited paper. Wang et al. (2017) also find strong evidence that novel research takes
more time to become top-cited (Figure 1) and that it is published in journals having a lower
impact as measured by the Journal Impact Factor. These findings suggest that bibliometric
indicators based on citation counts and Journal Impact Factors with a short citation window,
may be biased against risky, novel research. They also show that citations to novel papers
are more likely to come from a broader set of disciplines and from disciplines that are more
distant from their "home" field (Figure 2), suggestive that novel research has a tendency to
both be best appreciated and to spark applications well beyond the disciplinary boundaries.




15
   They also find that papers based on repeat strategies were six times more likely to be published than those
that used new or jump strategies during the period 1983-2008.

                                                                                                                 9
               Figure 1 Delayed Recognition: Novel papers take more time to be cited




                               Figure 2 Trans-disciplinary impact over time




         Source: Wang et al. (2017).




       Assessing bias in funding risky research

       Using their novelty measure, Veugelers, Stephan and Wang (2021) examine whether
the ERC, the most important funding agency of the European Commission, set up in 2007
with the explicit aim to fund "high gain/high risk" research, is biased against novelty. They
find that applicants to the ERC Starting Grant program with a history of highly novel
publications are significantly less likely to receive funding than those without such a history.
The major penalty for novelty comes during the first stage of selection, when panel members
screen a large number of applications based on a short summary of the proposed research and
a CV listing the candidate's main publications, for which they are most likely to use readily



                                                                                              10
available bibliometric indicators. The finding is thus consistent with the use of bibliometric
indicators in grant selection as a source of bias against risky research.

       In an experiment conducted at the Harvard Medical School, Boudreau and coauthors
(2014) find that more novel research proposals, as measured by the percent of keywords not
previously used, receive more negative evaluations during peer-review. This result is driven
by proposals with particularly high levels of novelty. Their preferred explanation for this
finding rests on bounded rationality of reviewers. To quote the authors: "experts
extrapolating beyond the knowledge frontier to comprehend novel proposals are prone to
systematic errors, misconstruing novel work. This implies that, rather than receiving
unbiased assessments (with zero mean errors), novel proposals are discounted relative to their
true merit, quality and potential." (Boudreau et al. 2014: 2779). Lanöe (2019), using a
measure of novelty, finds evidence that funding decisions made by French National Research
Agency are biased against risk-taking. Wagner and Alexander (2013) evaluate the SGER
NSF program designed to support high risk, high reward research that ran from 1990 to 2006.
Funding decisions were made entirely by program officers with no external review. The
authors find that program officers routinely used but a small percent of available funds. The
authors interpret the findings as suggesting that either officers were averse to funding risky
research, despite the number of funded proposals that had transformative results, or that risk
taking was not rewarded within NSF. Packalen and Bhattacharya (2018), using the vintage of
ideas embodied in a paper as a proxy for novelty, find that NIH's propensity to fund projects
that build on the most recent vintage of advances has declined over the last several decades.

       Although the evidence discussed above is preliminary, it suggests that risky research
is disfavored in the competition for funding. This seems the case not only when the funding is
directed to `standard' science, but even when a deliberate goal of the funding agency is to
support high-risk, high gain, as in the case of the ERC.

       Assuming that the preliminary evidence is correct, why do funding agencies eschew
supporting risky research and thus possibly miss the opportunities of funding breakthroughs?
Is this a conscious or unconscious choice, implanted in their modes of operating? And what
can be done to encourage risk taking among funders? These are the questions we explore
further in the next sections.




                                                                                                 11
       4. Why would funding agencies eschew supporting risky research?

       To the best of our knowledge there is no research that directly addresses why funding
agencies may be light on risky research. Moreover, there may be multiple factors that concur
to play a role. Given the lack of research that informs on clear causes, we can only formulate
a set of hypotheses. In this section we provide an overview of hypotheses that deserve more
scrutiny in the future. We start with hypotheses that arise from outside the funding agencies
and relate to the broader research system. We then discuss how these translate into a set of
incentives and opportunities that could induce funding agencies to eschew supporting risky
research and instead fund "safe" research at different levels of analysis. We consider three
such levels: 1) The principle investigators who write and submit grant proposals, 2) the
panels in charge of selecting research to fund (composed by panelists and research officers),
and 3) the funding agencies. Figure 3 provides a summary of the hypotheses.


        4.1 Research system

       Calls for more accountability when using public funds and the trend towards more and
regular evaluations of policy programs put increasing pressure on publicly-funded science
institutions to show results, especially those aligned with political cycles. Shorter windows
for results already bias against basic research programs in general; witness the heated
discussions on the share of overall public R&D budgets for bottom-up basic research
programs like ERC, NSF and NIH, compared to more directed, applied and closer to market
programs. But even within basic research programs, the pressure to show results quickly
may discourage publicly funded agencies from funding more risky research. A major factor
is the length of time it takes risky research to have an impact: novel breakthroughs typically
take a long time to materialize. As shown in Figure 1, Wang et al. (2017) find that novel
research requires a longer time window than non-novel research to achieve impact. For the
first three years after publication, the probability that a highly novel paper is among the top
1% of cited papers is below that of non-novel papers; but beyond these three years, highly
novel papers start accumulating a lead and 15 years after publication, novel papers are nearly
twice as likely to be in the top 1% of highly cited papers. This longer time window for big
impact means that it takes the community a longer time to learn about new approaches and
switch from established research paths to adopting new ones. Funding agencies, in an effort
to maintain or expand funding, may feel that they cannot afford to wait for risky research to



                                                                                                  12
show its impact and opt instead to fund safer research that has measurable effects in the near
term, even if these effects are less likely to become breakthroughs.

       An important factor for discouraging risky research may be the general lack of
tolerance for failure and the meager rewards for those that take uncertain paths within the
science system. As hiring, promotion and funding decisions are important conditions to
engage in research and as reputation is a key reward to doing science, a lower inclination of
researchers to engage in risky research can be traced back to biases against risk in the science
system in general.

       Universities routinely make crucial career decisions, such as hiring, mid-year review,
tenure and promotion. When these career evaluations are made using bibliometric indicators
with relatively short-time windows (like Journal Impact Factors or short windows for
calculating citations), to measure research "quality", they can discourage risky research, as
these measures appear to be biased against risk-taking (Stephan, Veugelers, and Wang 2017).

       Career status and progression is not only an important reward for scientists
themselves, it is also an element that goes into the track record and reputation that funding
agencies and their panels consider as part of the applicant's profile. Any bias against risk in
career decisions may thus have indirect effects on funding decisions, which may in turn affect
career progression negatively when a candidate's productivity in acquiring external funding
is a crucial factor in determining career progression, as the story of Karikó illustrated.

       The large number of researchers in the US on "soft money" positions, i.e. in positions
where salary is funded from grants that the researcher is responsible for obtaining,
encourages the submission of proposals with little risk. If their research is not deemed
fundable or comes up empty handed, the university can cut its losses and hire another
individual into the position. It is notable that soft money positions have been on the rise in
recent years. In the US, for example, the majority of basic medical faculty are hired in soft
money positions and are responsible for bringing in most of their own salary (Stephan 2012).
Soft-money positions also are common outside of medical institutions. Stephan documents
that during the years when the NIH budget doubled, the majority of new hires were made into
soft money positions (Stephan 2007). Soft money positions not only transfer risk to the
faculty; they also discourage risk taking on the part of the faculty given the importance of
continued funding.



                                                                                                 13
        Beyond affecting career progression and funding decisions, track record matters more
generally as it affects a scientist's reputation and recognition. Although by no means the
only reward to doing science, peer recognition and reputation are key drivers of scientists'
choices (Merton 1957; Stephan and Levin 1992). 16                With peer recognition and reputation
biased against risky research, scientists may be less prone to choose risky research paths.
This is however not obvious; examples of scientists who have taken a risky course receiving
a Nobel Prize, for example, are readily available 17 and there is research suggesting that
prestigious prizes can encourage risk taking (Rzhetsky et al. 2015)


        4.2 Principal investigators


        The "lack of risky proposals" hypothesis

        When Story Landis was Director of NINDS at NIH, she noticed that the amount of
support the institute provided for what it classified as "basic-basic" research was declining,
compared to what it was spending on "basic-disease" and applied research. Finding this
disconcerting, the Institute set out to investigate why. Somewhat to their surprise, they found
that the amount of dollars researchers requested to do "basic-basic" research had declined by
21%. Landis, when asked why she thought the decline was occurring replied: "My concern
is that the decrease in the number of basic-basic applications reflects the perception that
NINDS is only interested in disease-oriented research." 18 Basic research is not, of course, the
same thing as risky research but the two are arguably close cousins. The example may
suggest that researchers, anticipating that risky proposals have a difficult time at review, may
simply refrain from conceiving and submitting risky research proposals. This is difficult to
test, given a lack of data on proposals. But it is a plausible hypothesis. Some evidence
consistent with a lack in supply of risky proposals is reported in Veugelers, Stephan and
Wang (2021). They find that non-funded junior ERC applicants who fail in the second stage
have significantly lower likelihood of producing novel papers after being rejected, compared
to the successful ones. The evidence is consistent with rejected applicants learning that risk
is not rewarded. Faced with the pressures to (re-) apply for funding, they adjust their research



16
    Rewards also include the satisfaction derived from puzzle solving, and financial gain that often accompanies
a successful research career (Stephan 2012; Stephan and Levin 1992). Cohen, Sauermann and Stephan (2020)
also show that scientists are strongly motivated by an interest in contributing to society.
17
   Jim Allison, who shared the Nobel Prize for immunotherapy for cancer in 2018 is but one case in point.
18
   https://blog.ninds.nih.gov/2014/03/27/back-to-basics/. Accessed March 30, 2021.

                                                                                                              14
portfolio away from risky research, something which the successful applicants are "freed"
from doing.

        Overall, the reward-premium awarded by the science system for doing risky-research,
compared to that of doing not-so-risky research, appears insufficient to encourage risk taking.
The findings from Foster and colleagues (2015) reported supra, suggest that taking the risk
associated with jump and new research makes it more likely to achieve high impact. But the
additional rewards in terms of the extra citations they find are relatively small and may not
compensate sufficiently for the possibility of failing in terms of not getting published and its
negative impact on the researcher's careers. Their results thus suggest that returns may be
higher for following a safer research path. Stephan (2019) has called this the "Quad effect",
referring to the fact that competitive female figure skaters attempt fewer quadruple jumps,
arguably because the incremental score they can earn for completing a quad, compared to
successfully completing a triple jump, is insufficient to compensate for the risk of failing to
complete the quad jump. For male figure skaters, scoring is different: the incremental score
is larger and arguably provides sufficient incentive to attempt the quad. The work of Uzzi et
al. (2013) is consistent with the findings of Foster et al. (2015), and shows that "[t]he highest-
impact science is primarily grounded in exceptional conventional combinations of prior work
yet simultaneously features an intrusion of unusual combinations", suggesting that a risky
approach, when embedded in a more standard conventional approach can better escape the
citation premium bias. Stated differently, a little bit of risk adds spice to the research; but
conventionality is the dominant characteristic of highly cited papers. 19


        The "Loss aversion by principal investigators" hypothesis

        The preferences of scientists for the level of risk involved in the projects they wish to
pursue may not only reflect biases against risk in the reward structure of science, as discussed
supra, but also loss aversion on the part of scientists. Behavioral psychology has shown that
humans are generally loss-averse. They over-estimate the magnitude of perspective losses
and under-estimate the magnitude of perspective gains (Kahneman and Tversky 1979;
Tversky and Kahneman 1991). It is not implausible to expect that scientists are no exception
to the rule.



19
   Papers characterized as having high medium conventionality coupled with a high tail "novelty" have a hit rate
in the top 5 percent 9.2 times out of 100.

                                                                                                             15
        4.3 Research agencies


        Lack of a portfolio approach hypothesis

        A common approach taken by investors to stabilize the volatility of outcomes is to
include in the same portfolio stocks that have uncorrelated outcomes, or that have outcomes
that are negatively correlated, i.e. when one loses, the other gains. In finance, where the
investors normally want to maximize the overall return of the portfolio and are risk-averse, a
portfolio approach enables purchasing more risky stocks than when the investor buys stocks
"one by one" without reference to what is in her portfolio. The "one-by-one" practice is
frowned upon in the investment literature, given that the choice of a stock whose outcomes
are highly correlated to those already in the portfolio may expose the investor to extreme
gains, but also extreme losses, foregoing any advantages from using the portfolio to diversify
away the risk.

        The same logic holds to some extent for funding agencies. Agencies generally review
proposals one by one, rank them in descending order of overall aggregated score, and then
distribute funds according to the score until the budget is exhausted. 20 This "one by one"
approach may arguably restrict the level of risk agencies take. To the extent that they are risk
averse, the "one by one" approach only aggravates the risk-taking problem.


        The "interdisciplinary bias" hypothesis

        Review panels are often designed by funding agencies to be discipline-based. This,
for example, is generally the case at NSF, and ERC. The latter for instance operates with 25-
panels which are mostly discipline-focused. It follows that investigators who want to propose
research involving multiple disciplines often must make hard choices concerning the most
appropriate panel to consider their proposal. It also means that their proposal may face
obstacles at review that discipline-focused proposals do not face. Bromham, Dinnage and
Hua (2016) studied more than 18 thousand proposals submitted to the Australian Research
Council Discovery Program. They found that the probability of receiving funding decreased




20
   At some agencies, such as NSF, program officers have some leeway in making decisions, but this is not
common.

                                                                                                           16
as the degree of interdisciplinarity of the proposal increased. 21 Banal-Estanol and colleagues
(2019) studied the success rate of teams of co-investigators that sought funding at the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. They showed that team-members with
interdisciplinary backgrounds (i.e. who had balanced shares of publications in different
fields) were penalized, even if those with an interdisciplinary background who were
eventually funded were more successful ex-post.

         A penalty directed at interdisciplinary research may work against funding risky
science, because, as noted supra, papers of high novelty are often interdisciplinary.
Moreover, Wang et al. (2017) also find that novel work that is highly cited is more likely to
garner citations from outside, not from within its own field, suggesting that the research is
appreciated more by others than by colleagues.               Monodisciplinary panels may thus more
likely be biased against risks associated with novel interdisciplinary research.


         Peer review protocols conceal uncertainty hypothesis

         Peer review opinions, especially for risky proposals, involve forecasting research
outcomes in conditions of uncertainty (Knight 1921; Nelson 1959). However, protocols
commonly used to elicit experts' opinions arguably provide little room for uncertainty,
usually requiring reviewers to provide a single score on a numeric ordinal scale to represent a
criterion. For example, the ERC requires a single score to rate the "ground-breaking nature
and potential impact of the research project". Given the uncertainty of future outcomes, the
request of a single-point estimate score can conceptually be thought of as the median value of
the possible outcome distribution envisaged by the reviewer. Whereas in peer review of
`standard' science, the provision of a single point-estimate may provide a necessary time-
saving compromise, in evaluations of risky research, the outcomes of interest can be expected
to be in the tails and a single-point estimate may have little meaning. Furthermore,
uncertainty regarding the outcomes is the key piece of information in this case (Morgan
2014; Morgan and Henrion 1990). It seems plausible that similar practices that demand




21
   The study uses Interdisciplinary Distance (IDD), a measure that takes into account the fields indicated as
pertinent to the proposal by the principle investigator and the distance between the fields, based on the relative
frequency with which the fields co-occur throughout the entire sample.

                                                                                                                 17
experts to express a score that conceals, rather than represents uncertainty, may induce poor
judgments. 22


         Practices that stress reviewers' agreement may disfavor risky science hypothesis

         It is customary in grant peer review to collect several expert opinions about each
proposal before taking a decision. The underling idea is that aggregation 23 of a larger number
of opinions improves accuracy (Kaplan, Lacetera, and Kaplan 2008; Snell 2015), because
random errors likely cancel each-other out when averaging results (Larrick and Soll 2006).
This would especially be important for risky proposals, which are more difficult to evaluate,
hence more exposed to imprecisions and misjudgments.

         The efficacy of this approach relies on two assumptions. First, that a large number of
independent reviewers are available. Second, that the mechanisms for aggregating multiple
views are unbiased towards risk. In practice, however, both assumptions are problematic. The
costs of the review process (Ismail, Farrands, and Wooding 2008) and the unwillingness of
reviewers constrain the number of opinions that can be collected (e.g., the NIH advises 4
reviews for each proposal, ERC panels solicit between 3 and 10 external reviews, but only for
proposals that are short-listed to go to the second-stage of evaluation). Moreover, reviewers
may not be independent and instead have correlated errors (biases), because they share the
same background knowledge or beliefs (Clemen and Winkler 1999; Ottaviani and Sorensen
2015).

         Another critical point when moving from multiple opinions to a single aggregated
opinion and to a final deliberation (e.g., binary choice to fund or not)24 relates to whether
methods and rules used in the decision are unbiased towards risk. Prior studies of peer review
have evidenced low levels of agreement among reviewers even in the evaluation of
"standard'" proposals (Pier et al. 2018). Risky proposals probably spark even greater
disagreement, given the larger uncertainty involved. Current practices at NIH and ERC use


22
   The scholars of expert elicitation have elaborated and tested a number of techniques which are commonly
used in drug-approval, risk analysis, climate-change forecasting, and other areas where uncertainty is key and
expert opinions are the only way to collect information (Morgan and Henrion 1990).
23
   The term aggregation (Bolger and Rowe 2015; List 2012) means the combination of multiple opinions.
Aggregation can be computed with rules or algorithms (e.g., average, quantile average, ..) or can be done
behaviorally, with a consensus meeting (Hora et al. 2013; Martini and Sprenger 2018).
24
   Deliberation, i.e. the binary choice to fund or not, can be directly dependent on the aggregation method or
involve additional rules (e.g., aggregation with arithmetic average and deliberation in descending order of
aggregated score until budget saturation.)

                                                                                                                 18
behavioral aggregation, i.e. consensus meetings, during which multiple views are confronted
and disagreement resolved with discussion (Lamont 2009). However, behavioral aggregation
is exposed to groupthink (Cooke 1991; Lamont 2009) and may lead people to herd away
from the truth, following influential opinions (Banerjee 1992; Mengel 2019). Consistent with
the findings from Della Vigna and Pope (2018) that academics overestimate the accuracy of
beliefs of highly-cited scholars, this may lead to herding on their beliefs. Furthermore, the
requirement of consensus may arguably induce a bias against risky research. Assuming that
risky proposals lead to outcomes in the `tails' of the distribution, i.e., either "hits" of "flops"
(Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Manso 2011), it is plausible that the related opinions would also
be polarized. If this is the case, methods of aggregation and deliberation that do imply
consensus may be systematically biased against risk-taking (Linton 2016). Alternative
methods that do not imply consensus exist or are conceivable, such as gold cards, or lotteries
among those above a given threshold (Fang and Casadevall 2016; Gross and Bergstrom 2019;
Roumbanis 2019), but their limited use has not to date enabled analyses.


       4.4 Panelists and research officers


       The "insurance agent" hypothesis

       Many agencies and panels are acutely aware that the future of their program depends
upon supporting researchers who do not come up "empty-handed." They may look at the
opportunity cost of funding more risky research and compare it with benefits from funding
safer research. These concerns may be magnified by the size of the grant. It is one thing to
place $200,000 on a project that may come up empty handed. It is entirely another to place
$2M.

        Such concerns can lead panels to place considerable emphasis on "what can go
wrong", rather than "what can go right" during the review process. One of the "what can go
wrong" concerns is that the proposed research cannot be accomplished. This concern
undoubtedly fuels the heavy emphasis at many funding agencies on strong "preliminary
findings" or, at some agencies, contingency plans, as part of the proposal. In so doing, the
implicit requirement is that research be de-risked before it is funded. In this way, the panel
supports research with little chance of failure, funding sure bets rather than research that is
not a sure-bet but may have considerable up-side potential.



                                                                                                  19
        The "bibliometric screening and workload" hypothesis

        Scientists and agencies collectively invest a huge amount of time in peer review. For
example, the NIH evaluates approximately 80,000 applications annually, engaging over
2,000 reviewers per years and has more than 150 standing Study Sections. 25 The ERC
averages 15 members on each of its 25 separate panels. The average panel member for the
Starting Grants looks at 137 proposals per call; for Advanced Grants, 83 proposals. 26

        Given the heavy workload, it is not surprising that reviewers and panel members may
seek ways to rapidly screen proposals, especially on a first pass. One of the easiest ways to
do so is to focus on the publishing record of the scientist proposing the research, by
examining readily available measures of citations to papers and other bibliometric indicators
on platforms such as Google Scholar and Scopus. Such was not always the case: As late as
the early 1990s the only way to count citations was to laboriously look in the volumes
published by the Institute of Scientific Information, usually only available in the panel
member's institutional library.

        Does a heavy focus on bibliometrics affect the panel's decision when it comes to
supporting risky research? The work by Wang, Veugelers and Stephan (2017) suggests that
the answer could be yes: They find that novel research is systematically less likely to be
published in high Impact Factor journals.27 Moreover, as noted above, novel research takes
longer to be a top hit than does non-novel research. Such a bibliometric bias against novel
research can lead panels to select against individuals with a history of novel (risky) research,
especially when the applicant is young and has a short history of citations. More generally, a
focus on bibliometrics shifts the basis of decisions away from the substance of the proposal to
an easily accessible metric.

        How workload affects the selection of novel R&D projects has not been studied for
funding agencies; it has, however, been studied in R&D departments of for-profit firms. The




25
   https://grants.nih.gov/grants/peerreview22713webv2.pdf. Accessed January 2, 2021. For Study Sections see
https://public.csr.nih.gov/StudySections/StandingStudySections. Accessed January 2, 2021.
26
   Average for 2008-2013.
27
   The fact that these impact factors are calculated using relatively short citation windows, coupled with the
supra mentioned finding of Wang et al. (2017) that it takes a longer time window for novel research to become
highly cited may explain why journal editors, striving for good scores on their impact factor, may be biased
against novel research.

                                                                                                            20
authors of one study find that a high panel workload reduces the panel's preference for novel
research (Criscuolo et al. 2017).


        "Risk-biased panel members" hypothesis

       Reviewers are often selected based on the excellent expertise of their research profile.
Selection of top/senior experts specialized in the exact same niche area of the proposal are
typically assumed to be the best choice for reviewers. But are top experts also the best
reviewers for assessing risky research proposals? Which kind of reviewers are needed for an
unbiased assessment of risky research? Does it require experience with risky research to be
more willing to take risks in evaluating the proposals of others?

       Unfortunately, we lack specific knowledge illuminating which kind of reviewer's
expertise is best suited at assessing risky research, both in terms of willingness to take risks
and in terms of capacity to accurately assess risk. Only a handful of studies have looked at
reviewers' characteristics and related preferences for funding research proposals. Looking at
the intellectual distance between the background of the reviewers and the research being
proposed, Li (2017) finds that NIH proposals which were related to the research of the
panelist were scored more favorably than those unrelated; they were also scored more
accurately. DellaVigna and Pope (2018), however, studying the accuracy of reviewers when
predicting the outcomes of experiments in behavioral social sciences, find that scholars with
expertise in an area were not more accurate than scholars who were not experts. They also
find that more senior scholars, and academics with more citations were no more accurate.
Looking at assessment of novel proposals specifically, Boudreau and colleagues (2014),
find that novel proposals were evaluated less favorably than non-novel ones. This was not
explained by the degree of intellectual proximity of the evaluator. In conclusion, the limited
evidence available suggests that reviewers who are expert in the niche area are not
necessarily more accurate in assessing research proposals and may be more prone to fund
research in their area.




                                                                                                   21
        Figure 3 Incentives and opportunities regarding risky research: A summary.




       5. Conclusion and suggestions for encouraging risk-taking among
           science funders

       Society needs scientific breakthroughs to tackle many of the challenges it faces.
Because many of the paths to such breakthroughs are risky, its science system, and
particularly its public science funding system, need to ensure that risk taking is encouraged
or, at a minimum, that the system is not biased against risky research. The previous sections
have made clear that we cannot take for granted that this is the case. The findings and
hypotheses that we have explored also suggest possible ways for moving forward.

       The Karikó -Weissman mRNA case already provides some initial thoughts regarding
ways that risky research could be promoted. Their early joint work was partially supported


                                                                                                22
on a grant Weissman obtained that did not directly relate to designer mRNA. Such a
"backburner" strategy is not uncommon in science. Scientists regularly rely on funding
obtained to support another research objective, particularly in the very early exploratory
stages of the other research, when it is still highly risky and without enough preliminary
findings to apply for dedicated funding.

       The mRNA example also shows the importance luck plays in pathbreaking research:
if they had not met at the copy machine, Karikó and Weissman might never have formed the
collaboration that led to mRNA vaccines. The probability that such lucky encounters occur,
can be at least partly "engineered". A work environment enabling more open serendipitous
encounters has the potential of leading to more risky research built on new unprecedented
connections of knowledge pieces. The mRNA example also underlines the importance of
taking an interdisciplinary approach: Karikó was trained as a biochemist, Weissman as an
immunologist, a powerful combination to address the critical bottleneck for mRNA to be
effective and safe in humans. An open environment enabling cross-disciplinary connections
could thus already take away an important impediment for risky research. Moving the
example from the mRNA novel scientific insights supported in part by NIH funding, into the
development of mRNA-based vaccines for the market, supported in part by SBIR funding,
DARPA, and eventually BARDA and Warp Speed, shows the importance of staged funding
of new approaches.

       We conclude with suggestions of ways to encourage risk-taking (or at a minimum
avoid a bias against risk) in science, combining insights from the Karikó-Weissman mRNA
research with insights from the admittedly limited evidence and research on risk avoidance as
it relates to science funding reviewed in the previous sections. As discussed supra, the
promotion of risk needs to be addressed within the entire science system: It cannot be solved
by an individual program or funding agency. It requires a holistic perspective on the science
enterprise, activating not only funders and their reviewers, but also universities and research
centers, journal editors and their reviewers and, last but not least, researchers themselves.
Without ignoring the holistic perspective, we focus the discussion on suggestions for science
funders if they would like to augment their support for risky research. Where appropriate, we
suggest further research and experiments designed with the goal of advancing our knowledge
of ways to promote risk taking in science.


       Deemphasize bibliometrics

                                                                                                23
       Funding agencies, in order to advance innovation, could insist on multiple ways to
assess applicants' research record, avoiding an overly focused use of bibliometrics. They
could refrain from asking or inferring that grant applicants provide short-term citation counts,
and indicators based on short term windows, such as the Journal Impact Factor and top field-
cited articles. They could instruct panels to abstain from discussing such indicators in
reviews or at a very minimum instruct panels of the potential biases which using such
indicators entails.


        Diversity in panel composition

       Funders could balance panel composition with a sufficiently large number of panel
members holding diverse and independent perspectives. They could avoid a panel design
which is narrowly discipline-focused, and thus runs the danger of underappreciating the out-
of-field impact from risky research. This is a more complicated task than selecting panel
members based on top expertise in the field as the main panel selection criterium, as is
commonly done, and which runs the danger of overly relying on the assumed superior
assessment of experts regarding possible outcomes. More importantly, much could be
learned concerning the causal impact of panel composition on risky research selection by
using random control design to run experiments on panel composition.


       Allow for disagreement

       Alternatives to the commonly used consensus or average procedures should be
considered. Aggregation/deliberation rules could be adapted to the nature of the science that
the grant aims at sponsoring. Because more risky research is more prone to extreme
outcomes, it matters not only to have reviewers willing to take risk, but also an accurate
assessment of these extreme outcomes and their probability of occurrence. This requires a
large enough number of sufficiently uncorrelated risk-unbiased opinions. In addition, the
evidence that risky research may lead to more polarized views, warns against aggregation
methods that rely on consensus (e.g., behavioral aggregation), or that assumes distributions of
opinions according to a bell-shape (e.g., arithmetic average). To learn more about alternative
methods that do not imply consensus, experiments with such alternative procedures could be
conducted, using random trials so that we can properly evaluate their impact on the selection
of risky research.



                                                                                             24
        Portfolio approach

        The `one by one' approach typically used in panels works against selecting risky
proposals. At a minimum, panels need to think about correlation among the proposals they
are funding. One sure sign of high correlation in terms of low risk is requiring that all
successful proposals have convincing preliminary findings. More generally, a portfolio
approach to address risk aversion could require panels to put in different baskets highly risky
and moderately risky proposals and provide a way to choose proposals from each. In practice
such a portfolio approach could be quite challenging to implement for research projects.
First, portfolio theory requires that the research paths be sufficiently uncorrelated. This may
not hold within panels that are focused on specific subdisciplines that share risk factors.
Correlation between research paths, in and of itself, can be hard to determine, particularly
when covering vastly different goals across different fields and with different research
approaches. Second, there is the question of fairness: in building a portfolio approach some
proposals may have to be eliminated in an effort to balance or de-risk the portfolio.


        Staging

        An approach to de-risking, commonly used for funding entrepreneurial projects in the
Venture Capital industry, where it is referred to as the `spray and pray' strategy (Lerner and
Nanda 2020), is to fund in stages, where increasingly larger amounts of funding are allocated,
depending on whether interim milestones are being met. Funding in stages can be combined
to include a portfolio approach28.

        Although a staging strategy is used by DARPA,29 by the SBIR program and was
recently introduced into the European Innovation Council program in the EU, it is rarely used
for the funding of basic research. Can such a staging approach also be used by science
funding agencies, allowing them to take more risk? Interim evaluation is especially useful
when initial estimates are unreliable, but can be quickly updated and when investments can
start at small scale and can be later scaled up (Vilkkumaa et al. 2015). It is thus especially
suitable for research that can make substantial steps forwards in a relatively short period of
time and does not require large fixed-costs to be started (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf


28
   Veugelers and Zachmann (2020), for example, proposed a combination of a staging and portfolio approach to
fund vaccines projects and calculated what such an approach would cost to society to obtain a desired number of
vaccines at the end.
29
   https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R45088.pdf. Accessed August 30, 2020.

                                                                                                            25
2018). 30 Some research fields meet these conditions, but the conditions are more the
exception than the norm in the natural sciences, where the share of research that requires
expensive equipment and substantial effort is large (Stephan 2010).


           Loose-play, early-stage ideas

           In the mRNA example, it was crucial that Weissman could use some of the funding he
had already obtained to support early-stage risky joint research with Karikó. Other
researchers often do the same. Dedicated loose-play programs have a number of pluses: it
decreases the amount of effort that goes into preparation of fully-fledged proposals, it is
reasonably easy to administer, and it has the potential of "de-risking" a research agenda
before it goes up for formal evaluation at a granting agency. But a necessary condition to
doing so requires that the PI have existing funding that can be redirected. If these are funds
obtained from regular science funding programs, this raises the question of selection bias in
terms of who obtains such funding. Researchers with a track record in novel research may
be biased against. Also, early career researchers do not have access to such funds; others,
such as Karikó, have tried to get funding but have not succeeded. And even for those who
have such funding, the rules of engagement may not allow using funds for other than the
research described in the proposal.

           Going beyond the "backburner" option, could dedicated loose-play funding for early-
stage risky explorations be operationalized? One approach is to have early-stage funding
readily and quickly available to researchers at their home institution. The California Institute
of Technology, by way of example, had such a program whereby faculty could submit a short
proposal to the Vice Provost for Research and get a decision in a matter of days. Funds
ranged from $25,000 to $250,000 a year for a period of two years. The idea was to give
faculty the wherewithal to engage in early-stage risky research that, given apparent risk
aversion of granting agencies, was deemed not yet ready for submission. If the initial findings
looked promising, and produced enough preliminary data, the faculty could then submit a full
grant proposal. Other institutions, such as ETH Zurich, provide generous base research
funding to all their chairs which they can deploy for research at their own initiative.




30
     In the VC industry, this has largely favored IT and digital companies.

                                                                                              26
        Dedicated programs for early-stage risky research and base research funding require
resources, which institutions often do not have, or may not want to redirect away from other
programs. One way to provide institutions with the financial means for such funding schemes
would be for federal funders to shift a trench of resources to local institutions with the goal of
encouraging risk taking. But loose-play funding can also have downsides. It could, for
example, promote favoritism at the local level. It requires willingness and capacity to
support risky projects at the local level, or at least no bias against risky projects, something
which may not be present, as argued supra. It also involves a willingness to provide salary
support to applicants, especially applicants in soft money positions. A primary reason Karikó
was turned down for the $10,000 Merck starter grant, administered by the University of
Pennsylvania, that she applied for in 1991, was a request for salary support. The rejection
letter singled this out, citing one reviewer who said that "the most substantial weakness is the
use of the entire award for faculty salary support." 31 Politically, shifting funds from federal
agencies to universities for such programs also involves granting agencies ceding some
control to local institutions.32


         Funding researchers rather than projects and for longer periods of time

           Programs that fund researchers rather than projects for longer periods of time allow
researchers to engage in more risky research. It gives the scope and time to researchers to
redirect their research in case of failure. The example that readily comes to mind is the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) that funds successful applicants for seven years,
rather than for three to five years, as is common for most other funding organizations, and
where selection is based more on the applicant and his longer-term research strategy, rather
than a specific research project. HHMI, moreover, does not demand early results nor does it
penalize researchers for early failure. Azoulay et al. (2011) compare the research output of
HHMI investigators to a group of similarly accomplished NIH investigators using propensity
scoring. They find that HHMI investigators use more novel keywords and produce more hits
and more flops, compared to the NIH investigators. Although it is not clear whether these
results depend upon the longer duration of grants and the practice of HHMI to not demand




31
  Letter to Karikó dated April 29, 1991.
32
  NIH already does this by awarding training grants to institutions to administer. In the early years of NIH,
candidates for training awards were selected at NIH.

                                                                                                                27
early results nor penalize researchers for early failure or for other variables, the results
suggest that these practices encourage risk-taking.


        Targeting science funding to risky breakthrough missions

        In the Karikó -Weissman case, the vexing problem of immune response was a well-
known scientific challenge, impeding the promising mRNA technology to be used as a
modality for treating humans. As such, it could have been turned into a "mission" with
dedicated funding.      While the science funding system was either unable or unwilling to
identify such a "mission" in the early research stages of mRNA research, a more mission-
oriented approach was followed in later stages, when DARPA awarded Moderna up to $24.6
million in 2013 "to research and develop its messenger RNA therapeuticsTM" after having
already awarded the company a "seedling" grant of $0.7 million to begin work on the
project.33 Subsequently, when the search for corona-virus vaccines became more pressing
and BARDA and Warp Speed entered the picture, a more targeted approach for funding their
development was used.

        DARPA is frequently heralded for its successes in funding mission-oriented high-risk,
highreward research. Azoulay, Fuchs et al. (2019) identify the organizational flexibility and
autonomy given to program directors as key success elements of the DARPA model. A key
factor for DARPA's success is attracting program staff who are more like risk-taking, idea-
driven entrepreneurs than like administrators. These program staff are given individual
discretion to design project calls and select projects from across the distribution of reviewer
scores, which is seen as antidote to the risk bias DARPA's reviewers may hold. The
autonomy which program officers enjoy is combined with clear targets for which they are
held accountable.

        Can the DARPA model be replicated for avoiding the risk bias in funding basic
research? Azoulay, Fuchs et al (2019) identify as "DARPAble" domain mission-motivated
research on nascent technologies within an inefficient innovation system. These missions
must be clearly identifiable, associated with quantifiable goals and have trackable progress
metrics. Because a focus on basic research for improving understanding is not a clearly
defined mission, the authors deem the DARPA model not appropriate for funding basic


33
  https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/darpa-awards-moderna-therapeutics-
grant-25-million-develop. Accessed May 27, 2021.

                                                                                                          28
research. While DARPA may not be a general model for funding basic research, it may
nevertheless be inspirational for specific scientific challenges for which goals can be clearly
defined.


       Prizes

       An alternative to a competitive-grant approach is to create prizes to encourage path-
breaking research (e.g., Williams 2010, 2012). Although such prizes for risky breakthroughs
can incentivize research, they shift the risk onto the shoulders of the researchers, given that
prizes are only awarded conditional upon succeeding in the endeavor. It may thus only
incentivize researchers who are risk lovers, who have high (perhaps overly high) estimates of
their probability of success and have access to resources.

       Conclusion

       To conclude, science funding agencies should be encouraged to pave the way for
promoting risk taking in scientific research, given that breakthrough research is often
perceived as risky. The way forward is neither safe, nor clearly defined. It is risky in the
sense that it is not clear which paths will work and which will not. Perhaps the most
important contribution funding agencies can make would be to support research which builds
knowledge on the design of funding programs and reviewing practices related to risky
proposals that have the potential of delivering breakthroughs. This support could entail not
only financing such research, but also granting access to data and championing experimental
approaches to test alternative designs of research funding.




       6. References

Althaus, Catherine E. 2005. "A Disciplinary Perspective on the Epistemological Status of
     Risk." Risk Analysis 25(3):567­88.

Aven, Terje. 2011. "On Some Recent Definitions and Analysis Frameworks for Risk,
     Vulnerability, and Resilience." Risk Analysis 31(4):515­22.

Azoulay, Pierre, Erica Fuchs, Anna P. Goldstein, and Michael Kearney. 2019. "Funding
     Breakthrough Research: Promises and Challenges of the `ARPA Model.'" Innovation
     Policy and the Economy 19(1):69­96.


                                                                                                  29
Azoulay, Pierre, J. Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2011. "Incentives and Creativity:
    Evidence from the Howard Hughes Medical Investigator Program." The Rand Journal
    of Economics 42(3):527­54.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2012. NIH Peer Review:
    Challenges and Avenues for Reform. 18116. Cambridge, MA.

Banal-Estañol, Albert, Inés Macho-Stadler, and David Pérez-Castrillo. 2019. "Evaluation in
    Research Funding Agencies: Are Structurally Diverse Teams Biased Against?"
    Research Policy 48:1823­40.

Banerjee, A. V. 1992. "A Simple Model of Herd Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics
    107(3):797­817.

Bolger, Fergus and Gene Rowe. 2015. "The Aggregation of Expert Judgment: Do Good
    Things Come to Those Who Weight?" Risk Analysis 35(1):5­11.

Boudreau, Kevin, Eva Guinan, Karim R. Lakhani, and Christoph Riedl. 2014. "Looking
    Across and Looking Beyond the Knowledge Frontier: Intellectual Distance and
    Resource Allocation in Science." Management Science 62(10):2765­2783.

Bromham, Lindell, Russell Dinnage, and Xia Hua. 2016. "Interdisciplinary Research Has
    Consistently Lower Funding Success." Nature 534(7609):684­87.

Clemen, Robert T. and Robert L. Winkler. 1999. "Combining Probability Distributions From
    Experts in Risk Analysis." Risk Analysis 19(2):187­203.

Cohen, Wesley M., Henry Sauermann, and Paula Stephan. 2020. "Not in the Job Description:
    The Commercial Activities of Academic Scientists and Engineers." Management
    Science 66(9):4108­4117.

Cooke, Roger M. 1991. "Experts in Uncertainty. Opinions and Subjective Probabilities in
    Science." New York Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Criscuolo, Paola, Linus Dahlander, Thorsten Grohsjean, and Ammon Salter. 2017.
    "Evaluating Novelty: The Role of Panels in the Selection of R&D Projects." Academy of
    Management Journal 60(2):433­60.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Devin Pope. 2018. "Predicting Experimental Results: Who Knows


                                                                                          30
    What?" Journal of Political Economy 126(6):2410­56.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2018. "Cost of
    Experimentation and the Evolution of Venture Capital." Journal of Financial Economics
    128(3):422­42.

Fang, Ferric C. and Arturo Casadevall. 2016. "Research Funding: The Case for a Modified
    Lottery." MBio 7(2).

Foster, Jacob G., Andrey Rzhetsky, and James A. Evans. 2015. "Tradition and Innovation in
    Scientists' Research Strategies." American Sociological Review 80(5):875­908.

Franzoni, Chiara and Paula Stephan. 2021. Uncertainty and Risk-Taking in Science:
    Meaning, Measurement and Management.

Gross, Kevin and Carl T. Bergstrom. 2019. "Contest Models Highlight Inherent
    Inefficiencies of Scientific Funding Competitions." PLoS Biology 17(1).

Hansson, Sven Ove. 2018. "Risk." in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E.
    N. Zalta. Stanford University.

Harris, Richard. 2013. "Scientists Win Nobel For Work On How Cells Communicate."
    Retrieved (https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=230192033).

Hora, Stephen C., Benjamin R. Fransen, Natasha Hawkins, and Irving Susel. 2013. "Median
    Aggregation of Distribution Functions." Decision Analysis 10(4):279­291.

Ismail, Sharif, Alice Farrands, and Steven Wooding. 2008. Evaluating Grant Peer Review in
    the Health Sciences: A Review of the Literature. Santa Monica.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
    under Risk." Econometrica 47(2):263­92.

Kaplan, David, Nicola Lacetera, and Celia Kaplan. 2008. "Sample Size and Precision in NIH
    Peer Review." PLoS ONE 3(7).

Knight, Frank. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. (1964 repr. New York, NY: Sentry Press.

Lamont, Michele. 2009. How Professors Think. Inside the Curious World of Academic
    Judgement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



                                                                                          31
Lanoë, Marianne. 2019. "The Evaluation of Competitive Research Funding: An Application
    to French Programs." L'Universite de Bordeaux.

Larrick, Richard P. and Jack B. Soll. 2006. "Intuitions About Combining Opinions:
    Misappreciation of the Averaging Principle." Management Science 52(1):111­27.

Laudel, Grit. 2017. "How Do National Career Systems Promote or Hinder the Emergence of
    New Research Lines?" Minerva 55(3):341­69.

Lerner, Josh and Ramana Nanda. 2020. "Venture Capital's Role in Financing Innovation:
    What We Know and How Much We Still Need to Learn." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 34(3):237­61.

Li, Danielle. 2017. "Expertise versus Bias in Evaluation: Evidence from the NIH." American
    Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9(2):60­92.

Linton, Jonathan D. 2016. "Improving the Peer Review Process: Capturing More Information
    and Enabling High-Risk/High-Return Research." Research Policy 45(9):1936­38.

List, Christian. 2012. "The Theory of Judgment Aggregation: An Introductory Review."
    Synthese 187:179­207.

Martini, Carlo and Jan Sprenger. 2018. "Opinion Aggregation and Individual Expertise." Pp.
    180­201 in Scientific Collaboration and Collective Knowledge, edited by T. Boyer-
    Kassem, C. Mayo-Wilson, and M. Weisberg. Oxford University Press.

Mazzucato, Mariana. 2015. The Entrepreneurial State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
    Myths. New York: Anthem Press.

Mengel, Friederike. 2019. Gender Biases in Opinion Aggregation.

Merton, Robert K. 1957. "Priorities in Scientific Discovery: A Chapter in the Sociology of
    Science." American Sociological Review 22(6):635­59.

Morgan, M. Granger. 2014. "Use (and Abuse) of Expert Elicitation in Support of Decision
    Making for Public Policy." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
    111(20):7176­84.

Morgan, Millett Grager and Max Henrion. 1990. Uncertainty: A Guide to Dealing with
    Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy Analysis 6th Edition. Cambridge University


                                                                                             32
    Press.

Nelson, Richard R. 1959. "The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research." Journal of
    Political Economy 67(3):297­306.

Nicholson, Joshua M. and John P. A. Ioannidis. 2012. "Research Grants: Conform and Be
    Funded." Nature 492(7427):34­36.

Ottaviani, Marco and Peter Norman Sorensen. 2015. Combining Reviews in Expert Panels.

Packalen, Mikko and Jay Bhattacharya. 2018. Does the NIH Fund Edge Science? 24860.
    Cambridge, MA.

Pier, Elizabeth L., Markus Brauer, Amarette Filut, Anna Kaatz, Joshua Raclaw, Mitchell J.
    Nathan, Cecilia E. Ford, and Molly Carnes. 2018. "Low Agreement among Reviewers
    Evaluating the Same NIH Grant Applications." Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences of the United States of America 115(12):2952­57.

Roumbanis, Lambros. 2019. "Peer Review or Lottery? A Critical Analysis of Two Different
    Forms of Decision-Making Mechanisms for Allocation of Research Grants." Science,
    Technology, & Human Values 44(6):994­1019.

Rzhetsky, Andrey, Jacob G. Foster, Ian T. Foster, and James A. Evans. 2015. "Choosing
    Experiments to Accelerate Collective Discovery." Proceedings of the National Academy
    of Sciences 112(47):14569­74.

Sahin, Ugur, Katalin Karikó, and Özlem Türeci. 2014. "MRNA-Based Therapeutics-
    Developing a New Class of Drugs." Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 13(10):759­80.

Snell, Richard R. 2015. "Menage a Quoi? Optimal Number of Peer Reviewers." PLoS ONE
    10(4).

Stephan, Paula. 2007. "Early Careers for Biomedical Scientists: Doubling (and Troubling)
    Outcomes Presentation Harvard University." in Presentation Harvard University.
    Boston, MA.

Stephan, Paula. 2012. How Economics Shapes Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press.

Stephan, Paula. 2019. "Practices and Attitudes Regarding Risky Research." Stanford


                                                                                            33
    University: Metascience Symposium.

Stephan, Paula E. 2010. "The Economics of Science." Pp. 217­73 in Handbook of Economics
    of Innovation, edited by B. H. . Hall and N. Rosenberg. Amsterdam, NL: North Holland.

Stephan, Paula and Sharon Levin. 1992. Striking the Mother Lode in Science: The
    Importance of Age, Place, and Time. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Stephan, Paula, Reinhilde Veugelers, and Jian Wang. 2017. "Blinkered by Bibliometrics."
    Nature 544(7651):411­12.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1991. "Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A
    Reference-Dependent Model." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4):1039­61.

Uzzi, Brian, Satyam Mukherjee, Michael Stringer, and Ben Jones. 2013. "Atypical
    Combinations and Scientific Impact." Science 342(6157):468­72.

Veugelers, Reinhilde, Paula Stephan, and Jian Wang. 2021. "Excess Risk-Aversion at ERC."
    Research Policy forthcoming.

Veugelers, Reinhilde and Georg. Zachmann. 2020. "Racing against COVID-19: A Vaccines
    Strategy for Europe." Policy Contribution (April).

Vilkkumaa, Eeva, Ahti Salo, Juuso Liesiö, and Afzal Siddiqui. 2015. "Fostering
    Breakthrough Technologies - How Do Optimal Funding Decisions Depend on
    Evaluation Accuracy?" Technological Forecasting and Social Change 96:173­90.

Viner, Neil, Philip Powell, and Rod Green. 2004. "Institutionalized Biases in the Award of
    Research Grants: A Preliminary Analysis Revisiting the Principle of Accumulative
    Advantage." Research Policy 33(3):443­54.

Wagner, Caroline and Jeffrey M. Alexander. 2013. "Evaluating Transformative Research
    Programmes: A Case Study of the NSF Small Grants for Exploratory Research
    Programme." Research Evaluation 22(3):187­97.

Wang, Jian, Reinhilde Veugelers, and Paula Stephan. 2017. "Bias against Novelty in Science:
    A Cautionary Tale for Users of Bibliometric Indicators." Research Policy 46(8):1416­
    36.

Williams, Heidi. 2010. Incentives, Prizes, and Innovation.


                                                                                             34
Williams, Heidi. 2012. "Low-Performing Schools Attract and Keep Academically Talented
    Teachers? Evidence." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31(3):752­76.

Wolff, JA, RW Malone, P. Williams, W. Chong, G. Acsadi, A. Jani, and PL. Felgner. 1990.
    "Direct Gene Transfer into Mouse Muscle in Vivo." Science 23(247):1465­68.




                                                                                      35
