                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COMPETITION LAWS, GOVERNANCE, AND FIRM VALUE

                                          Ross Levine
                                           Chen Lin
                                           Wensi Xie

                                      Working Paper 28908
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28908


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Stephen Haber, Terry Hendershott, and Luc Laeven for helpful discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition Laws, Governance, and Firm Value
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 28908
June 2021
JEL No. G3,K21,K22,L4

                                         ABSTRACT

Do antitrust laws influence corporate valuations? We evaluate the relationship between firm
value and laws limiting firms from engaging in anticompetitive agreements, abusing dominant
positions, and conducting M&As that restrict competition. Using firm-level data from 99
countries over the 1990-2010 period, we discover that valuations rise after countries strengthen
competition laws. The effects are larger among firms with more severe pre-existing agency
problems: firms in countries with weaker investor protection laws, with weaker firm-specific
governance provisions, and with greater opacity. The results suggest that antitrust laws that
intensify competition exert a positive influence on valuations by reducing agency problems.


Ross Levine                                    Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business                        Department of Finance
University of California at Berkeley           Chinese University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)    Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                        wensixie@cuhk.edu.hk
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
                                                                                                            1



1. Introduction

           Policymakers increasingly call for reforms to strengthen antitrust laws. For example, the

U.S. House Judiciary Committee's Antitrust Subcommittee (2020) concluded a 16-month

investigation by stressing the need to strengthen antitrust laws, policies, and enforcement.

Furthermore, recent news reports indicate that Democrats and Republicans in the U.S. Congress

are considering major reforms to antitrust laws (e.g., Tracy and Kendall, 2021). In Europe,

European Union and United Kingdom authorities have also signaled their intent to pursue new

legislation to address alleged anticompetitive behavior to promote customer welfare and

innovation (e.g., Schechner, 2020). Japan's Fair Trade Commission also signaled its intention to

coordinate with the U.S. and Europe in strengthening antitrust laws (Kihara and Wada, 2020). In

China, the State Administration for Market Regulation issued a draft of new guidelines to stop

monopolistic behaviors.1 The push for stronger antitrust laws raises questions about the impact of
such reforms on firms, customers, workers, and economic growth. This paper provides what we

believe is the first analysis of how changes in antitrust laws shape corporate valuations.

           Influential theories offer distinct predictions regarding the impact of antitrust laws that

intensify competition on firm value. The agency view holds that competition spurs

improvements in governance that boost valuations. Specifically, competition forces inefficient

firms out of markets and potentially into bankruptcy. As a result, competition encourages firms
to reduce inefficiencies, including inefficiencies associated with agency problems that allow

managers to shirk, empire-build, tunnel, and extract private benefits from the firms at the

expense of shareholder value (Alchian, 1950; Fama, 1980; Fama and Jensen, 1983; Shleifer and

Vishny, 1997). Research also stresses that competition can generate information on managerial

performance that shareholders use to mitigate agency problems (Holmstrom, 1982; Hart, 1983).

           In contrast, other theories highlight how competition can reduce firm value. Intensifying

competition tends to reduce market power, squeezing cash flows and profits (Irvine and Pontiff

1
    https://www.china-briefing.com/news/china-releases-anti-monopoly-guidelines-for-its-platform-economy/
                                                                                                 2



2009). By reducing cash flows, competition can also constrain firms from exploiting growth
opportunities, reducing firm value (Salop 1977; Dixit and Stiglitz 1977). Furthermore,

intensifying competition can increase default risk by reducing the monopoly rents of incumbent
firms (Raith 2003; Gaspar and Massa 2006). In this way, competition can discourage investment
in projects that only payoff by extracting monopoly rents over long periods, such as R&D
investments (Aghion et al., 2005). Several authors stress that the overall impact of product
market competition on agency problems is theoretically ambiguous (Scharfstein, 1988;
Hermalin, 1992; Schmidt, 1997). These conflicting theoretical predictions about the impact of
competition laws on firm value help motivate our empirical examination.
       In this paper, we examine the impact of antitrust laws that intensify competition on

corporate valuations. We exploit the panel dataset complied by Bradford and Chilton (2018) and
Bradford et al. (2019) on laws regulating competition among firms. The dataset covers more
laws, countries, and years than other datasets on competition laws. From the individual laws,

Bradford et al. (2019) create an overall index of the legal and regulatory risks facing firms
engaging in anticompetitive activities. This Competition Law Index measures the degree to
which antitrust laws and authorities limit firms from engaging in anticompetitive agreements,
abusing dominant positions, and conducting mergers and acquisitions that restrict competition.
Increases in the Competition Law Index signify more stringent antitrust laws that foster

competition among firms. Indeed, using data on the Competition Law Index for 90 countries
from 1990 through 2010, we find that increases in the Competition Law Index are associated with
subsequent increases in product market competition. Specifically, we estimate the relationship
between the Competition Law Index and the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of industry
concentration. We find a positive association between increases in Competition Law Index and
subsequent reductions in product market concentration.
       Our baseline analyses evaluate the association between firm value and the Competition
Law Index. We measure firm value using Tobin's Q, which equals the book value of total assets
plus the market value of equity minus the book value of equity, divided by the book value of
                                                                                                  3



total assets (e.g., Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny 1988; Gompers, Ishii, and Metric 2003). The
baseline regressions include numerous controls to isolate the independent relationship between

competition laws and corporate valuations. We include firm and industry-time fixed effects to
condition out time-invariant firm characteristics (such as corporate culture) and time-varying
industry factors (such as economic or technological shocks). The regressions also include annual
Gross Domestic Product per capita and the following time-varying firm traits: size, age, leverage,
and profitability.
        We find a positive and economically meaningful connection between the stringency of
antitrust laws and firm values. The coefficient estimates imply that a one-standard-deviation
increase in the Competition Law Index leads to a rise of 0.12 in Tobin's Q, equivalent to

approximately 13% of the sample standard deviation of Tobin's Q and 8% of the sample mean of
Tobin's Q. The results hold when including or excluding the firm, industry, and country controls
noted above. In robustness tests, we control for the following additional country factors:

financial development (stock market development, credit market development), economic and
business freedom (e.g., property rights, government integrity, business freedom, labor freedom,
monetary freedom, trade freedom, investment freedom, and financial freedom), and tax treatment
of shareholder income (capital gains tax, dividend tax). The results hold when controlling for
these additional variables sequentially or simultaneously. Finally, we find no evidence of reverse

causality. Corporate valuations do not predict changes in competition laws.
        We enhance our identification strategy by evaluating the mechanisms underlying the
agency view. The agency view holds that intensifying competition laws induces more intense
competition that mitigates agency problems, boosting valuations. The baseline results establish a
positive relationship between competition laws stringency and valuations. However, they do not
show that intensifying competition laws increases valuations by reducing agency frictions. To
evaluate the underlying mechanisms, we assess whether the association between competition
laws and corporate valuations varies across countries, firms, and industries in ways consistent
with the agency view.
                                                                                                    4



        We begin by evaluating a corollary of the agency view: intensifying competition will
improve governance and boost valuations more when there are larger pre-existing agency

frictions. The intuition for this corollary is that competition will not materially reduce agency
frictions if other corporate governance mechanisms have already alleviated those problems. To
assess this corollary, we examine whether the association between competition laws and
corporate valuations is stronger among (a) firms in countries with weaker investor protection
laws that impede sound corporate governance, (b) firms with weaker firm-specific governance
provisions, and (c) more opaque firms, as informational asymmetries tend to enhance the
manifestation of agency frictions.
        The evidence is strongly consistent with the agency view's corollary that making antitrust

laws more stringent boosts corporate valuations more when there are larger pre-existing agency
problems. First, we discover that the competition-valuation connection is more pronounced in
economies with weaker investor protection laws. We measure the strength of a country's investor

protection laws using the Anti-Director Rights index initially developed by La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) and later modified by Djankov et al. (2008). The Anti-
Director Rights index gauges the extent to which laws protect minority shareholders against
management. Research suggests that stronger investor protection laws reduce agency problems
(La Porta et al. 2002; Shleifer and Wolfenzon 2002). Consistent with the agency view, we find

that the competition-valuation nexus is stronger in countries with weaker investor protection
laws.
        Second, and consistent with the agency view, we find that the competition-valuation
nexus is stronger among firms with weaker firm-specific governance mechanisms. We consider
three firm-specific governance indicators. Internal Monitoring and Governance measures the
extent to which a company structures its board of directors (e.g., size, independence, committees,
etc.) and executive compensation policies to mitigate agency problems. Equal Shareholder
Rights measures the extent to which a company grants equal voting rights to shareholders.
Managerial Entrenchment gauges the extent to which a company's governance provisions
                                                                                                       5



insulate managers from the disciplinary threat of removal. We construct Managerial
Entrenchment using corporate provisions that past research shows facilitate entrenchment

(Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick 2003; Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell 2008). These provisions
include poison pills, blank checks, supermajority votes, golden parachutes, limited shareholder
rights to call for special meetings, and classified boards. These three firm-specific governance
indicators yield the same result: intensifying competition laws exerts a larger boost in valuations
among firms with weaker governance mechanisms.
       Third, our findings on corporate opacity lend further support to the view that competition
boosts valuations by reducing agency problems. Informational asymmetries help managers
extract private benefits with adverse ramifications on corporation valuations. The agency view

holds that the value-enhancing effects of competition will be larger among more opaque firms.
To assess this prediction, we use four firm-specific measures of opacity. Industrial Tangibility
equals the ratio of tangible assets (property, plant, and equipment) to total assets. Since tangible

assets are typically easier for outside investors to evaluate than intangible assets, researchers
often interpret higher values of Industrial Tangibility as indicating less opacity. Analyst
Coverage equals the number of analysts following the firm. Holding other features about the
firm constant, more analysts typically imply greater information production about the firm and
hence less opacity. For the next two measures of opacity, we use indicators of earnings

management based on Jones (1991) and Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney (1995). An extensive
literature (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki 2016) uses earnings management to proxy for opacity. We
discover that more stringent antitrust laws boost firm values more for firms that have (a) less
asset tangibility, (b) a smaller number of analysts following the firm, and (c) a greater degree of
earnings management.
       We next evaluate another corollary of the agency view. Suppose making competition
laws more stringent boosts valuations by intensifying competition and ameliorating agency
problems. In this case, the impact of competition laws on valuations should be smaller among
firms operating in industries that were already highly competitive before the change in
                                                                                                     6



competition laws. At the extreme, strengthening antitrust laws should have no impact on
valuations in perfectly competitive industries, according to the agency view. To assess this

corollary, we examine the relationship between valuations and competition laws while
differentiating by the degree of pre-existing industry competition. We measure industry
competition using the value of HHI for each country-industry in the initial year of the sample.
We find that intensifying competition laws disproportionately boosts valuations among firms in
more concentrated industries. Moreover, these effects are especially pronounced in economies
with greater pre-existing agency frictions. We find that intensifying competition laws
disproportionately boosts valuations more among firms that are both (a) in economies with
greater pre-existing agency frictions and (b) in less competitive industries.

       As a final test, we examine the relationship between competition laws and firm-specific
measures of operating efficiency. That is, we provide direct evidence on how making antitrust
laws more stringent shapes firm behaviors. We use two operating efficiency measures. Selling,

General & Administrative Expenses/Sales includes expenditures on items not directly involved
in the manufacturing of goods or the provision of services, such as marketing and advertising
expenses. The second measure, Staff Costs/Sales, equals wages paid to employees and other
labor-related costs (such as employee benefits, pension expense, profit-sharing expense,
insurance, etc.) divided by total sales. These measures, albeit imperfect, are often used to gauge

firms' operating performance and managerial slack and shed additional empirical light on why
intensifying competition laws is associated with subsequent increases in corporate valuations.
       We discover that intensifying competition laws is associated with improved operational
efficiency among firms in economies with weaker investor protection laws. In the regressions
where the dependent variable is either Selling, General & Administrative Expenses/Sales or Staff
Costs/Sales, Competition Law Index enters negatively and significantly. The interaction term,
Competition Law Index * Anti-Director Rights, enters positively and significantly. These
findings are consistent with the agency view: strengthening antitrust laws lowers operating costs
more in economies with weaker shareholder protection laws.
                                                                                                    7



       Our work relates to but is distinct from several lines of research. Giroud and Mueller
(2010; 2011) show that weakening the governance of firms reduces operating performance, stock

returns, and valuations among U.S. firms, but only in non-competitive industries. Relatedly,
Kadyrzhanova and Rhodes (2011) show for a sample of U.S. firms that the impact of governance
provisions on firm value depends on whether the provisions allow managers to delay takeovers
and differs by industrial concentration. The focus of these studies is the relationship between
corporate governance and firm value, and whether this relationship varies by industrial
competition. Our study focuses instead on how reforms on competition laws affect corporate
valuations. Furthermore, while extensive research explores the relationship between competition
and governance, performance, and firm value (e.g., Nickell, 1996; Sundaram, John, and John,

1996; Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999; Blundell, Griffith, and Van Reenen, 1999), these studies
provide mixed evidence on the competition-valuation nexus, and do not examine the effects of
antitrust laws. Our research evaluates the relationship between reforming competition laws on

firm value. Furthermore, we test whether the association between competition laws and corporate
valuations varies across countries, firms, and industries in ways consistent with the agency view
of the competition law and valuation nexus.



2. Data

       This section discusses the data used in the main analyses. In later sections, we describe
the data used in extensions that examine firm-specific corporate governance and opacity

measures.

2.1. Tobin's Q

       Tobin's Q equals the book value of total assets plus the market value of equity minus the
book value of equity, divided by the book value of total assets. The market value of equity equals
the stock price multiplied by the total number of shares outstanding. We obtain these data from
                                                                                                     8



the Thomson Reuters Worldscope database. An extensive body of theoretical and empirical
research uses Tobin's Q to measure corporate performance and valuations, including Morck,

Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), Lang and Stulz (1994), Kaplan and Zingales (1997), La Porta et al.
(2002), Gompers, Ishii, Metric (2003), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Fabisik et al.
(2021). Many researchers stress that Tobin's Q has advantages over accounting-based valuation
metrics because it is based on market prices that reflect both the level and risk of a firm's
expected future profits (e.g., McFarland, 1988; Wernerfelt and Montgomery 1988).


2.2. Competition law index (CLI)

       Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) compile data on statutory laws

regulating competition among firms for 123 countries from 1888 through 2010. They first collect
all competition laws starting from the first competition law in each country. For example, the
first antitrust law in the U.S. is the Sherman Act of 1890. They then codify the content of each of
those laws. The dataset includes information on substantive provisions concerning

anticompetitive agreements, abuse of dominant positions, controls on mergers, and the authority
to address and remedy violations of those laws.
       Bradford and Chilton (2018) aggregate information on individual laws into a Competition
Law Index (CLI) that measures the overall stringency of a country's laws restricting

anticompetitive behaviors by firms in each year. The CLI is composed of four subcomponents.
First, Anticompetitive Agreements aggregates information on the degree to which laws limit
firms from forming horizontal cartels or colluding through vertical agreements. For example, the
Anticompetitive Agreements subcomponent includes data on laws prohibiting firms from
colluding to (1) set market prices for products, (2) divide or allocate the market along
geographic, demographic, price, or other characteristics, (3) limit product supply, (4) limit bids
above specific prices, (5) not to sell/buy products to/from specific companies, (6) determine the
price at which retailers sell products to ultimate consumers, (7) condition contracts on buying
other products not directly connected to the product that is the subject of the contract, and (8)
                                                                                                      9



undertake coercive or other practices that limit access to the market or eliminate competitors
from the market.

       The second component of the CLI aggregates information on laws limiting firms from
abusing their dominant positions. These Abuse of Dominance laws include general prohibitions
of abuses of power and narrower provisions that limit specific price and non-price abuses. For
example, some laws prohibit dominant firms from (1) setting different prices for different
customers for the same products, (2) setting unfair prices by taking advantage of its dominant
positions, (3) setting extremely low prices to eliminate competitors, (4) offering discounts to
incentivize consumers or downstream companies to trade exclusively with the firm, (5) setting
prices at which retailers will ultimately sell to consumers, (6) limiting the supply of products to

particular customers, and (7) conditioning sales of one product on the sales unrelated products.
       Third, Merger Control aggregates information on the extent to which competition laws
regulate mergers and acquisitions. It includes data on each country's laws concerning (1) pre-

merger notification and approval requirements, (2) authority to restrict mergers for competition
and other public interest reasons, and (3) the permissible arguments by firms for mergers and
acquisitions that restrict competition.
       The fourth component of the CLI is Authority. It aggregates information on laws
concerning (1) which parties have legal standing to bring lawsuits against firms alleged to have

violated competition laws, (2) the remedies that authorities can impose for violations of
competition laws, and (3) the industries and enterprise types covered by or exempted from the
scope of competition laws.


2.3. Investor protection laws

       We use the Anti-Director Rights index to gauge the strength of a country's investor
protection laws. The Anti-Director Rights index was initially developed in La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) and then revised by Djankov et al. (2008). We use the
                                                                                                      10



Djankov et al. (2008) version, based on the commercial laws in each country as of 2003. The
researchers designed the index to gauge the legal protection of minority shareholders.

        Specifically, the Anti-Director Rights index is composed of six components. First, Vote
by Mail equals one if the law mandates that shareholders are entitled to vote by mail on the items
on the agenda through a proxy form or postal ballot. The legal rights of voting by mail enable
shareholders to cast informed votes and oppose management-initiated proposals. Second, Shares
not Deposited equals one if the law prohibits companies from requiring shareholders to deposit
their shares before the shareholder meeting. The requirement of depositing shares imposes a cost
on shareholders because they must either obtain a certificate of ownership or are unable to sell
their shares, thereby increasing obstacles to the actual exercise of the voting right. Third,

Cumulative Voting equals one if the law allows minority shareholders (owning 10% or less of the
capital stock) to cast all their votes for a single candidate for the board of directors or to vote
proportionately to the number of votes they own. Cumulative voting strengthens the minority

shareholder rights as it empowers minority shareholders to influence the board of directors and
limits the power of controlling shareholders to dominate the board. The fourth component,
Oppressed Minority, measures the extent to which minority shareholders can challenge actions
that benefit controlling shareholders and damage the company by either rescinding relevant
transactions or seeking damages suffered by the company. In particular, Oppressed Minority

equals one if minority shareholders can challenge a resolution of both the shareholders and the
board if it is unfair, prejudicial, oppressive, or abusive. It equals 0.5 if shareholders can challenge
either a resolution of the shareholders or of the board if it is unfair, prejudicial, or oppressive. It
equals zero otherwise. Fifth, Pre-Emptive Rights equals one if the law granted existing
shareholders the first opportunity to subscribe to new stock issuances and zero otherwise. Sixth,
Capital to Call a Meeting equals one if the law mandates that the minimum percentage of shares
that entitle a single shareholder to call a special meeting is less than or equal to 10% and zero
otherwise. In this way, the Anti-Director Rights index ranges from 0 to 6, with higher values
                                                                                                                11



indicating stronger rights granted by the law to protect minority shareholders from being
expropriated by managers or controlling shareholders.


2.4. Other country traits

        The analyses below control for several time-varying country characteristics potentially
associated with firm value. To control for economic development, we use GDP per capita, which
equals the natural log of gross domestic product per capita. To measure financial development,
we use Stock Market Capitalization/GDP and Private Credit/GDP. Stock Market
Capitalization/GDP is the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP. Private Credit/GDP is the
amount of credit banks provide to the private sector as a proportion of GDP. We also condition
on the Economic Freedom index. This index measures the protection of private property rights,
government integrity, the size of the government, the extent to which regulations impede
efficient business operations, government interventions in labor markets, taxes, government size,
barriers to international trade, constraints on global capital flows and the operation of domestic
financial institutions (Miller, Kim, and Roberts 2020).2 Furthermore, several countries changed
their tax treatment of shareholder income. These tax changes could shape valuations (e.g., Hail et
al., 2015) and be correlated with competition law reforms. We control for this possibility by
conditioning on two measures. Dividend tax equals the annual maximum statutory dividend tax
rate. Capital gains tax equals the annual maximum statutory capital gains tax rate. We create


2
  The Heritage Foundation developed the Economic Freedom index from the following ten components (1) Property
Rights measures the degree of protecting private property via legal system and government enforcement. (2)
Government Integrity is a measure of government corruption and transparency. (3) Tax Burden measures the
marginal tax rates on both individual income and corporate profits. (4) Government Spending measures the overall
expenditure burden of government, including direct spending for maintaining government and transfer payment in
all kinds. (5) Business Freedom measures the degree to which regulatory and infrastructure environments hinder
efficient business operations, such as the ease of starting, operating, and closing a business. (6) Labor Freedom
measures the extent to which a country's legal and regulatory framework protects the labor market, such as
minimum wages and restrictions on hiring, working hours, and layoffs. (7) Monetary Freedom measures the extent
to which government activities distort prices, along with the overall inflations. (8) Trade Freedom measures tariff
and non-tariff barriers on imports and exports of goods and services. (9) Investment Freedom measures the
constraints on the flow of investment capital, such as capital controls, foreign exchange controls, and national
treatment of foreign investment. (10) Financial Freedom measures banking efficiency and the extent to which the
financial sector is independent of government intervention.
                                                                                                   12



these variables using data from the International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development tax database


2.5. Other firm traits

       We account for several time-varying firm characteristics in the main regressions. Size
equals the natural log of the book value of total assets (denominated in U.S. dollars) of the firm.
Leverage equals the ratio of long-term debt to the book value of total assets. ROA is the ratio of
earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) to the book value of
total assets. Age equals the natural log of one plus the number of years since a firm's founding. If
information on the year of a firm's founding is missing, we use the year of incorporation.


2.6. Sample construction

       We begin with all firms in the Thomson Reuters Worldscope database across all
countries covered by the Bradford and Chilton (2018) Competition Law Index dataset. The

sample starts in 1990 because that is the beginning of Worldscope's comprehensive firm-level
data. Our sample ends in 2010 because this is the last year when Bradford and Chilton (2018)
provide data on the CLI. We exclude firms with negative sales or negative cash holdings and
those in regulated industries, which include utilities (standard industrial classification codes

(SIC) between 4900 and 4999) and financial firms (SIC between 6000 and 6999). Following
existing cross-country, cross-firm research that seeks to make firms more comparable (e.g.,
Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004), we exclude firms with a book value of total assets less than
$100 million. We also require that firms have available information on all key variables
(described below). We winsorize firm-level financial variables at the 1% and 99% of the
distribution. After implementing these sample selection criteria, our primary sample includes
197,191 firm-year observations involving 22,399 firms in 93 countries. Our primary sample
                                                                                                                    13



represents approximately 95% of the total global market capitalization.3 Table 1 provides the
summary statistics on key firm-level and country characteristics. The primary dependent variable

in our analyses is Tobin's Q. It has a mean of 1.51 and a median of 1.21, suggesting that Tobin's
Q in our sample does not have a skewed distribution.



3. Competition laws and corporate valuations

         This section examines the relationship between competition laws and corporate
valuations. Specifically, this section (1) uses linear, ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions to
assess the association between the Competition Law Index and Tobin's Q and shows a positive

connection between the stringency of the antitrust laws and firm value, (2) shows that increases
in the Competition Law Index are associated with reductions in industrial concentration, and (3)
demonstrates that changes in corporate valuations do not predict subsequent changes in the
Competition Law Index. The next section employs additional strategies to (a) better identify the

impact of competition laws on valuations and (b) examine how competition and corporate
governance interact to shape corporate valuations.


3.1. Baseline specification

         We employ the following regression specification to assess the relationship between a

country's competition laws and corporate valuations:


    !"#$%! &(",$,% = *& + , × ."/012$2$"%3456%718$,%'( + 9:!
                                                           ",$,%'( + *" + *),% + ;",$,% , (1)




The dependent variable is Tobin's Qi,c,t of firm i in country c in year t. The primary explanatory
variable is the competition law index for country c in year t-1: Competition Law Indexc,t-1. It
measures the stringency of competition laws and gauges the regulatory risks facing firms

3
  We compute the total global market capitalization by aggregating market capitalization of all non-utility, non-
financial firms covered in the Worldscope database in 2010.
                                                                                                       14



engaging in anticompetitive activities. X'i,c,t-1 includes four time-varying firm traits (Size, Age,
Leverage, and ROA) for each firm i in country c in year t-1 and GDP Per Capita of country c in

year t-1. We condition on these traits to isolate the independent relationship between competition
laws and corporate valuations. We control for additional characteristics in robustness tests
described below. Equation (1) also includes firm (i) fixed effects to condition out time-invariant
firm characteristics and industry (j) (three-digit SIC) by year (j,t) fixed effects to control for
time-varying industry traits. In the next section, we employ additional strategies for identifying
competition laws' impact on valuations and exploring how that relationship varies by corporate
governance systems. We estimate Equation (1) using OLS with standard errors clustered at the
country level.


3.2. Baseline results

          We find that the Competition Law Index is positively and significantly associated with
Tobin's Q across several regression specifications. As shown in Table 2, the positive connection

between the stringency of competition laws and corporate valuations holds when conditioning on
firm and year fixed effects (columns 1-2) or firm and industry-year fixed effects (columns 3-6).
The results are robust to including or excluding time-varying firm traits (Size, Age, Leverage,
and ROA) and an indicator of economic development (GDP Per Capita). The results also hold

when excluding the U.S. (columns 5 and 6). Furthermore, the coefficient estimates are similar in
magnitude across the different specifications.
          The estimated coefficients imply an economically meaningful association between
antitrust laws and firm values. We use the coefficient estimates from the specification in column
4, containing the complete set of control variables to illustrate the economic magnitudes. The
estimates imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in the Competition Law Index (0.27) leads
to a rise of 0.12 (= 0.27 * 0.448) in Tobin's Q. This rise is equivalent to approximately 13% of
the sample standard deviation of Tobin's Q (0.94) and 8% of the sample mean of Tobin's Q
(1.51).
                                                                                                               15



3.3. Controlling for additional country characteristics

        An omitted, time-varying country characteristic that correlates with competition laws and

corporate valuations could bias these results. For example, changes in competition laws might be
associated with changes in other national regulations and policies that shape financial systems,
institutional and regulatory quality, and economic and business freedom. We add additional
country traits into the baseline specification to mitigate this omitted variable concern and test
whether the baseline results continue to hold.
        Results presented in Table 3 show that the positive and significant relationship between
Tobin's Q and the Competition Law Index holds when sequentially including an array of other

country characteristics, namely (a) financial development (Stock Market Capitalization/GDP and
Private Credit/GDP), (b) economic freedom (Economic Freedom), and (c) taxes on capital gains
and dividend (Capital Gains Tax and Dividend Tax). The results also hold when simultaneously
including all these characteristics, as shown in column (6).4


3.4. Does reverse causality explain the results?

        The results reported in Tables 2 and 3 are consistent with the view that making antitrust
laws more stringent boosts valuations. However, there may be concerns that reverse causality
drives the relationship between corporate valuations and antitrust laws. To address this concern,

we examine whether changes in corporate valuation predict changes in competition laws.
        Specifically, we first compute the average value of Tobin's Q across firms in a country
each year (Country Tobin's Q). We then assess whether Country Tobin's Q at t-1 predicts the
Competition Law Index in period t (and period t+1) using the following model specification:



4
 In unreported robustness tests, we also implement the Brodeur, Cook, and Heyes (2020) p-hacking test to further
evaluate the robustness of the relationship between Tobin's Q and the Competition Law Index to changes in the
conditioning information set (e.g., Levine and Renelt, 1992). Specifically, we examine the regression results in
Table 3 using all combinations of the explanatory variables. We confirm a strong positive relationship between
Tobin's Q and the Competition Law Index across the specifications, suggesting a robust, independent connection
between competition and valuations.
                                                                                                   16



  ."/012$2$"%3456%718$,% = *& + , × ."<%2=>!"#$%! &($,%'( + 9?@A01=.40$24$,%'( +
                                                                       + C$ + C% + ;$,% .          (2)



We include country (C$ ) and year (C% ) fixed effects to account for unobservable time-invariant
country characteristics and time effects. We estimate Equation (2) using OLS with standard
errors clustered at the country level.
         We find that corporate valuations do not predict changes in competition laws. As shown
in Table 4, Tobin's Q Country in t-1 enters insignificantly in all columns. This result holds when
(a) measuring a country's competition laws in period t (columns 1-2) or t+1 (columns 3-4), and
(b) including or excluding the degree of economic development (GDP per Capita). There is no

evidence of reverse causality running from changes in corporation valuations to changes in
national antitrust laws.

3.5. Do competition laws influence competition?

         One interpretation of the results is that increasing the stringency of competition laws
boosts corporate valuations by intensifying product market competition. However, this
interpretation presumes that increases in the Competition Law Index intensify competition among
firms.

         In this subsection, we examine whether an intensification of competition law stringency,
i.e., increases in the Competition Law Index, boosts product market competition. We use the
Herfindahl-Hirschman index of industry concentration as a proxy for (less) product market
competition. We then estimate the following regression at the country-industry level:


         DD6$,),% = *& + , × ."/012$2$"%3456%718$,%'( + 9:*,+', + C$,) + C(),)% + ;$,% .           (3)



The dependent variable, HHIc,j,t is the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of industry j in country c in
year t. Following Giroud and Mueller (2010), we compute HHI based on firms' sales or total
                                                                                                       17



assets. We control for country-by-industry (C$,) ) fixed effects in all specifications. We include
either year (C% ) or industry-by-year (C),% ) fixed effects in different specifications. We estimate

Equation (3) using OLS with standard errors clustered at the country level.
        We discover that increasing the stringency of competition laws is associated with
material reductions in product market concentration. As reported in Table 5, the Competition
Law Index enters negatively and significantly in all regressions. These findings indicate that
industries, on average, become less concentrated after countries make their competition laws
more stringent.



4. Evaluating the mechanisms linking competition laws and corporate valuations

        The results thus far suggest that making competition laws more stringent is associated
with subsequent increases in competition and corporate valuations. These findings are consistent
with the agency explanation: competition triggers improvements in corporate governance that

mitigate agency problems within firms, and the reduction in agency frictions boosts corporate
valuations. However, we have not yet demonstrated that intensifying competition laws boosts
valuations by reducing agency frictions. The next two sections assess the mechanisms underlying
the agency explanation.

        In particular, this section examines whether the association between competition laws and
corporate valuations varies across countries, firms, and industries in ways consistent with the
view that competition laws increase corporate valuations by spurring competition and reducing
agency frictions. We begin by evaluating a broad corollary of the agency view: intensifying
competition will improve governance more when there are larger pre-existing agency frictions.
Intuitively, competition will not materially improve governance if other corporate governance
mechanisms already work effectively. This section assesses this broad corollary using national
investor protection laws as a proxy for pre-existing agency frictions. Next, this section evaluates
an additional implication of the agency view. We test whether the impact of making competition
                                                                                                  18



laws more stringent on valuations is smaller among firms operating in industries that were
already highly competitive before the change in competition laws. Finally, we examine the

relationship between competition laws and firm-specific measures of operational efficiency. This
provides direct evidence on the connection between reforms of antitrust laws and how firms alter
their behaviors.


4.1. Differentiating by national investor protection laws

       The agency explanation suggests that intensifying competition will trigger more
substantial increases in corporate valuations in economies with greater agency frictions. We first
examine this prediction by using insights from the law and finance literature. As reviewed by La

Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008), research shows that firms operating in countries
with weaker shareholder protection laws tend to have more severe agency problems than firms in
countries with stronger investor protection laws (e.g., La Porta et al. 2002). Therefore, the
agency explanation predicts that the value-enhancing effects of stronger antitrust laws will be

larger among firms in countries with weaker shareholder protection laws and correspondingly
smaller among firms in countries with stronger shareholder protection laws.
       We evaluate whether the competition-valuation connection is weaker in countries with
stronger shareholder protection laws. To measure shareholder protection laws, we use the Anti-

Director Rights index originally developed by La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and later revised in
Djankov et al. (2008). As described above, larger values of the Anti-Director Rights index
signify stronger shareholder protection laws. We then modify Equation (1) by including an
interaction term: Competition Law Index* Anti-Director Rights. The agency explanation predicts
a negative coefficient estimate on the interaction term.
       The Table 6 results suggest that the value-enhancing effects of more stringent
competition laws are smaller among firms in countries with stronger shareholder protection laws.
As shown in column 1, the linear term, Competition Law Index, enters positively and
significantly. The interaction term, Competition Law Index * Anti-Director Rights, enters
                                                                                                                         19



negatively and significantly, suggesting that the value-enhancing effects of competition decrease
with the strength of investor protection.5 We find similar results when partitioning the sample

into high- and low-Anti-Director Rights countries based on whether the Anti-Director Rights
index of a country falls above or below the sample median. As shown in columns 2 and 3, the
positive association between Competition Law Index and firm value is statistically significant for
low-Anti-Director Rights countries but insignificant in high-Anti-Director Rights countries. This
finding is consistent with the view that intensifying competition is particularly beneficial to firm
value in economies that give weaker legal protections of shareholders, i.e., in economies that
provide minority shareholders limited rights in redressing agency issues.6


4.2. Differentiating by industry market structure

           We next examine a different corollary of the view that competition boosts valuations by
reducing agency frictions. Suppose that making competition laws more stringent intensifies
competition, and the resultant competition spurs improvements in corporate governance that

reduce managerial agency problems and increase valuations. Under these conditions, the impact
of any given change in competition laws on corporate valuations should be smaller if the
industry is already highly competitive. For example, if firms are operating in a perfectly
competitive market, intensifying competition laws will not impact valuations through the

competition-agency channel.




5
    The Anti-Director Rights index is time-invariant, so the firm-fixed effects subsume the linear term of this index.
6
 As a robustness test, we use an additional indicator of the strength of shareholder protection. La Porta et al. (1998,
1999) show that common law countries tend to have stronger investor protection laws than civil law countries. Thus,
we use the indicator variable, Common Law, which equals one if a country's legal origin is the English common law
and zero if a country's legal origin falls within the civil tradition (i.e., French, German, or Scandinavian). We test
whether the relationship between corporate valuations and competition laws is weaker among common law
countries. Appendix Table A1 shows that the interaction term, Competition Law Index * Common Law, enters
negatively and significantly. To the extent that common-law countries incorporate legal provisions that are more
protective of shareholder rights than civil-law countries, these results are consistent with the view that competition
boosts firm value by enhancing corporate governance.
                                                                                                  20



       To test this prediction, we measure industry market structure using the HHI. We set HHI
equal to the Herfindahl­Hirschman Index of concentration, which equals the sum of squared

market shares of each firm's total sales in a country-industry-year. We then define High HHI as a
dummy variable that equals one if a firm belongs to an industry with an above-sample-median
HHI and zero otherwise. To mitigate the concern that changes in competition laws directly
change market structure, we use the value of HHI for each country-industry measured in the
initial year of the sample. We then include the interaction term, Competition Law Index * High
HHI, in the baseline regression. The agency explanation suggests that the interaction term will
enter with a positive coefficient.
       As shown in Table 7, the regression estimates are consistent with the agency view. The

positive relationship between competition law stringency and firm value is more pronounced in
more concentrated industries. Specifically, the Competition Law Index * High HHI interaction
term enters positively and significantly at the 10 percent level in column 1.

       We extend these analyses by combining predictions concerning investor protection laws
and industry concentration. Specifically, the agency explanation predicts that the value-
enhancing effects of competition will be greater among firms in (1) economies with greater pre-
existing agency frictions (e.g., in economies where Low Anti-Director Rights equals one) and (2)
less competitive industries (e.g., in industries where High HHI equals one). To examine these

predictions simultaneously, we implement two strategies. First, we include into the baseline
model (a) the two interaction terms (Competition Law Index*Low Anti-Director Rights and
Competition Law Index*High HHI) and (b) the triple interaction term (Competition Law Index *
Low Anti-Director Rights*High HHI). Second, we split the sample between Low and High Anti-
Director Rights countries and run the regressions while including the Competition Law
Index*High HHI interaction term.
       As shown in Table 7, the results are consistent with the prediction that intensifying
competition laws will disproportionately boost valuations among firms that are both (a) in
economies with greater pre-existing agency frictions and (b) in less competitive industries.
                                                                                                    21



Specifically, we find that both Competition Law Index* Low Anti-Director Rights and
Competition Law Index * Low Anti-Director Rights*High HHI enter positively and significantly.

These results suggest that after countries increase the stringency of competition laws, firm
valuations increase more in countries with greater agency frictions (as measured by Low Anti-
Director Rights = 1), and this effect is more pronounced when the firm is operating in a less
competitive industry (as measured by High HHI = 1). This result holds when using the triple
interaction term (column 2) or when splitting the sample, as shown in columns 3 and 4.


4.3. Operating efficiency

       We augment our evaluation of the agency view by examining the operational

performance of firms. In particular, the agency explanation stresses that intensifying competition
boosts corporate values by reducing agency problems and enhancing corporate performance.
Thus far, we have shown that the relationship between intensifying competition laws and
corporate valuations varies across firms in (a) countries with different investor protection laws

and (b) industries with different market concentration levels in ways consistent with the agency
explanation.
       We now examine the relationship between changes in competition laws and two firm-
specific measures of operational efficiency. The first measure, Selling, General & Administrative

Expenses/Sales, equals operating expenses that do not include expenditures directly related to
producing goods or services divided by total sales. These include marketing, advertising, rent,
utilities, salaries, and benefits expenses not directly involved in manufacturing goods or
providing services. Thus, Selling, General & Administrative Expenses/Sales is often used to
gauge firms' operating performance and managerial slack. The second measure, Staff
Costs/Sales, equals wages paid to employees and other labor-related expenses (such as employee
benefits, pension expense, profit-sharing expense, insurance, etc.) divided by total sales. When
comparing firms within an industry, Staff Costs/Sales provides information on a firm's relative
operational efficiency.
                                                                                                 22



       We then assess whether intensifying competition laws is associated with improvements in
these two operational efficiency measures. Specifically, we use Selling, General &

Administrative Expenses/Sales and Staff Costs/Sales as dependent variables and employ the same
regression specifications as in Table 6. While Selling, General & Administrative Expenses/Sales
and Staff Costs/Sales are imperfect operational efficiency measures, they provide additional
evidence on the agency explanation for why intensifying competition laws is associated with
subsequent increases in corporate valuations.
       We find a positive connection between the stringency of competition laws and
operational efficiency in economies with weak legal protection of shareholder rights. In
particular, consider columns 2 and 4 of Table 8, where the dependent variable is Selling, General

& Administrative Expenses/Sales in column 2 and Staff Costs/Sales in column 4. The regression
includes the Competition Law Index, the interaction term between the Competition Law Index
and Anti-Director Rights, and the set of time-varying firm controls, firm-fixed effects, and

industry-year fixed effects discussed above. As shown, the Competition Law Index enters
negatively and significantly in both regressions, while the interaction terms enter positively and
significantly. These findings indicate making competition laws more stringent is associated with
future reductions in these cost indicators in economies with weaker shareholder protection laws.
The findings are consistent with the view that competition mitigates managerial slack and

enhances corporate efficiency.



5. Differentiating by firm-specific corporate governance and opacity characteristics

5.1. Firm-specific corporate governance characteristics

       We next evaluate the agency view's prediction that competition boosts valuations more
when there are larger pre-existing agency frictions. We use three firm-specific measures of those
pre-existing agency frictions. Thus, rather than using a country-level measure, Anti-Director
Rights, to proxy for pre-existing agency frictions, we now use firm-level indicators. One
                                                                                                                   23



disadvantage of using firm-specific corporate governance indicators is data coverage. The
sample shrinks to 20% of the primary sample when using these indicators.

         We obtain these firm-specific indicators of corporate governance from the Thomson
Reuters ASSET4 database. We construct the indicators using the earliest available data from
ASSET4. Thus, they are firm-specific and time-invariant. The sample using firm-specific
governance indicators covers 38,359 firm-year observations across 50 countries.
         First, Internal Monitoring and Governance measures the degree to which a company
structures its board of directors and executive compensation policies to ameliorate agency
frictions.7 Thomson Reuters constructs Internal Monitoring and Governance by aggregating 34
corporate board and executive compensation traits into a score ranging from 0 to 100. Larger

values indicate more effective internal governance mechanisms. Thus, the agency explanation
predicts that the positive impact of competition on valuations will be smaller among firms with
larger Internal Monitoring and Governance values.

         Second, Equal Shareholder Rights measures whether the corporation treats shareholders
equally, rather than limiting the rights of some shareholders. It equals one if the firm satisfies all
three of the following criteria and zero otherwise: (a) the company does not have shares with
different voting rights, (b) the firm does not have shares with a voting cap or a share ownership
limit, and (c) the firm does not require that shareholders hold a minimum number of shares to

vote. Using the bylaws and charter of the firm, Equal Shareholder Rights gauges the protection




7
  Thomson Reuters constructs the Internal Monitoring and Governance score from 34 individual components.
Concerning the board of directors, the score uses indicators capturing board size, board independence, the
independence of committees (e.g., audit committee, compensation committee, nomination committee), the tenure of
board members, the affiliations of board members on other corporate boards, the skills of board members, board
diversity (gender, cultural), re-election policies and succession plans for board members, board attendance rates, and
whether the board or board committees have the authority to hire external advisers or consultants without
management's approval. Regarding executive compensation policies, the score uses information on whether the
company has a performance-based compensation policy for the higher-level executives and board members, whether
the company links executive and board compensation to (a) longer-term objectives, i.e., objectives that are more
than two years in the future, (b) total shareholder return, and (c) corporate social responsibility, and whether the
company has the necessary internal improvement and information tools for the board members to develop
appropriate compensation/remuneration to attract and retain key executives.
                                                                                                  24



of small shareholders. The agency explanation suggests that the value-enhancing effects of
competition will be smaller for firms that protect shareholders equally.

       Third, Managerial Entrenchment measures the extent to which a company's corporate
governance provisions insulate managers from the disciplinary threat of removal. Greater
managerial entrenchment tends to be associated with more severe agency frictions associated
with increased shirking, empire-building, and tunneling by managers (e.g., Manne 1965). To
construct Managerial Entrenchment, we use the summation of six corporate provisions that past
research shows facilitate entrenchment (Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick 2003; Bebchuk, Cohen, and
Ferrell 2008). Specifically, we add one point to Managerial Entrenchment for each of the
following entrenchment provisions in the firm's bylaws or charter: (Poison Pills, Blank Checks,

Supermajority Votes, Golden Parachutes, Limited Shareholder Rights to Call for Special
Meetings, and Classified board. When firm bylaws or charters require a supermajority vote to
amend corporate charters, impose limits on shareholders' abilities to call special meetings, or

create a classified board structure that limits the number of members up for re-election in any
given year, this tends to constrain shareholder power over management. Provisions such as
poison pills, blank check preferred stock, and golden parachutes hamper hostile takeovers and
protect incumbent managers from market discipline. Managerial Entrenchment ranges from zero
to six, with higher values indicating greater managerial entrenchment. The agency explanation

predicts that the positive impact of competition on valuations will be larger among firms with
greater Managerial Entrenchment.
       As shown in Table 9, the findings are consistent with the agency explanation. The
positive association between the Competition Law Index and Tobin's Q is stronger among firms
with weaker governance provisions. The Competition Law Index * Internal Monitoring and
Governance interaction term enters negatively and significantly. This finding indicates that when
firms have stronger governance provisions (larger values of Internal Monitoring and
Governance), the value-enhancing effects of competition are muted. The results are similar for
Equal Shareholder Rights. For Managerial Entrenchment, larger values indicate weaker
                                                                                                    25



governance. Consistent with the agency explanation, we find that the Competition Law Index *
Managerial Entrenchment interaction term enters positively and significantly. This result is

consistent with the prediction that the value-enhancing effects of competition are greater when
corporate governance is less effective in discipline managers, i.e., with larger values of
Managerial Entrenchment.
       We extend these analyses by examining the individual components of the aggregate
Managerial Entrenchment index. Rather than studying the Competition Law Index * Managerial
Entrenchment interaction term, we investigate the interaction between the Competition Law
Index and each of the six entrenchment provisions that compose the Managerial Entrenchment
index: (a) Poison Pills, (b) Blank Checks, (c) Supermajority Votes, (d) Golden Parachutes, (e)

Limited Shareholder Rights to Call for Special Meetings, and (f) Classified Board. Since these
entrenchment provisions imply greater agency frictions, the agency view predicts that these
interaction terms will enter positively. The results presented in columns (4) ­ (9) are strongly

consistent with this prediction. Five out of the six interaction terms between the Competition
Law Index and the individual entrenchment provisions enter positively and significantly.


5.2. Differentiating by firm-specific informational opacity

       In this subsection, we use measures of firm opacity to proxy for pre-existing agency

frictions. Opacity makes it more difficult for shareholders and the board of directors to oversee
the actions of managers. As a result, informational asymmetries help managers extract private
benefits from firms and obfuscate the negative consequences of such actions. In this way, opacity
is indicative of greater agency frictions. Thus, the agency view predicts that the value-enhancing
effects of competition will be stronger among more informationally opaque firms.
       We use four measures of information opacity to test this prediction. First, Industrial
Tangibility measures the asset tangibility in each industry. We first compute the median value of
the ratio of tangible assets (property, plant, and equipment or (PPE)) to total assets for each firm
in Worldscope over the ten years from 1990 through 1999 and call it Tangibility. We then
                                                                                                            26



calculate the median value of Tangibility across firms within each industry and call this value
Industrial Tangibility. Under the assumption that tangible assets are less informationally opaque

than intangible assets, higher values of Industrial Tangibility indicate less opacity. Second,
Analyst Coverage equals the number of analysts following the firm. Assuming that more stock
analysts imply smaller informational asymmetries, higher values of Analyst Coverage suggest
less opacity.
        The third and fourth measures of opacity use Discretionary Accruals, which is that part
of total accruals over which management has discretion. An extensive literature uses
Discretionary Accruals to proxy for earnings management (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki, 2016). Total
Accruals (TAC) equals the change in working capital (=current assets-cash - (current

liability-maturing debt) ) minus depreciation and amortization. We use two models to estimate
the discretionary component of Total Accruals: the Jones model and the modified Jones model
(Jones, 1991; Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney, 1995). Both regression models attempt to explain

total accruals using firm traits (e.g., sales, fixed assets, etc.). They then define the absolute values
of the residuals from the regression as Discretionary Accruals. Larger values of these
Discretionary Accruals measures imply greater earnings management and less informative
financial statements.
        More specifically, the Jones model (Jones 1991) is the following:

         /01!,#                         (                 3045!,#                6657/!,#
        0/!,#$%
                  = *&,),% + *),% F0/           G + ,),% F 0/           G + 9),% F   0/!,#$%
                                                                                               G + ;",% .
                                        !,#$%                   !,#$%



The dependent variable is TACi,t, total accruals by firm $ in year 2, scaled by the total book value
of assets at the beginning of a fiscal year (ATi,t-1). Sale is the change of total revenues from t-1
to t. PPENT represents the net value of property, plant, and equipment. As indicated, the model
scales these explanatory variables by ATi,t-1 and includes the inverse of ATi,t-1 as a separate
explanatory variable. We estimate the model for each country-year group with more than ten
observations. Then we use the absolute value of the residual, ;
                                                              I8,% , as Discretionary Accruals
                                                                                                   27



(Jones). We set High Discretionary Accruals (Jones) equal to one if Discretionary Accruals
(Jones) falls above the sample median and zero otherwise.

       The Modified Jones model (Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney, 1995) is:

   !J.",%                     1                OJ3P",% - RP.!",%            @@PS!",%
           = *&,),% + *),% K        M + ,),% K                   M + 9),% K          M + ;",% ,
   J!",%'(                  J!",%'(                J!",%'(                   J!",%'(


where RECT represents the change of account receivables. We then follow similar procedures
and compute Discretionary Accruals (Modified Jones). We set High Discretionary Accruals
(Modified Jones) equal to one if Discretionary Accruals (Modified Jones) falls above the sample
median and zero otherwise.
       We follow the same methodology used above to test the prediction that Tobin's Q will
increase more following an increase in the Competition Law Index among more informationally
opaque firms. That is, we re-estimate Equation (1) while sequentially including four interaction
terms: the interactions between the Competition Law Index and each of the four opacity
measures.
       The findings confirm the predictions of the agency explanation. As shown in Table 10,
the positive association between the Competition Law Index and Tobin's Q is more pronounced
for (1) firms in industries with lower Industrial Tangibility, (2) firms covered by fewer stock
analysts (lower Analyst Coverage), and (3) firms with more earnings management as measured
by either High Discretionary Accruals (Jones) or High Discretionary Accruals (Modified Jones).
These results are consistent with the prediction that the value-enhancing effects of competition
are stronger when informational asymmetries are larger.



6. Conclusion

       We assess how changes in a country's competition laws would affect corporate
valuations in that country. Exploiting a large panel dataset containing (a) detailed information on
laws regulating competition among firms in more than 90 countries over the period from 1990
                                                                                                 28



through 2010 and (b) market-based measures of firm value for more than 22,000 firms, we find a
positive association between the Competition Law Index and firm value. The results hold when

including firm and industry-by-time fixed effects, along with an array of time-varying country
traits and firm characteristics.
        We also evaluate underlying mechanisms linking antitrust laws and firm value. We find
that making competition laws more stringent boosts firm value more (a) for firms in economies
with weaker investor protection laws, (b) for firms that have less effective governance
mechanisms in reducing agency frictions, and (c) for more opaque firms. Furthermore, the value-
enhancing effects of more stringent competition laws are smaller among firms operating in more
competitive industries. Finally, we discover that operational efficiency increases after

competition laws become more stringent in economies with more severe agency problems. These
results are consistent with the agency view that more stringent competition laws intensify
competition, and the resultant boost in competition reduces managerial agency problems and

increases valuations.
                                                                                                29


References

Aggarwal, R.K. and Samwick, A.A., 1999. Executive compensation, strategic competition, and
      relative performance evaluation: Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 54, 1999-2043.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2005. Competition and innovation:
      An inverted-u relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 701-728.

Alchian, A.A., 1950. Uncertainty, evolution, and economic theory. Journal of Political Economy
       58, 211-221.

Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., Ferrell, A., 2008. What matters in corporate governance? Review of
      Financial Studies 22, 783-827.

Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Van Reenen, J., 1999. Market share, market value and innovation in a
      panel of british manufacturing firms. Review of Economic Studies 66, 529-554.

Bradford, A., Chilton, A.S., 2018. Competition law around the world from 1889 to 2010: The
       competition law index. Journal of Competition Law & Economics 14, 393-432.

Bradford, A., Chilton, A.S., Megaw, C., Sokol, N., 2019. Competition law gone global:
       Introducing the comparative competition law and enforcement datasets. Journal of
       Empirical Legal Studies 16, 411-443.

Brodeur, A., Cook, N., Heyes, A., 2020. Methods matter: P-hacking and publication bias in
      causal analysis in economics. American Economic Review 110, 3634-3660.

Dechow, P.M., Sloan, R.G., Sweeney, A.P., 1995. Detecting earnings management. The
      Accounting Review 70, 193-225.

Dixit, A.K., Stiglitz, J.E., 1977. Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity.
        American Economic Review 67, 297-308.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The law and economics of
      self-dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430-465.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth
      more? Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Fabisik, K., Fahlenbrach, R., Stulz, R.M., Taillard, J.P., 2021 (forthcoming). Why are firms with
       more managerial ownership worth less? Journal of Financial Economics.

Fama, E.F., 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. Journal of Political Economy 88,
      288-307.

Fama, E.F., Jensen, M.C., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and
      Economics 26, 301-325.
                                                                                                   30


Gaspar, J.M., Massa, M., 2006. Idiosyncratic volatility and product market competition. Journal
       of Business 79, 3125-3152.

Giroud, X., Mueller, H.M., 2010. Does corporate governance matter in competitive industries?
       Journal of Financial Economics 95, 312-331.

Giroud, X., Mueller, H.M., 2011. Corporate governance, product market competition, and equity
       prices. Journal of Finance 66, 563-600.

Gompers, P., Ishii, J., Metrick, A., 2003. Corporate governance and equity prices. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 118, 107-156.

Hail, L., Sikes, S., Wang, C., 2017. Cross-country evidence on the relation between capital gains
        taxes, risk, and expected returns. Journal of Public Economics 151, 56-73

Hart, O.D., 1983. The market mechanism as an incentive scheme. The Bell Journal of Economics
       14, 366-382.

Hermalin, B.E., 1992. The effects of competition on executive behavior. The RAND Journal of
      Economics, pp.350-365.

Holmstrom, B., 1982. Moral hazard in teams. The Bell Journal of Economics 13, 324-340.

Irvine, P.J., Pontiff, J., 2009. Idiosyncratic return volatility, cash flows, and product market
        competition. Review of Financial Studies 22, 1149-1177.

Jones, J.J., 1991. Earnings management during import relief investigations. Journal of
        Accounting Research 29, 193-228.

Kadyrzhanova, D. and RhodesKropf, M., 2011. Concentrating on governance. Journal of
      Finance 66, 1649-1685.

Kaplan, S.N., Zingales, L., 1997. Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful measures
      of financing constraints?. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.

Kihara, L., and Wada T., 2020. Japan to join forces with U.S., Europe in regulating big tech
       firms: Antitrust watchdog head. Reuters Oct. 18. (https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
       japan-economy-ftc/japan-to-join-forces-with-u-s-europe-in-regulating-big-tech-firms-
       antitrust-watchdog-head-idUSKBN2740DZ).

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The economic consequences of legal
       origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46, 285-332.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. Legal determinants of external
       finance. The Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and finance. Journal of
       Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
                                                                                               31


La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Investor protection and
       corporate valuation. Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.

Lang, L.H.P., Stulz, R.M., 1994. Tobin's q, corporate diversification, and firm performance.
       Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.

Leuz, C., Wysocki, P.D., 2016. The economics of disclosure and financial reporting regulation:
       Evidence and suggestions for future research. Journal of Accounting Research 54, 525-
       622.

Levine, R., Renelt, D., 1992. A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions.
       American Economic Review 82, 942-963.

Manne, H.G., 1965. Mergers and the market for corporate control. Journal of Political Economy
      73, 110-120.

Mcfarland, H., 1988. Evaluating q as an alternative to the rate of return in measuring
       profitability. Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 614-622.

Miller, T., Kim, A.B., Roberts, J.M., 2020. 2020 Index of Economic Freedom. The Heritage
        Foundation.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1988. Management ownership and market valuation: An
      empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.

Nickell, S.J., 1996. Competition and corporate performance. Journal of Political Economy 104,
       724-746.

Raith, M., 2003. Competition, risk, and managerial incentives. American Economic Review 93,
       1425-1436.

Salop, S., 1977. The noisy monopolist: Imperfect information, price dispersion and price
       discrimination. Review of Economic Studies 44, 393-406.

Scharfstein, D., 1988. Product-market competition and managerial slack. The RAND Journal of
       Economics 19, 147-155.

Schechner, S., 2020. Tech giants face new rules in Europe, backed by huge fines. Wall Street
      Journal. December 16. (https://www.wsj.com/articles/tech-giants-face-new-rules-in-
      europe-backed-by-huge-fines-
      11608046500?st=7toblg1mls4grfi&reflink=desktopwebshare_permalink).

Schmidt, K.M., 1997. Managerial incentives and product market competition. Review of
      Economic Studies 64, 191-213.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance 52, 737-
        783.
                                                                                                  32


Shleifer, A., Wolfenzon, D., 2002. Investor protection and equity markets. Journal of Financial
        Economics 66, 3-27.

Sundaram, A.K., John, T.A., John, K., 1996. An empirical analysis of strategic competition and
      firm values. The case of R&D competition. Journal of Financial Economics 40, 459-486

Tracy, R., and Kendall, B., 2021. Antitrust law: What is it and why does Congress want to
       change it? Wall Street Journal. March 12. (https://www.wsj.com/articles/antitrust-law-
       what-is-it-and-why-does-congress-want-to-change-it-
       11615554000?st=a9v1kt5nphds6z7&reflink=desktopwebshare_permalink).

U.S. House of Representatives, 2020. Investigation of competition in digital markets.
      Subcommittee on Antitrust, Commercial and Administrative Law. Committee on the
      Judiciary. https://judiciary.house.gov/uploadedfiles/competition_in_digital_markets.pdf.

Wernerfelt, B., Montgomery, C.A., 1988. Tobin's q and the importance of focus in firm
      performance. The American Economic Review 78, 246-250.
                                                                                                                     33


Table 1 Summary statistics

This table reports the summary statistics of key variables used in our analysis. For each variable, N, Mean, Sd, P10,
P50, and P90 represent, respectively, the number of non-missing observations, the mean value across observations,
the standard deviation across observations, and the value of the variable at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile of the
distribution of the variable. Statistics include both firm-level variables and country-level during 1990-2010.

Variable                                                       N       Mean       Sd         P10        P50       P90
Competition Laws Stringency
   Competition Law Index                                     1277      0.555     0.271        0        0.644     0.839
Other Country-Level Variables
   Anti-Director Rights                                      1089       3.48      1.1        2          3.5        5
   GDP Per Capita                                            1277       9.38     1.32       7.28        9.59      10.8
   Stock Market Capitalization/GDP                           909        71.8     87.8       14.2        48.9      146
   Private Credit/GDP                                        1089       63.7     44.8       16.2        52.8      127
   Economic Freedom                                          1051       65.1     9.58       53.4        64.7      77.9
   Capital Gains Tax                                         821        14.6     15.7        0          12.5       40
   Dividend Tax                                              821        20.9     15.8        0           22       41.9
Firm-Level Variables
   Tobin's Q                                               197191       1.51     0.943      0.797       1.21      2.53
   Selling, General & Administrative
                                                           158020      0.193     0.168      0.049      0.151     0.377
   Expenses/Sales
   Labor and Related Expenses/Sales                         71396      0.19      0.148      0.033      0.160     0.372
   Size                                                    197191      20.1      1.40        18.6       19.8     22.1
   Age                                                     197191      3.21      1.05        1.79       3.37     4.47
   Leverage                                                197191      0.158     0.162      0.000      0.117     0.378
   ROA                                                     197191      0.107     0.107      0.014      0.106     0.222
   Internal Monitoring and Governance                       38359      46.59     28.26       8.52      45.31     86.71
   Equal Shareholder Rights                                 38359      0.833     0.373        0          1         1
   Managerial Entrenchment                                  38359      2.463     1.64         0          2         5
   Industrial Tangibility                                  197191      0.325     0.163      0.141      0.295     0.561
   Analyst Coverage                                        197191      4.314     5.465        1          2        11
   Discretionary Accruals (Jones)                          193565      0.087     0.132      0.008      0.046     0.190
   Discretionary Accruals (Modified Jones)                 193559      0.087     0.130      0.008      0.046     0.195
                                                                                                                     34


Table 2 Competition laws and firm value, baseline
This table reports the association between competition laws and firm value. The dependent variable, Tobin's Q,
equals the book value of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the
book value of total assets. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of
competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age.
Country controls include GDP per capita. We include firm and year fixed effects in columns 1-2 and firm and
industry-by-year fixed effects in columns 3-6. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the
country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                     Tobin's Q
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
Competition Law Index           0.674**        0.477**        0.595**      0.448**          0.606**         0.497**
                                (2.610)         (2.157)       (2.327)       (2.038)         (2.408)          (2.357)
Size                                          -0.290***                   -0.300***                        -0.254***
                                               (-7.518)                     (-8.410)                         (-13.34)
Leverage                                        0.0176                       0.0541                           0.0605
                                                (0.438)                     (1.623)                          (1.113)
ROA                                           1.019***                     0.915***                         0.991***
                                                (14.13)                     (12.30)                          (10.78)
Age                                           -0.104***                  -0.0661***                       -0.0921***
                                               (-4.396)                     (-2.959)                         (-3.723)
GDP Per Capita                                0.980***                     0.882***                         0.797***
                                                (5.268)                     (6.259)                          (7.127)
Firm FE                            Y               Y              Y             Y              Y                 Y
Year FE                            Y               Y              N             N              N                 N
Industry-Year FE                   N               N              Y             Y              Y                 Y
Observations                    220,974        197,913        220,259      197,191          171,430         151,265
R-squared                        0.635           0.673         0.673         0.706           0.669             0.703
# of countries                    99               93            99            93             98                92
                                                                                                                      35


Table 3 Competition laws and firm value, robustness
This table shows the association between competition law index and firm value, while conditioning on other
country-level factors, namely Stock Market Capitalization/GDP, Private Credit/GDP, Capital Gains Tax, Dividend
Tax, and Economic Freedom. The dependent variable, Tobin's Q, equals the book value of total assets minus the
book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of total assets. The key explanatory
variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-
level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita.
Country controls include GDP per capita. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-
statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                          Tobin's Q
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
Competition Law Index                    0.471**        0.481**      0.491** 0.481**            0.480**      0.449**
                                         (2.353)        (2.058)      (2.328)      (2.151)       (2.167)        (2.233)
Stock Market Capitalization/GDP          0.0003                                                              0.00002
                                         (1.065)                                                               (0.168)
Private Credit/GDP                                      0.0005                                                -0.0004
                                                        (1.543)                                               (-0.951)
Economic Freedom                                                     0.00179                                 0.00146
                                                                     (0.457)                                   (0.338)
Capital Gains Tax                                                                   0.0001                   0.00176
                                                                                   (0.0942)                    (1.605)
Dividend Tax                                                                                    -0.0003     -0.000808
                                                                                                (-0.184)      (-0.475)
Size                                    -0.302***      -0.306***    -0.331***     -0.300***    -0.300***    -0.336***
                                         (-7.648)        (-8.570)    (-7.700)      (-8.064)     (-8.025)      (-6.737)
Leverage                                0.0630**        0.0598*     0.0642**        0.0563       0.0566     0.0779***
                                          (2.140)        (1.874)      (2.051)       (1.661)      (1.671)       (2.998)
ROA                                     0.849***        0.862***    0.757***      0.904***     0.904***      0.645***
                                          (12.98)        (12.72)      (9.720)       (12.00)      (12.01)       (10.18)
Age                                    -0.0614***     -0.0588***    -0.0673**    -0.0574***    -0.0570**      -0.0395
                                         (-2.733)        (-2.706)    (-2.335)      (-2.750)     (-2.689)      (-1.345)
GDP Per Capita                          1.046***        0.858***    0.912***      0.880***     0.885***      1.277***
                                          (4.013)        (7.151)      (7.588)       (5.643)      (5.500)       (5.278)
Firm FE                                      Y               Y           Y             Y            Y             Y
Industry-Year FE                             Y               Y           Y             Y            Y             Y
Observations                             185,236        183,594      171,324       189,112      189,112      148,960
R-squared                                  0.717           0.714       0.724         0.709        0.709         0.741
# of countries                               73             90           92            41           41            41
                                                                                                                      36


Table 4 Pre-existing firm value and competition laws
This table reports the connection between pre-existing measures of firm value and the competition law index. The
dependent variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws,
measured in year t (columns 1-2) or t+1 (columns 3-4). The explanatory variable, Country Tobin's Q, is the one-
year-lagged measure of firm value (Tobin's Q), averaged across each country in a year. Other variables are defined
the same as before. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported
in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.


                                         Competition Law Index[t]                  Competition Law Index[t+1]
                                            (1)                  (2)                  (3)                    (4)
Country Tobin's Q [t-1]                   -0.019               -0.018               -0.010                 -0.010
                                         (-1.107)             (-1.059)             (-0.598)               (-0.597)
GDP per Capita [t-1]                                           -0.095                                      -0.001
                                                              (-1.072)                                    (-0.016)
Country FE                                  Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Year FE                                     Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Observations                              1,179                1,179                 1,179                  1,179
Adjusted R-squared                        0.806                0.807                 0.826                  0.826
# countries                                90                    90                   90                     90
                                                                                                                     37


Table 5 Competition laws and product market competition
This table reports the connection between competition laws in a country and market structure. The dependent
variable is the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) of each country-industry in a year based on sales (columns 1-2) or
total assets (columns 3-4). Other variables are defined the same as before. The t-statistics calculated with robust
standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%,
5% and 10% respectively.

                                                   HHI(sales)                            HHI(total assets)
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)
Competition Law Index                    -0.0866**            -0.0888**            -0.0987**          -0.100**
                                          (-2.238)             (-2.343)             (-2.373)           (-2.450)
GDP Per Capita                           -0.367***            -0.364***            -0.371***         -0.367***
                                          (-5.758)             (-5.797)             (-5.638)           (-5.664)
Country-Industry FE                           Y                    Y                    Y                  Y
Year FE                                       Y                    N                    Y                  N
Industry-Year FE                              N                    Y                    N                  Y
Observations                              110,534              109,920              110,405           109,792
R-squared                                   0.762               0.787                 0.788             0.811
# of countries                               119                 119                   119               119
                                                                                                                      38


Table 6 Competition laws and firm value, differentiate by investor protection
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and firm value, across countries with
different degree of investor protection. We use the Anti-Director Rights index as proxies for the extent to which a
country's legal framework protects investors from being expropriated by insiders. The Anti-Director Rights index
(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997, 1998; Djankov et al. 2008) is an aggregate measure of how
strongly the legal system protects minority shareholders against managers or controlling shareholders in the
corporate decision-making process. High (or Low) Anti-Director Rights is an indicator that equals one if the Anti-
Director Rights index of a country falls above (or below) the sample median value. Tobin's Q equals the book value
of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of total
assets. Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-
level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita. The t-
statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                    Tobin's Q
                                                                                      Low                  High
                                                                                  Anti-Director        Anti-Director
                                                                                     Right                Right
                                                                      (1)              (2)                  (3)
Competition Law Index                                             1.163***         0.713***              0.0974
                                                                    (9.328)         (3.987)              (0.663)
Competition Law Index*Anti-Director Rights                       -0.248***
                                                                   (-6.215)
Size                                                             -0.301***           -0.378***           -0.241***
                                                                   (-8.250)            (-10.48)            (-11.57)
Leverage                                                          0.0562*               0.0368             0.127**
                                                                    (1.699)             (1.299)            (2.238)
ROA                                                               0.909***            0.883***           0.913***
                                                                    (12.44)             (13.81)            (7.152)
Age                                                             -0.0521***          -0.0657***            -0.0536*
                                                                   (-2.881)            (-2.859)            (-1.827)
GDP Per Capita                                                    0.700***            0.712***           0.775***
                                                                    (3.796)             (9.114)            (3.560)
Firm FE                                                                Y                   Y                  Y
Industry-Year FE                                                       Y                   Y                  Y
Observations                                                      195,570               90,663             103,863
R-squared                                                            0.708               0.717              0.710
# of countries                                                         66                  33                 33
                                                                                                                   39


Table 7 Competition laws and firm value, differentiate by pre-existing market structure
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and firm value, across industries with
different pre-existing market structure. High HHI is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm belongs to an industry
with an above-sample-median Herfindahl­Hirschman Index based on sales, and zero otherwise. Low Anti-Director
Rights is an indicator that equals one if the Anti-Director Rights index of a country falls below the sample median
value, and zero otherwise. Tobin's Q equals the book value of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the
market value of equity, divided by the book value of total assets. Competition Law Index measures the overall
stringency of competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability
and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered
at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

                                                                                   Tobin's Q
                                                                                         Low Anti-       High Anti-
                                                                                          Director        Director
                                                                                           Rights          Rights
                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
Competition Law Index                                        0.352*          0.0986       0.556**           0.173
                                                             (1.897)        (0.635)        (2.729)         (1.053)
Competition Law Index*High HHI                               0.183*          -0.151       0.266**          -0.172
                                                             (1.745)        (-1.139)       (2.243)        (-1.204)
Competition Law Index* Low Anti-Director Rights                            0.558***
                                                                            (2.794)
Competition Law Index* Low Anti-Director Rights
                                                                            0.394**
*High HHI
                                                                            (2.378)
Firm & Country controls                                         Y              Y              Y               Y
Firm FE                                                         Y              Y              Y              Y
Industry-Year FE                                                Y              Y              Y              Y
Observations                                                 197,191        195,570         90,663        103,863
R-squared                                                     0.706          0.708          0.717          0.710
# of countries                                                 93              66             33            33
                                                                                                                 40


Table 8 Competition laws and operational efficiency, differentiate by investor protection
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and operating efficiency, across
countries with different degree of investor protection. We measure efficiency using Selling, General &
Administrative Expenses/Sales (columns 1 and 2) and Labor and Related Expenses/Sales (columns 3 and 4). The
Anti-Director Rights index (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997, 1998; Djankov et al. 2008) is an
aggregate measure of how strongly the legal system protects minority shareholders against managers or controlling
shareholders in the corporate decision-making process. Competition Law Index measures the overall stringency of
competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age.
Country controls include GDP per capita. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the
country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                        Selling, General & Administrative                Labor and Related
                                                  Expenses/Sales                           Expenses/Sales
                                             (1)                (2)                     (3)             (4)
Competition Law Index                    -0.0100           -0.0215***               -0.00818       -0.0384***
                                         (-1.569)            (-2.714)                (-0.994)        (-4.828)
Competition Law Index*Anti-
                                                                0.00491*                            0.00924***
Director Rights
                                                                (1.783)                                (3.534)
Firm & Country controls                      Y                     Y                   Y                  Y
Firm FE                                      Y                     Y                   Y                  Y
Industry-Year FE                             Y                     Y                   Y                  Y
Observations                              157,374               155,972              69,663            68,461
R-squared                                  0.816                 0.816               0.896              0.896
# of countries                              92                     66                  89                64
                                                                                                                                                                            41


Table 9 Competition laws and firm value, differentiate by firm-level governance metrics
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and firm value, across firms with different corporate governance mechanisms. We use three
firm-specific measures of corporate governance, which captures the effectiveness of internal governance mechanisms (Internal Monitoring and Governance), the
effectiveness towards equal treatment of shareholders (Equal Shareholder Rights), or the extent of managerial entrenchment (Managerial Entrenchment). Managerial
Entrenchment equals the number of entrenchment provisions commonly observed among international firms, including poison pills, classified boards, blank checks,
supermajority votes, golden parachutes, and limited shareholder rights to call for special meetings. Tobin's Q equals the book value of total assets minus the book value of
equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of total assets. Competition Law Index measures the overall stringency of competition laws in a country in a
year. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors
clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.
                                                                                                                                           42


                                                                                      Tobin's Q
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)       (9)
Competition Law Index                     0.435*     0.628**     -0.204    0.0886       0.0804     -0.138    -0.00461    -0.00358     0.116
                                          (1.922)    (2.258)    (-1.533)   (0.540)     (0.472)    (-1.079)   (-0.0305)   (-0.0212)   (0.663)
Competition Law Index*Internal
                                         -0.0061**
Monitoring and Governance
                                         (-2.141)
Competition Law Index*Equal
                                                     -0.610**
Shareholder Rights
                                                     (-2.598)
Competition Law Index*Managerial
                                                                0.306***
Entrenchment
                                                                (3.843)
Competition Law Index*Poison pill                                          1.669***
                                                                            (2.750)
Competition Law Index*Blank check                                                      0.584*
                                                                                       (1.911)
Competition Law Index*Supermajority
                                                                                                  0.628***
votes
                                                                                                  (3.718)
Competition Law Index*Golden
                                                                                                             0.693***
Parachutes
                                                                                                             (2.687)
Competition Law Index*Shareholder
                                                                                                                          0.376*
rights to call a special Meeting
                                                                                                                         (1.931)
Competition Law Index*Classified board                                                                                                0.221
                                                                                                                                     (0.991)
Firm & Country controls                     Y           Y          Y          Y            Y          Y         Y           Y           Y
Firm FE                                     Y           Y          Y          Y            Y          Y         Y           Y           Y
Industry-Year FE                            Y           Y          Y          Y            Y          Y         Y           Y           Y
Observations                              38,359     38,359      38,359     38,359      38,359     38,359     38,359      38,359     38,359
R-squared                                 0.739       0.740      0.739      0.740        0.739      0.740     0.740       0.739       0.739
# of countries                              54         54          54         54          54         54         54          54          54
                                                                                                                       43


Table 10 Competition laws and firm value, differentiate by information asymmetries
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and firm value, across firms with
different degrees of informational opacity. We measure firm opacity using four measures. Industrial Tangibility
equals the industrial median value of tangible assets (property, plant and equipment) to total assets across firms in
the same industry. Analyst Coverage equals the number of analysts following the firm. Discretionary Accruals
denotes the residuals from regressing total accruals on operating terms using Jones model (Discretionary Accruals
(Jones)) or modified Jones model (Discretionary Accruals (Modified Jones)). Tobin's Q equals the book value of
total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of total assets.
Competition Law Index measures the overall stringency of competition laws in a country in a year. Firm-level
controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls include GDP per capita. The t-
statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                  Tobin's Q
                                                              (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)
Competition Law Index                                     0.839***         0.641***       0.369*             0.365*
                                                            (2.720)         (2.890)       (1.741)            (1.724)
Competition Law Index*Industrial Tangibility              -1.143***
                                                           (-3.397)
Competition Law Index* Analyst Coverage                                   -0.0382***
                                                                            (-3.002)
Competition Law Index* High Discretionary
                                                                                            0.157**
Accruals (Jones)
                                                                                            (2.267)
Competition Law Index* High Discretionary
                                                                                                            0.166***
Accruals (Modified Jones)
                                                                                                            (2.710)
Firm & Country controls                                       Y               Y                Y               Y
Firm FE                                                       Y               Y                Y               Y
Industry-Year FE                                              Y               Y                Y               Y
Observations                                               197,191         197,191          193,554         193,548
R-squared                                                   0.706           0.707            0.706           0.706
# of countries                                               93              93               81               81
                                                                                                                  44


Appendix

Table A1 Competition laws and firm value, differentiate by legal origin
This table presents the heterogeneous effects between competition law index and firm value, across countries with
different legal origins. Common Law is an indicator that equals one if a country's legal origin is the English common
law, and zero if a country's legal origin falls within the civil tradition (i.e., French, German, or Scandinavian).
Tobin's Q equals the book value of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity,
divided by the book value of total assets. Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of competition
laws in a country in a year. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, Profitability and Age. Country controls
include GDP per capita. The t-statistics calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the country level are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                   Tobin's Q
                                                                                  Civil-Law         Common-Law
                                                                                  countries           countries
                                                                    (1)              (2)                 (3)
Competition Law Index                                           0.655***          0.670***             -0.161
                                                                  (3.668)          (4.065)            (-1.170)
Competition Law Index*Common Law                               -0.780***
                                                                 (-4.159)
Size                                                           -0.300***          -0.244***           -0.341***
                                                                 (-8.365)           (-8.477)           (-7.659)
Leverage                                                          0.0528             0.0557           0.0577**
                                                                  (1.617)            (0.777)            (2.458)
ROA                                                             0.913***           0.982***           0.875***
                                                                  (12.39)            (7.774)            (16.93)
Age                                                           -0.0614***         -0.0990***           -0.0400**
                                                                 (-2.912)           (-3.052)           (-2.291)
GDP Per Capita                                                  0.829***           0.809***              0.495
                                                                  (5.263)            (7.059)            (1.624)
Firm FE                                                              Y                  Y                  Y
Industry-Year FE                                                     Y                  Y                  Y
Observations                                                    197,191            103,694              92,446
R-squared                                                          0.707              0.710              0.717
# of countries                                                       93                 61                 32
