                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    USING THE RETAIL DISTRIBUTION OF SELLERS TO IMPUTE EXPENDITURES
                                SHARES

                                        Alexis Antoniades
                                        Robert C. Feenstra
                                           Mingzhi Xu

                                       Working Paper 28902
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28902


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank seminar participants at the American Economic Association, ICP/PPP, ESCOE, the
University of Edinburgh, and Peking University for comments. This research was made possible
through the support of an NPRP grant from the Qatar National Research Fund. Researchers own
analyses calculated based in part on data from Nielsen Consumer LLC and marketing databases
provided through the NielsenIQ Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the NielsenIQ data
are those of the researcher(s) and do not re ect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible
for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.
Financial support from the China Government Scholarship (CSC) for a doctoral study and a
NBER post-doctoral fellowship are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alexis Antoniades, Robert C. Feenstra, and Mingzhi Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using the Retail Distribution of Sellers to Impute Expenditures Shares
Alexis Antoniades, Robert C. Feenstra, and Mingzhi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 28902
June 2021
JEL No. C81,E01,E31

                                          ABSTRACT

Many price indices must be constructed without quantity data at the elementary level. We show
that for some consumer goods in the United States and other countries, one can approximate
expenditure shares using weights derived from the retail distribution of sellers. These weights are
based on the share of outlets selling an item, or the share of outlets adjusted by the total number
of items sold in each. Relative to using no weights, we find that using such imputed weights
substantially reduces bias in the frequency of price changes, in annual inflation, and in price
comparisons across countries.

Alexis Antoniades                                Mingzhi Xu
School of Foreign Service                        Science Building Building No. 1 Room 423N
Georgetown University - Qatar                    Peking University
Education City                                   5th Yiheyuan Road
PO Box 23689                                     Haidian District
Doha                                             China
Qatar                                            mingzhixu@nsd.pku.edu.cn
aa658@georgetown.edu

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
1       Introduction
Many price indices, whether constructed using data collected from visiting stores or from scraping
the web, lack item-specific quantity data for the construction of elementary expenditure aggregates.
In the absence of such explicit expenditure weights, elementary aggregates are calculated by taking
an unweighted average of the prices that comprise them. While in some cases implicit weights can
be introduced through the sampling of the items to be included in the elementary aggregates, this
is not the case with indices calculated using data from the web that lack both implicit and explicit
weights.1
    Treating however all items equally is highly problematic and can introduce biases, as we shall
demonstrate. Consumers purchase a variety of products, but they exhibit strong preference for
only a small subset of the available products and brands within any narrowly defined product
group. The sales distribution is so skewed, that based on our own calculations using scanner data
on some consumer goods, the total sales of the top 2% best sellers per product category can account
for as much as the total sales of the bottom 96%.2
    The unavailability of expenditure data at the elementary (or "basic heading") level is also an
issue that has come up in the work of the International Comparison Program (ICP). Labeled as "the
largest and most complex international statistical activity in the world", the ICP aims to measure
the cost of living across the world by computing purchasing power parity parities (PPPs).3 In the
2011 round, the ICP collected price data from across 199 countries and regions. These data are
used to provide direct comparisons of well-being, to compare growth rates by sector, to report price
levels, and to assess poverty rates. Moreover, PPP-based GDP is used by the IMF to determine
voting rights, quota subscriptions, and financing amounts for its county members. It is also used
by the IMF to produce the World Economic Outlook. Because in the data collection exercise of the
ICP only prices are reported, which are then averaged to produce price aggregates at the "basic
heading" level, measurement error is introduced. Similar to the studies that use online price data,
    1
      See Cavallo and Rigobon (2016) in The Billion Prices Project (BPP) for an overview of how online price data
offer a promising and rich new source of information for informing economic studies. Because price data collected
online are up to date, easy to obtain, and they cover a very large number of retailers, locations, and products, their
use in empirical work can be found across several economics disciplines. Cavallo and Rigobon (2011) and Cavallo
(2018) use the data to study the distribution of price changes. Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) study sources of
price rigidity using online price data while Cavallo (2013) uses data collected online to compare estimated inflation
measures with official statistics. Cavallo (2017) finds that online and offline price data are similar in most countries
and have similar behavior patterns. References within those studies provide information on additional work that
uses online price data to study price behavior. An exception to the studies that use online price data with no
information on expenditure or quantities is Goolsbee and Klenow (2018). The authors use online transaction data
that include both price and quantity to document a lower inflation in online prices than in the CPI. But their data
is proprietary and not available for scraping.
    2
      Computations are based on sales of Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs) ­ defined in note 7 ­ between
2006 and 2011, inclusive, in Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. Scanner
price and quantity data for 30 product categories provided by Nielsen are used for computations, and results for
the United States are similar. A detailed description of the data follows in section 3.
    3
      http://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/world-bank-publish-purchasing-power-parities-december013.



                                                           1
no weight information is collected in the ICP to reflect the quantities of items sold, so all items
within the same basic heading are treated equally.4
    In this paper we show that one can approximate item-specific expenditure weights using weights
that can be easily constructed from the retail distribution of sellers. These weights are based on
the shares of stores selling an item, or on the share of stores adjusted by the number of all items in
those stores. Our approach, which is easy to implement and does not require additional resources
in terms of time and cost can be applied to the ICP framework and (retroactively) to existing
price data collected online, such as those collected by Cavallo and Rigobon (2016) in the BPP.
Relative to using no weights, we finds that using using weights imputed from the retail distribution
substantially reduces bias in the frequency of price changes, in annual inflation, and in ICP price
comparisons across countries.
    To illustrate how our approach works, consider a typical dataset of prices collected online, either
by scraping data from apps that record offline prices across retailers (e.g. Feenstra et al. (2020)), or
by scraping data from various retailers' web sites (e.g. Cavallo and Rigobon (2011, 2016); Cavallo
(2013, 2017, 2018)).5 Such datasets contain information on prices but not on expenditure, at least
not directly.
    Indirectly, however, these datasets yield important information on expenditure shares from the
number of non-missing price quotations (i.e. selling outlets) per item. Because these datasets
contain multiple prices per item ­ reflecting the many outlets an item is available at -- but are
not balanced as some items are sold in some outlets while others are not, we can easily obtain
measures of the retail distribution of sellers that can then be used to impute expenditure shares.
Specifically, using only price information we can construct a metric for retailer distribution by
dividing the number of outlets carrying a particular items over the total number of outlets in our
sample. We call this metric the numeric distribution (ND ). We can also construct a measure of
distribution that takes into account the size of each outlet, where the count of price observations
(i.e. items) per retailer at given a point in time is used to proxy for size. We call this metric the
weighted distribution (WD ).
    We now have sufficient information to impute market shares for each item by assuming ­ as
supported by the data ­ a convex relation between market share and item distribution. That is,
we assume that items available in more retailers have higher sales, and that as the number of retail
sellers rises then the market share rises at an increasing rate. We use an exponential function
to capture the relation between the number of sellers and the the market share, which we argue
is a parsimonious choice among possible convex functions.6 These imputed market shares can
then be used to weight price observations and reduce measurement errors in calculations and/or
   4
     In both the ICP and in studies that use online data, expenditure data from surveys and from the CPI are used
across categories to aggregate data up. Our focus here is the aggregation that takes place within a basic heading
where no weight is applied.
   5
     Similarly, one may also consider a dataset of prices collected by the ICP through surveying of local retailers.
   6
     See note 18. Parameter selection is discussed later in the paper.


                                                         2
estimation.
     We illustrate the approach and evaluate its performance in terms of reducing measurement
error by considering three important applications: (i) measuring the frequency of price changes,
(ii) measuring inflation, and (iii) measuring international price differences. These applications are
chosen because they cover a large, important, diverse, and active body of work that is of great
interest to academics, policy makers, and practitioners.
     For these exercises we use scanner data for a sample of Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs)
sold in the United States and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries between 2006 and
2011.7 First, we compute or estimate the measure of interest using actual prices and quantities.
We set the outcome of this estimation to be the benchmark because it is based on the prices
consumers pay and the quantities they purchase. Next, we repeat the estimation by ignoring
the expenditure information so that all items are treated (and weighted) equally. This approach
mimics the approach taken by researchers working with online and with ICP data. By comparing
the new estimate with the benchmark we are able to identify and quantify measurement error
when expenditure or quantities are unknown and all items within an item group are treated
equally. Finally, to test whether our proposed methodology of imputing market shares from price
observations works in reducing measurement error, we repeat the exercise again but this time each
observation is weighted by an imputed market share derived from estimating the retail distribution
from the price data.
     In the first application we show that using only prices understates the true frequency of price
changes both in the US and in the GCC. This happens because as we document here, items with
higher sales experience more frequent price changes. When only price data is used to compute
the frequency of price changes, prices of a handful of items that account for the majority of sales
and experience frequent price changes are marginalized by the vast number of all other items with
infrequent price changes that account for very little sales.
     To correct for this measurement error we repeat the exercise by ignoring again expenditure
information (which would not have been known to researchers working with online price data), but
instead we use information on the retail distribution collected from price data to proxy expenditure
shares. This approach reduces measurement error by 71%.
     In the second application we compute inflation rates for the US and each of the GCC countries
between January 2006 and December 2011 for FMCGs. By not using expenditure information we
understate inflation in each country. Specifically, the democratic measure of inflation yields lower
inflation by 0.5 percentage points annually in the US and by 0.3 percentage points annually in
the GCC as compared to the plutocratic measure that takes into account actual expenditure by
   7
     Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs) is a term from the marketing literature and also used by analytics
firms such as AC Nielsen to refer to relatively inexpensive consumer products that are sold quickly. Nearly all goods
sold in supermarkets and convenience stores of all sizes are included within FMCGs. Our sample of goods in this
paper will focus on 30 product groups of FMCGs within the GCC countries and a set of comparable goods for the
United States.


                                                         3
consumers. However, when we compute inflation using prices weighted by an imputed measure of
expenditure share derived from the retail distribution metrics, inflation is no longer understated
by as much: the downward bias/measurement error is reduced by at least one-half for the United
States and two-thirds or more for the GCC countries.
    In the third and final application we compute purchasing power parities (PPPs) for the Gulf
countries. Using information from the confidential World Bank ICP survey used to collect prices in
2011, we employ scanner data to: simulate the ICP exercise without expenditure information; with
expenditure information; and with information on prices and distribution but not on expenditure.
An interesting aspect of this exercise is that by setting a "lab-type experiment" we are also able
to consider and evaluate several decision rules that are relevant to the ICP. For instance, we
experiment with altering the number of outlets surveyed (10, 20, and 50) in each country. We also
consider alternative practical rules when two or more items at an outlet fit the same item definition
provided in the ICP item list (for example, take the minimum, maximum, average, median, or a
random price among all items that fit the definition).
    In terms of measurement error, we find that using only prices at the basic heading level and
excluding information on expenditure vastly overstates actual price differences across the GCC.
Specifically, while we estimate prices to differ by 6% on average among the GCC countries when
both prices and expenditure information is included in the estimation, we estimate differences to
be as high as 18% when expenditure information is excluded from the calculations. In contrast,
when information on the numeric distribution and the weighted distribution are used, we find
prices to differ by 9% and 7%, respectively, hence, reducing measurement error by 75% over the
case when only prices are used.
    To summarize, in the absence of any information on quantities or on expenditure, using data on
the retail distribution provides a very good proxy for expenditure. Even with data from a limited
sample of outlets, the convexity between distribution and market share allows us to successfully
separate the most important items from the rest. And as the applications above confirm, the
returns of such strategy in terms of reducing measurement error and potential bias are substantial.
    In the following section we review the literature on retailer distribution and market share and
illustrate their relation through a simple exercise using prices collected online. In section 3 we
present the data used in the applications and in section 4 we present the applications. Section 5
concludes and provides directions for further research.


2    The Retail Distribution and Market Share
To measure the retail distribution, the following metrics have been widely adopted in the marketing
field (see the references just below):




                                                 4
                                                               Number of outlets carrying item
          Numeric or Physical Distribution, ND (%) =                                                      (1)
                                                                  Total number of outlets

                                                          Total sales of outlets carrying item
             All Commodity Volume, ACV (%) =                                                              (2)
                                                               Total sales of all outlets

                                                    Total category sales of outlets carrying item
       Product Category Volume, PCV (%) =                                                                 (3)
                                                         Total category sales of all outlets

Numeric distribution (ND ), also known as physical distribution, reports the share of outlets car-
rying a particular item. It is the least data-intense measure of the three metrics, but it does not
distinguish between outlets with high sales and low sales. All commodity volume (ACV ) and
product category volume (PCV ) take into account variation in outlet size, but require more data,
namely, expenditure.
    Several studies in the marketing literature have found strong evidence of a convex relation
between the retail distribution and market share, in both the cross section and the time series.
Nuttall (1965) studied confectioneries; Mercer (1992) cigarettes in England and Scotland; Farris
et al. (1989) tortilla chips and instant coffee in the US; Borin et al. (1991) shampoo in Japan. In
1995, Reibstein and Farris (1995) used scanner data from the IRI's 1988 Info Supermarket Review
to test for convexity in 12 randomly chosen US grocery store categories. They first sketched a
theoretical outline to provide some conceptual foundation for the hypothesized convex relation.8
They then tested the following logistic function that resulted from their model:

                                                                ACV 1
                                   Market Share = 0 ×                                                     (4)
                                                             (1 - ACV )2
For all categories but frozen pizza, they confirmed that a convex relation characterizes market
shares, defined as item dollar sales over total category sales, and the retail distribution in the cross
section. In the time series, the evidence was not as strong. A decade later, Kruger and Harper
(2006) from IRI expanded the Reibstein and Farris (1995) analysis by testing for the presence
of convexity in 263 US product categories and 817 product groups over a period of 22 quarters
between 2000:Q1 and 2005:Q2. They found evidence of convexity in 95% of the cases tested.
Similarly to the studies above, we also tested for and confirmed the presence of convexity between
market share and the retail distribution on 30 product categories of FMCGs for each of the six
  8
    Reibstein and Farris (1995) attributed convexity to the presence of customer loyalty, to search costs, and
to uncompromised choice from the unavailability of competing brands. According to their model, distribution
gives access to consumers who are loyal to a particular product/brand, but also to consumers whose preferred
product/brand is not available. With perfect brand loyalty or no search costs (or both), the relation between
market share and distribution would be linear. But because search costs are non-negative and brand loyalty not
perfect, the relation becomes convex.


                                                      5
GCC countries used in our sample.
    The evidence suggests that in the absence of any information on item expenditure, the retail
distribution can be used to impute market share. However, to ensure that such an approach works
well with the datasets we have in mind -- namely, those that come from online sources and the
ICP price surveys -- a key prerequisite is to be able to produce reliable measures of the retail
distribution solely from price data. In the absence of expenditure data, the numeric distribution
(ND ) can be computed from online price data, but ACV and PCV cannot. To account for variation
in outlet size, we propose an alternative metric that uses outlet item variety as an indicator for
outlet size. Specifically, we define the weighted distribution (WD ) as:

                                                        Total products of outlets carrying item
             Weighted Distribution, WD (%) =                                                                      (5)
                                                             Total products of all outlets

    Counting the number of products offered by an outlet is a good indicator of its sales. Even
if the number of products sold in an outlet is not available, some simpler measures of outlet size
might be used.9 More generally, if universal barcode information is not available to measure the
retail distribution, we believe that other information can be used. For example, consider the case
of a retail chain that uses its own stock-keeping units rather than universal barcodes for tracking
its product items. We have confirmed through examples that: (a) the number of outlets within
a chain carrying a particular item vary, with more well-known product brands carried in more
locations;10 (b) there is a convex relationship between an item's overall market share and the
number of outlets carrying it within the chain.11


2.1     An Illustration
Does the availability of products in online data exhibit the same convex relation between market
share and the retail distribution as documented in the studies using scanner data? In theory, they
should when the online data are based on the items that are available in physical outlets. However,
as far as we know, no study has formally put this hypothesis to the test.12 Before we can apply our
methodology, we must then first check whether the convexity exists in online data. To check, we
conduct a simple test that matches online outlet data with actual expenditure data. The online
   9
     See section 4.4 where we discuss this issue in the context of ICP price surveys.
  10
     In this example, we collected data for a grocery store chain in the United States with about 350 outlets across
seven states.
  11
     In this example, we analyzed data from two retail chains in the United Arab Emirates, one with only 10 outlets
and another with 43 outlets. Using the Nielsen barcode data to identify items and to measure overall market share,
we confirm a convex relationship between market share and the retail distribution (ND or WD ) computed over all
retail chains (as in this paper) or over only the chain in question. These results are available on request.
  12
     Cavallo (2017) does provide the first large-scale study comparing prices between online and offline stores across
many countries and finds that they are identical about 72% of the time. But he does not (and cannot due to the
lack of expenditure data) test whether in online price data a convex relation exists between the retail distribution
and market share, which is what we need to confirm here.



                                                          6
data allow us to construct the two measures of the retail distribution discussed above, and the
scanner data allow us to check whether the relation between the constructed retail distribution
measures and actual market shares is convex. Our data source for this exercise is the online data
for toothpaste, personal wash items, shampoo, and laundry detergent products sold across 22 cities
in China in 2014, which come from a mobile application that lists the (offline) prices of a large
number of items from a small sample of reported outlets in each city.13
    The data contain no information on expenditure. The number of outlets included in the dataset
varies by city and ranges from 3 to 12. No information on the inclusion or exclusion of outlets
exists. Furthermore, we do not know if we can proxy for outlet size with the number of listed
items (barcodes) per outlet in the online application. If no price for a given barcode is reported at
a particular outlet, this means either that the item is not sold there or that it is sold but the price
is not uploaded. Therefore, counting the number of items per outlet may not be a good proxy
for actual outlet size. These shortcomings mean that our measures of ND and WD will be very
noisy at best. At worse, they will be very poor approximations of the actual retail distribution
and will make it hard for us to identify a convex relation from our sample, even if one exists in
the population. In addition to the scraped price data from the phone app, we also use scanner
data for these four categories provided by Nielsen China. The scanner data provide barcode-level
price and quantity information for each city, but prices are averaged across time (weeks) and space
(retailers) in each city. Therefore, we can compute market (expenditure) share for each barcode
but not the retail distribution.
    We use the mobile app dataset to compute the two measures of the retail distribution, and we
use the Nielsen dataset to compute market share for each item. We then merge the two datasets,
and for the majority of the barcodes found in the mobile application, we now observe both the
retail distribution and market share . Finally, we allocate items into bins based on market share
and take the median retail distribution (ND or WD ) across all items in each market share bin.
Scatter plots of the retail distribution and market share for each product category are reported,
first using the the numeric distribution (ND ) in Figure 1, panel (a), and then using the weighted
distribution (WD ) in Figure 1, panel (b). The figures confirm that the relation between market
share and the computed retail distribution is convex, despite the data issues discussed above that
may have compromised our ability to measure the retail distribution accurately.
    The implications are significant. First, scholars can exploit the convex relation between market
share and the retail distribution to impute market shares from information obtained only from
prices, and they can then use imputed market shares to assign item-specific weights. We elaborate
more on this next as we consider three important applications. Second, even when data are
available from a small sample of outlets, as in our example above using the Chinese data, measures
of the retail distribution still provide a very good proxy for expenditure shares.
 13
      More information on the dataset is provided in Feenstra et al. (2020).



                                                          7
                                       (a) Numeric Distribution




                                       (b) Weighted Distribution

Notes: We use price data from an online app in China to compute the retail distribution (ND and
WD ) and Nielsen scanner data to compute market shares for items (barcodes) in the laundry detergent,
shampoo, personal wash items, and toothpaste categories. Items are allocated into bins based on the
retail distribution (x-axis) and the average market share of all items within a bin is plotted on the graph,
against measures of the the numeric distribution (ND ; panel (a)), and the weighted distribution (WD ;
panel (b)). For more information on the data, see Feenstra et al. (2020).

       Figure 1: Measures of Retail Distribution and Market Share, Chinese Data
                                            8
3     Data Description
So far we have (i) drawn attention to the convex relation that exists between the retail distribution
and market share, (ii) claimed that the relation can be exploited to impute market share from online
(and ICP) data so that measurement error can be reduced, and (iii) shown that the convex relation
also exists in online price data. Next, we validate our claim that the proposed approach reduces
measurement error by applying it to three important applications. We first discuss the data and
then the applications in more detail.
    Our sample comes from AC Nielsen store scanner data for FMCGs in the United States and the
six GCC countries: Bahrain (BAH), Kuwait (KUW), Oman (OMN), Qatar (QTR), Saudi Arabia
(KSA) and United Arab Emirates (UAE). The price and quantity information for thousands of
items (barcodes) across 30 product groups between January 2006 and December 2011 are used.14
The frequency of data for the GCC countries is monthly or bi-monthly, and according to Nielsen,
these data cover about 85% of all the FMCGs consumed in those countries.
    Three important characteristics of the GCC dataset are worth highlighting. First, data are
provided for each outlet, across thousands of outlets. By analyzing the data at the outlet level,
we are able to provide stylized facts on retailers. We are also able to accurately measure the retail
distribution. Second, prices are reported during the day of the audit in each period. They are
not averaged across all days within a period. This practice allows us to measure the frequency of
price changes across periods without measurement error.15 Third, most of the items we study are
imported, many of the consumers in these markets are expatriates (as many as 85% in Kuwait,
UAE, and Qatar), and several international retailers operate in the markets. We confirm that
the characteristics of the data from these countries is similar to that from the United States, and
which suggests that the findings we present below can be generalized with some confidence to other
economies, too.16
    For the United States, the Nielsen data include observations from five channels: (i) Convenience,
(ii) Drug, (iii) Food, (iii) Mass Merchandiser, and (v) Liquor outlets.17 To make the analysis
between US and GCC data more comparable we primarily focus on Food observations, unless
otherwise stated. In addition, we pick 129 product modules that closely match the 30 product
groups available in the GCC data (the definitions of product groups between the US and the GCC
   14
      The categories are beans, blades, bouillon, cereals, cheese, chewing gum, chocolate, cigarettes, cooking oil,
carbonated soft drinks, deodorants, detergents, dish wash, energy drinks, fabric conditioners, insecticides, juices,
liquid cordials, male grooming, milk, milk powder, powder soft drink, shampoo, skincare, skin cleansing, sun care,
tea, toothbrush, toothpaste, and water.
   15
      In some cases, Nielsen provides price data that are averaged across the period of interest (e.g., week or month).
This practice prevents researchers from accurately measuring the frequency and magnitude of price changes. For
more on the time averaging measurement error in the Nielsen data, see Cavallo and Rigobon (2016).
   16
      Antoniades and Zaniboni (2016) make a similar point. The authors use a subset of this dataset to study
retailers' pass-through into consumer prices in the United Arab Emirates. They measure one-year pass-through to
be 20%, which they find to be similar to estimates obtained using micro data in advanced economies.
   17
      Data at the barcode level for the United States is available by subscription from Nielsen at the Kilts Center for
Marketing, https://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen.

                                                          9
datasets vary). These modules belong to 21 US product groups of five department groups. Because
the frequency of US data is weekly while that of the GCC is monthly or bimonthly, we convert US
data to monthly by aggregating up expenditure within a month and considering the price during
the first week of the month for each barcode at each outlet.
    Descriptive statistics for the GCC and US datasets are provided in Table 1. In total, the
dataset provides price and quantity information on 203,719 (non-unique) items sold across 5,851
outlets in the GCC and 111,733 items across 11,046 stores in the US over a six-year period. In the
GCC, Qatar and Bahrain are the smallest economies in terms of population, and Saudi Arabia the
largest. A closer examination of the data reveals that the majority of items do not exist across all
periods and all outlets and that in each product category or product module sales of FMCGs are
highly concentrated in a handful of items.


                                   Table 1: Brand Descriptive Statistics

           Country                     Categories    Products     Outlets    Start Date     End Date

           Bahrain                          30         24,259        311      Jan   2006    Dec   2011
           Kuwait                           30         37,660        285      Jan   2006    Dec   2011
           Oman                             30         40,165        614      Jan   2006    Dec   2011
           Qatar                            30         24,150        267      Jan   2006    Dec   2011
           Saudi Arabia                     30         34,447       3,398     Jan   2006    Dec   2011
           United Arab Emirates             30         43,038        976      Jan   2006    Dec   2011

           United States                   21*        111,373      11,046     Jan 2006      Dec 2011
   Note: Scanner data for the GCC countries provided by AC Nielsen while for the U.S. by the Kilts Center at the
   University of Chicago and span sales of FMCGs between 2006 and 2011. The frequency of the data is monthly
   or bi-monthly, and price and quantity information is given at the level of the retailer in each period. * To make
   the results comparable across the U.S. and the GCC we match the 30 product categories in the GCC with the
   corresponding US data. The matching yields 129 product modules that belong to 21 product groups and five
   department groups.



    In the previous section, we made the assertion that counting the number of available items is
a good proxy for store size. To provide support for this assertion, in Figure 2 we plot average
monthly sales by outlet in UAE in US dollars on the vertical axis with outlet size (sales) ranking,
from smallest to largest, on the horizontal axis. Out of 976 outlets available in the sample, about
a couple of dozen outlets account for the majority of sales. The rest are small outlets with low
sales. Next, we plot the average number of items, brands, and items per brand sold by each outlet
each month, while maintaining the size ordering of outlets (Figure 2, remaining quadrants). We
conclude that substantial variation in outlet size exists within a country and that large outlets
offer more items, brands, and items (varieties) per brand. The results for the other five countries
in the GCC and for the United States are similar and are omitted for brevity.


                                                        10
                        Sales per outlet ($, millions)                                           Items per outlet
          250




                                                                          5,000
          200




                                                                                4,000
                                                                Number of Items
    150




                                                                      3,000
Sales
          100




                                                              2,000       1,000
          50
          0




                                                                          0

                                  (a)                                                                (b)
                             Brands per outlet                                          Avg # of items per brand per outlet
          800




                                                                          20
                 600




                                                                          15
Number of brands




                                                              Number of items
    400




                                                                  10
          200




                                                                          5
          0




                                                                          0




                                  (c)                                                                (d)
    Notes: Retail outlets in UAE are ranked based on average monthly sales (panel (a)). Monthly sales
    are computed from Nielsen scanner data across 30 product groups between January 2006 and December
    2011. Items per outlet (panel (b)), brands per outlet (panel (c)), and average items per brand per outlet
    (panel (d)) are shown for each retail outlet while maintaining the ranking. The horizon axis denotes the
    outlet ranks based on outlet sales, in order of increasing sales from left to right.

                       Figure 2: Facts on Retailers' Heterogeneity, United Arab Emirates




                                                         11
4     Applications
4.1    Imputing Expenditure Shares
We proceed to illustrate how one can exploit the relation between the retail distribution and
market size to obtain a proxy for expenditure when expenditure is not observed but prices are. As
in the evidence from the marketing literature, we assume a convex relation between market share
and the retail distribution. In Online Appendix C we propose a theoretical model that provides
some micro-foundations to account for such a pattern. The theory, based on a standard set of
assumptions, characterizes both manufacturers' and retailers' decisions under alternative market
structure settings. As featured in the model, it is the interaction between heterogeneous firms and
varying "slotting fee" that yields the convex relation that is observed in the data. We show that
assuming heterogeneity in the "slotting fee" incurred by manufacturers is sufficient to generate the
convex relation between sales and the distribution measure, which is robust to alternative market
structures.
    We compare results with no item-specific weights assigned and with (actual based on expen-
diture shares or imputed from the retail distribution metrics ND and WD ) apply this to three
different applications: (i) measuring the frequency of price changes, (ii) measuring price levels and
inflation, and (iii) measuring international price differences/purchasing power parities (PPPs).
    While each application differs in nature, the core of the exercise is the same and consists of
three steps. In the first step, we use actual item price and quantity (expenditure) information
from the Nielsen dataset to compute or estimate a measure of interest, such as inflation or the
frequency of price changes. We set the outcome of this estimation to be the benchmark against
which the results of the alternative estimations will be compared.
    In the second step, we compute or estimate the same measure of interest, but this time we use
only prices and treat all observations equally. This estimation mimics the approach of the ICP and
studies employing online price data that lack information on expenditure and thus, do not assign
item-specific weights. We then compare these estimates to the benchmark case. Any difference
between these two measures is due to measurement error (or bias) that arises from being unable
to properly weight items by importance. Comparing the two estimates enables us to quantify how
important such measurement error may be.
    Finally, in the third step, we again exclude any information on quantities and expenditure,
but instead we use measures of the retail distribution extracted solely from price data to impute
market shares. These imputed market shares are then used to weight items in the estimations.
The outcome of this estimation allows us to test whether our proposed approach, namely, using
the retail distribution weights as a proxy for expenditure, reduces measurement error and by how
much. We first impute shares using ND and then using WD.
    The essential requirement behind our approach is to impute market (expenditure) shares from


                                                 12
computed measures of the retail distribution, namely, ND and WD. We do that by exploiting the
convex relation between these two variables and imposing the following functional form:

                                          Market Share = exp (a + bN D)                                          (6)

or
                                          Market Share = exp (a + bW D)                                          (7)

where ND and WD are item-specific measures of the the numeric and weighted distributions,
respectively, and the two regressions need not have the same coefficients.


                       Table 2: Market Share and Distribution Regression Results

                                                      Dependent variable: ln(market share)
                                          GCC               U.S. (Food outlets only)       U.S. (All Outlets)
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)

 Numeric Distribution            4.861                            4.213                            6.215
        (ND)                    (0.001)                          (0.002)                          (0.002)

 Weighted Distribution                           4.984                           4.325                           5.242
        (WD)                                    (0.000)                         (0.002)                         (0.002)

         Channel               FOOD            FOOD              FOOD           FOOD               ALL           ALL
       Observations          105,383,354     105,383,354       13,143,965     13,143,965        16,165,992    16,165,992
        R-squared               0.398           0.549             0.319          0.356             0.323         0.387
        Period FE               YES             YES               YES            YES               YES           YES
       Country FE               YES             YES                 -              -                 -             -
     Note: Nielsen scanner data are used to compute measures of retail distribution and market share.
     ln(market share) is then regressed on either measure of distribution and on additional controls. All Outlets
     include (i) Convenience, (ii) Drug, (iii) Food, (iii) Mass Merchandiser, and (v) Liquor outlets. Robust standard
     errors are in parentheses. All coefficients are statistically significant at 0.01 level.



    In general, the coefficients will not be estimated by researchers who are using this exponential
function to predict market shares; rather, the coefficients will be calibrated based on the evidence
across other products and/or countries. Here, we employ the Nielsen data to estimate these
coefficients for the GCC countries and the United States. Specifically, we first measure the numeric
distribution, weighted distribution, and market share for each item across all GCC product groups,
countries, and time periods. Then we pool the data and regress item retail distribution on log
market share in order to obtain the coefficients of interest. The results are reported in Table
2. Columns 1 and 2 present the estimates from regressing ln(market share) on ND and WD,
respectively, using GCC data. Period and country fixed effects are also included in the estimation.
For comparison purposes, estimates using US Nielsen data for the same product groups are provided

                                                          13
in columns 3 and 4. We also report estimates across all outlets in the United States in columns 5
and 6. We observe that regardless of whether GCC or US data are used, the convexity coefficients
b are very similar and lie between 4 to 6. In Table 2 we do not report the constant term a
(which also depends on the fixed effects), but in general that term is not used for prediction of the
market shares because the shares are normalized to sum to unity, which effectively determines the
constant a in each application. So a major advantage of the exponential functional form over other
alternatives is that there is only a single convexity coefficient b that is needed for the calibration,
and we find that this coefficient is quite stable across products and countries.18 In Online Appendix
Tables A.3 to A.5, we provide further regression estimates for each country-group pair across the
30 product groups and seven countries (six GCC countries and the US), where we find that the
convexity coefficients b lie between 4 and 7. We will use the pooled GCC estimates of b from Table
2 in all our calculations below, for both the GCC countries and for the United States.


4.2     Frequency of Price Changes
We first compute the frequency of price changes. We consider two methodologies for computing
price changes: counting gaps in the price line, and carrying forward the last observed regular price
through sale and stockout periods (for gaps of six months or less). We also consider estimates with
or without sales included. For sales, we use a basic definition that identifies sales from a V-shape
behavior in price. These measures are widely used in the literature. For more information, see
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
    Before presenting the results we make a very important observation: the frequency of price
change is proportional to item market share. This is illustrated in Figure 3 where we allocate
items into market share bins and report the median frequency of price change for each bin in UAE
and in the US.19 As the figure clearly illustrates, items with higher market share experience more
frequent price changes. Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013), while analyzing micro-level firm data in
  18
      To ensure that our results below are not sensitive to the specific coefficient of convexity b employed, we replicate
the estimations in each of the three applications by allowing the convexity coefficient to vary from 3 to 8 when we
impute expenditure shares from the retail distribution metrics. We find that the results are robust to the alternative
specifications. We conclude that including measures of the retail distribution to impute expenditure shares reduces
measurement error for a very generous range of coefficients, as long as the functional form used to link distribution
and market share maintains convexity. In addition, we also considered the logistic function specification in equation
(4) first proposed by Reibstein and Farris (1995) and repeated all the analysis using their functional form. The
results, which are available upon request, are very similar and omitted for brevity. We chose the simplest version
of the convexity function shown in equations (6) and (7) as it requires estimating only one convexity coefficient
instead of two, and because the functional form in the paper produces a better fit than the logistic model in the
applications below. Finally, we also tested whether a quadratic polynomial could provide a better fit. However,
as in the case of the logistic function, it requires knowledge on two parameters. Most importantly, the quadratic
approximation does not guarantee that imputed expenditure shares will be positive. In such case, one can force
the imputed negative expenditure coefficients to be zero but the results obtained in the subsequent exercises were
inferior to those presented in the paper.
  19
     Scatter plots are reported for the no-sales, no carry-forward case. The results are similar for other cases (e.g.
accounting for sales and/or carrying forward prices when gaps are observed) and countries, and when the mean
price frequency is reported instead of the median.


                                                           14
the US, document that large firms change prices 2-3 times more frequently than do small firms.
Interestingly, we reach the same conclusion by analyzing consumer prices.20
    We investigate this important finding further by ruling out the possibility that the relation is
driven by outliers. To do that, for each of the 129 narrowly defined product modules, we regress
the log market share of each barcode at an outlet with the frequency of its price changes. We then
plot the estimated coefficients for each of the 129 regressions in Figure 4 below for each module
regression, ordered by size. For reference, we also report the coefficient from running the same
regression in the UAE for all categories combined. In all but six cases, the regression coefficient is
positive and statistically significant. Therefore, even within the narrowly defined modules, retailers
change the prices of their best sellers more frequently.
                          .25




                                                                                                      .45
                                                                                                      .4
       Median Frequency




                                                                                   Median Frequency
                          .2




                                                                                                      .35
                          .15




                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                                      .25
                          .1




                                0      2      4             6      8     10                                 0   2     4             6    8     10
                                              Market share bin                                                        Market share bin



                                (a) The United Arab Emirates (UAE)                                    (b) The United States of America (USA)
              Notes: We use Nielsen scanner data from UAE and the US between January 2006 and December 2011 to
              calculate the market share of each item and the frequency of its price change. Items are then allocated
              into bins based on market share, and the median frequency of price change in each bin is plotted,
              revealing that items with higher sales experience more frequent price changes.

                                                            Figure 3: Frequency of Price Changes




    The finding that stores adjust prices more frequently for important items suggests that in the
absence of any information on quantities or on expenditure that would allow us to distinguish
between important and non-important items, averaging the frequency of price changes across all
items overstates the degree of price stickiness in the economy.
    Table 3 confirms that hypothesis. The frequency of price changes in the UAE and in the US
is computed under four alternative specifications: (i) using item-specific weights from expendi-
ture shares (column (1), benchmark); (ii) ignoring expenditure information and treating all items
  20
    Similarly, Gorodnichenko et al. (2018) find the online price items that experience a greater number of clicks
from buyers ­ which is used as a proxy for expenditure ­ have a greater frequency of sales and other price changes.

                                                                              15
Notes: We report regression coefficients of ln(market share) on the frequency of price changes for each
of the 129 US product modules. The coefficients are ranked by order, and standard errors are shown
with the dotted lines. Spikes in standard errors occur in modules that contain very few observations.
For comparison, we also report the regression coefficient between ln(market share) and the frequency of
price changes for all items in the UAE. The results overwhelmingly point to a positive relation between
market share and the frequency of price changes. That is, retailers tend to change prices of best sellers
more frequently.

                 Figure 4: Frequency of Price Changes By Product Module




                                                   16
equally (column (2)); (iii) using imputed expenditure shares from the numeric distribution (ND )
to assign item-specific weights (column (3)); and (iv) using imputed expenditure shares from the
weighted distribution (WD ) to assign item-specific weights (column (4)). Panel A reports compu-
tations for the frequency of price changes for UAE, and panel B for the US
    In the UAE, when both prices and quantities (expenditure shares) are taken into consideration
(column 1), we find that the median frequency of price change in UAE is 22% when sales are not
taken into account and 17% when they are. By contrast, when information on expenditure is not
known and all items are treated equally (column 2), the frequency of price change drops to 13%
when sales are not taken into account and to 12% when they are not. That is, not accounting
for item importance grossly understates the degree of price stickiness in the economy (by more
than 40% in our example). The results are similar using US data (see panel b) and confirm
the finding that not assigning item-specific weights in the computation of the frequency of price
changes understates its magnitude.21
    However, when we use measures of the the retail distribution (numeric distribution in column
3 and weighted distribution in column 4) to impute expenditure shares and then use these imputed
shares to weight items, we find that the bias shrinks substantially or even disappears. This happens
both for the UAE and the US providing further evidence that imputed shares from the retail
distribution metrics are good proxies for actual expenditure shares.



4.3     Inflation
We next turn our attention to measures of inflation and ask whether elementary price indices at the
lowest level of aggregation, calculated either without weights, with expenditure weights, or with
the imputed weights from the retail distribution, differ from each other. We then check whether
these potential discrepancies carry forward in the calculation of higher-level indices.
   To match how statistical agencies worldwide and the BLS calculate inflation, we calculate
elementary price indexes for each product category using a geometric Laspeyres price index and
we then aggregate these up to higher-level indices.22 The geometric Laspeyers indices for each
product group are computed as follows:
                                                           i
                                                          w0
                                      0:t           pt
                                                     i              0
                                     PGL    =                  ,   wi =1                                     (8)
                                                i
                                                    p0
                                                     i

  21
     Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) find the median frequency of price change for consumer goods in the US to be
19% to 20%. But their results are not directly comparable to ours as they examine the entire set of products that
span the CPI basket (and use data from earlier years). In their Appendix, however, they do report estimates by
Entry Level Items (ELI) that look not much different from ours. For example, they report a 37% frequency of price
change for milk, 39% for carbonates soft drinks, and 32% for cheese products.
  22
     For more information on how to compute price indices and more details on the approach we take, see Chapter
9 of International Monetary Fund (2020).



                                                         17
                 Table 3: Frequency of Price Changes by Measures of Price Weight

                                                        (1) Benchmark       (2)      (3)           (4)
                                                            P&Q              P    P & NUM       P & ACP

                                       A. United Arab Emirates
(i) With sales
                     Contiguous observations                  0.22         0.13      0.20         0.19
                     Carrying regular price forward           0.20         0.12      0.20         0.18
                     during sales and stockout

(ii) Without sales
                     Contiguous observations                  0.17         0.10      0.17         0.15
                     Carrying regular price forward           0.16         0.09      0.16         0.14
                     during sales and stockout

                                           B. United States
(i) With sales
                     Contiguous observations                  0.40         0.38      0.40         0.40
                     Carrying regular price forward           0.38         0.33      0.36         0.60
                     during sales and stockout

(ii) Without sales
                     Contiguous observations                  0.32         0.31      0.33         0.33
                     Carrying regular price forward           0.29         0.26      0.29         0.29
                     during sales and stockout

 Note: The table reports the median frequency of price changes. Data are provided by Nielsen and cover sales
 of FMCGs between 2006 and 2011 in the GCC countries and in the U.S. The frequency of the data is monthly
 or bi-monthly, and price and quantity information are given at the level of the retailer in each period.




                                                   18
         i
where w0   is the expenditure share of each item within a product group. When equal weights are
applied (as in the case when no information on expenditure shares is available), the geometric
Laspeyeres index reduces to the Jevons index. As before, we calculate four alternative elementary
price indices : (1) using actual expenditure shares as weights (our benchmark case), (2) using no
weights and treating all products equally, (3) using imputed shares from ND as weights, and (4)
using imputed shares from WD as weights. When weights are used, these are normalized to 1 in
each period. Table 4 reports the difference in the annualized inflation measures obtained when
using no weights, or using ND or WD, versus the benchmark case of actual expenditure weights.
    We aggregate the elementary price indices to higher-level aggregates with:

                                    0:t        b 0:t          b
                                   PGL  =     wj Pj ,        wj =1                                  (9)

where Pj0:t denotes the elementary price index of product group j till period t and wj     b
                                                                                               is a pre-
determined, period b weight assigned to each elementary group. In the case of the GCC countries,
we either assume that expenditure shares wb for each elementary aggregate are not known at such
a disaggregate level so that all elementary aggregate indices are treated equally (Table 4, panel a),
or that these are known so that heterogeneous weights are used (Table 4, panel b). In the latter
                                                                                         b
case, we use overall sales in 2006 by product group to create the expenditure shares wj    .
    For the United States, we also consider the case where all aggregates are treated equally when
aggregating (Table 4, panel a, and Figure 5a). But we also exploit the structure of the Nielsen
dataset to aggregate (without weights) the product group elementary price indices to five de-
partment groups, and then aggregate (with weights) the department groups again to produce a
higher-level index. We believe that this is a more meaningful exercise as the BLS is likely to have
expenditure shares at the department group level but not at the product group. We use again
overall 2006 sales to obtain the weights for each department. These, along with their correspond-
ing market shares, are: (i) Dairy, 28%, (ii) Dry Grocery, 61%, (iii) General Merchandise, 1%, (iv)
Health and Beauty Care, 3%; and (v) Non-Food Grocery, 7%. The results are available in Table 4,
panel b, and Figure 5b. Inflation figures for each of the 21 product groups and for each department
group are available in the Online Appendix for each of the four alternative versions.
                                                                                             b
    Regardless of what assumptions we make on the availability of weight information wj        , we find
strong evidence that excluding weights at the calculation of elementary price indices results in
under-reporting of inflation: annual inflation computed without any weights is lower than when
using expenditure weights by 0.3 percentage points on average for the GCC countries and 0.4-0.5
percentage points for the US. But we find that using imputed weights from ND and WD in the
elementary price aggregates reduces the bias in the higher-level aggregates: the downward bias is
reduced by two-thirds or more for the GCC countries and at least one-half for the United States.
Therefore, we conclude that when calculating inflation, using imputed weights from ND and WD
provide a meaningful proxy for actual expenditure shares.


                                                  19
                             Table 4: Summary of Inflation Measures

                                              Total Gap                        RMSE ratio
             County / Region         (1) No wgt (2) ND        (3) WD        (4) ND (5) WD
                                (a) Higher level aggregate - no weights

                Bahrain                 -0.2%        -0.1%      0.0%          0.29      0.48
                 Kuwait                  0.0%         0.2%      0.3%          0.33      0.21
                 Oman                    0.0%        -0.1%      0.0%          0.48      0.65
                 Qatar                  -0.1%         0.0%     0.1%           0.80      0.81
              Saudi Arabia              -0.6%        -0.3%     -0.1%          0.34      0.75
          United Arab Emirates          -0.9%        -0.6%     -0.4%          0.40      0.67
            Average GCC                -0.3%        -0.1%      0.0%           0.44      0.60

              United States            -0.5%         -0.2%     -0.1%          0.65      0.71

             (b) Higher level aggregate - expenditure weights based on total 2006 sales

                Bahrain                 -0.3%        -0.1%     0.0%           0.11      0.61
                 Kuwait                 -0.3%         0.1%     0.2%           0.81      0.76
                 Oman                    0.1%         0.1%      0.0%          0.72      0.74
                 Qatar                  -0.2%         0.3%     0.3%           0.51      0.34
              Saudi Arabia              -0.2%        -0.2%     0.0%           0.54      0.65
          United Arab Emirates          -1.0%        -0.8%     -0.6%          0.29      0.50
            Average GCC                -0.3%        -0.1%      0.0%           0.50      0.60

              United States            -0.4%         -0.2%     -0.2%          0.51      0.52
Note: We use scanner data to compute the growth in prices between January 2006 to December 2011. Four
alternative estimation methods are employed: (i) using prices and expenditure information to weight the data;
(ii) using only prices and no weights; (iii) using prices and weights based on imputed market shares from N D;
and (iv) using prices and weights based on imputed market shares from W D. The difference between the
estimated price level at the end of the period for each method and the benchmark is reported in columns (1) to
(3). We also report the share of the root mean square error (RMSE) of versions (iii) and (iv) to the RMSE of
version (ii) in columns (4) and (5), respectively. The RMSE is based on deviations from the benchmark case.
A coefficient less than 1 indicates a better fit relative to the case of no weights in estimation.




                                                   20
                     Combine Prod Groups (equal weight)                                                   US Aggregate Price Index
     120




                                                                                   120
                                                                                   115
     115




                                                                               Inflation
                                                                                 110
 Inflation
     110




                                                                                   105
     105




                                                                                   100
                                                                                     01jan2006              01jan2008           01jan2010                   01jan2012
     100




                                                                                                 Benchmark (uses expenditure)       No Weights used
                                                                                                 Numeric Distribution (ND)          Weighted Distribution (WD)
       01jan2006           01jan2008       01jan2010          01jan2012




(a) US Inflation Aggregate - No Department                                 (b) US Inflation Aggregate - with Department
Weights                                                                    Weights

                                                       Figure 5: US Inflation Measures



4.4                Implications for the International Comparison Program
The International Comparison Program (ICP), a collaboration between the World Bank and na-
tional statistical agencies, is an initiative under the United Nations with the mandate to measure
the relative cost of living across the world. Every few years, the World Bank puts together and
distributes an extensive price survey to statistical agencies worldwide. The survey is broken down
into product groups (e.g., "Bread and Cereals"; "Miscellaneous goods and services") and each
product group into several basic headings (e.g., "Other cereals, flour, and other products"; "Appli-
ances, articles and products for personal care"). Each basic heading contains a list of very detailed
product definitions (e.g., " Cornflakes Kellogg's 500 gram, range 250-600 gram, milled corn (maize)
pre-packed, ready to eat cereals, sugar and/or other ingredients"; "Tooth paste, tube, 80 mL, range
50-100 mL, Colgate, Classic Total, exclude whitening"). Its content varies by year and region and
is highly confidential. Statistical agencies are asked to price each item in a number of stores and
report the average price. Product prices are then used by the World Bank to compute price levels
for each basic heading, for each product group, and for the overall basket. At the basic heading
level, because expenditure information for each product is not known, prices are averaged across
all products by assuming identical weights. Then prices for each basic heading are aggregated up
using expenditure information from the components that make up the national CPI data. 23
    As straightforward as this exercise sounds, it presents an extremely daunting undertaking in
terms of methodology and administration. Various issues arise in the pre-survey (e.g., how to
construct the baskets), during the survey (e.g., how to price), and the post-survey (e.g., how to
  23
    We would like to thank the World Bank, especially Nada Hamadeh, for sharing with us a copy of the 2011
product survey. More information on the 2011 ICP survey is available in World Bank (2014) and at the World Bank,
International Comparison Program (ICP), http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPEXT/Resources/ICP 2011.html.



                                                                          21
aggregate) stages. Rightly, the World Bank characterizes the ICP as the largest and most complex
statistical exercise in the world.24
    In this third and final exercise, we consider the averaging of prices at the basic heading level
and ask whether this practice introduces measurement error and potential bias. Because prices of
the most important items may converge faster across retailers and across countries for consumers
paying more attention, taking an unweighted average price across all items within the basic heading
can upwardly bias measures of differences in the cost of living across countries.
    To check this, we use the scanner data to simulate the ICP under alternative scenarios that are
described below. We begin by extracting from the World Bank 2011 confidential ICP survey the
product definitions that overlap with the Nielsen scanner FMCG data. These are: (i) blades -- 2
definitions, (ii) cereals -- 4 definitions, (iii) detergents -- 2 definitions, (iv) juices -- 4 definitions,
and (v) toothpaste -- 1 definition. Examples of definitions selected are "Cornflakes Kellogg's
500 gram, range 250-600 gram, milled corn (maize) pre-packed, ready to eat cereals, sugar and/or
other ingredients" and "Tooth paste, tube, 80 mL, range 50-100 mL, Colgate, Classic Total, exclude
whitening." For confidentiality purposes, we omit reporting the remaining 11 definitions.
    While only 13 product definitions survive the matching, a total of 2,069 barcode items are
selected. This happens because multiple varieties (barcodes) of the same product match the same
ICP product description. For example, Colgate Total 100ml, Colgate Total 100ml PD, Colgate
Total 100ml Pump, Colgate Total 12 100ml, Colgate Total Fresh Stripe 100ml, and their 50ml
variations all satisfy the ICP product definition "Tooth paste, tube, 80 mL, range 50-100 mL,
Colgate, Classic Total, exclude whitening".25 The availability of multiple varieties of the same
product, which we call variety bias, poses an important challenge for price auditors as they have to
pick one of potentially several different prices. In the simulation, we experiment with alternative
pricing rules discussed below.
    With the construction of the survey completed, the simulation is broken down into two parts:
data collection and estimation. In the data collection part, we provide the simulation with a set of
rules that mimic the actual process. Specifically, we first input the number of outlets to be audited
(n =10, 20, or 50). We then ask the simulation to pick those n outlets out of the universe of stores
in our sample by selecting large outlets first. If all supermarkets/hypermarkets are exhausted, the
algorithm randomly picks the remaining from the population of groceries and mini-markets. This
is an important stage as prices vary across outlets, with the largest outlets offering lower prices.
Next, we ask the simulation to randomly pick a date for the audit out of the six bi-monthly periods
in 2011. We give guidance as to which price must be quoted if multiple varieties of a product at
  24
      Two recent papers highlight key challenges in the ICP methodology. Deaton and Aten (2017) discuss the
challenge of linking countries and regions together, while Inklaar and Rao (2017) compare and contrast alternative
measurement methodologies. Antoniades (2016) succinctly captures key challenges in the collection of raw data
with the 4Rs: the challenges of finding: (i) the right product, (ii) the right weight, (iii) the right price/retailer, and
(iv) the right variety.
   25
      For a full list of products that fit the same definition in the case of toothpaste and cereals, see Table A.2 in the
Online Appendix.

                                                           22
an outlet satisfy the same definition. The six alternative rules are: (1) take an average price,
(ii) take the median price, (iii) pick a price at random, (iv) pick the lowest price, (v) pick the
highest price, and (vi) pick the price of the item you think is the most important based on sales
(which can be judged from shelf space). Finally, and most important, we suppose that the price
auditors keep track of whether a product matching the definition is available in the chosen outlet
or note. That information is used to construct the numeric and weighted retail distributions. We
recognize that the number of items available in each outlet ­ as needed to compute the weighted
retail distribution ­ might not be available to the ICP. In that case, simpler measures of size might
be collected: for example, price auditors can still report information on outlet type (hypermarket,
grocery, self-service) or the number of checkout counters.
    Once prices are collected in each country, the country-product-dummy (CPD) regression is
estimated across the 13 product definitions and countries:

                                            ln pic = c + i +     it ,


where product is indexed by i and country is indexed by c. The variables c and i capture country
and product fixed effects, respectively. PPPs, relative to the numeraire (in this case, Bahrain) are
obtained from the exponent of country fixed effects. For example, if the exponent of the KSA
coefficient is 1.2, then prices in Saudi Arabia are 20% higher than in Bahrain.
    Three versions of the equation above are estimated. Version 1, the benchmark, considers both
price and expenditure information so that each observation is weighted by importance. Version 2
mimics the ICP by omitting expenditure information and treating all products equally. Versions 3
and 4 omit expenditure information but use information on the numeric (ND ) and weighted (WD )
distribution, respectively, to weight the data.
    To ensure that the results are not sensitive to the random selection of time period and outlets,
the exercise is repeated 50 times. Each time, average PPP differences across the GCC countries
are collected, and the median differences across these 50 iterations are reported in Table 5 for
alternative specifications. The first column indicates the rule specified for dealing with variety
bias (explained above). The second column lists the number of outlets audited. The next four
columns report the estimation results under the four alternative methods.
    For instance, the first row of the table lists average PPP differences for the scenario in which
10 outlets are audited and price auditors are asked to report the average price in case multiple
products satisfy the same PPP product description. When both prices and expenditure information
are used (version 1 -- benchmark), prices in the GCC differ by 6%. However, when only prices are
used and all products are treated equally, prices differ by 18%. Regardless of how many outlets are
audited or which rule is used to deal with variety bias, excluding weights overstates PPP differences
by a very large margin.26 However, when information on the numeric and weighted distribution
 26
      For robustness, we also report estimation results when the average (instead of the median) across the 50


                                                      23
is used to project expenditure shares (versions 3 and 4), estimated average PPP differences are in
line with the benchmark case.
    To summarize, the main lessons from this exercise are that (i) treating all products equally
overstates the true cost of living, (ii) increasing the sampling size does not improve or worsen
estimates, (iii) the results for alternative rules to deal with variety bias are similar, and (iv)
projecting expenditure shares from the retail distribution reduces measurement bias substantially.27


                             Table 5: Measuring International Price Differences

                                              Average PPP difference among the GCC countries by Weights Used
 Estimation Type        Outlets Audited
                                              (1) Expenditure (benchmark)           (2) None     (3) N D         (4) W D
         avg                    10                        0.06                        0.17         0.09            0.07
         avg                    20                        0.05                        0.18         0.06            0.07
         avg                    50                        0.08                        0.20         0.06            0.09

        max                     10                           0.07                     0.19         0.11            0.08
        max                     20                           0.06                     0.22         0.07            0.08
        max                     50                           0.14                     0.27         0.13            0.16

        med                     10                           0.03                     0.10         0.05            0.01
        med                     20                           0.02                     0.13         0.04            0.03
        med                     50                           0.07                     0.16         0.05            0.08

         mii                    10                           0.13                     0.16         0.07            0.10
         mii                    20                           0.14                     0.20         0.07            0.12
         mii                    50                           0.10                     0.17         0.07            0.11

         min                    10                           0.04                     0.10         0.05            0.04
         min                    20                           0.04                     0.11         0.04            0.04
         min                    50                           0.02                     0.07         0.05            0.03

         rnd                    10                           0.02                     0.12         0.05            0.06
         rnd                    20                           0.06                     0.14         0.05            0.09
         rnd                    50                           0.08                     0.16         0.03            0.10
    Note: Data are provided by Nielsen and cover sales of FMCGs between 2006 and 2011 in the GCC countries.
    The frequency of the data is monthly or bi-monthly, and price and quantity information are given at the level
    of the retailer in each period. In case multiple varieties of a product at a store satisfy the same definition
    of ICP product, we use alternative criteria to quote price: (i) take an average price (denoted as "avg"), (ii)
    take the median price (denoted as "med"), (iii) pick a price at random (denoted as "rnd"), (iv) pick the
    lowest price (denoted as "min"), (v) pick the highest price (denoted as "max"), and (vi) pick the price of the
    most-important-item based on sales (denoted as "mii").


iterations is computed. The results, available in the Online Appendix, are similar to those reported in Table 5.
   27
      Antoniades (2016) finds that there is more variation in prices across retailers than there is across varieties of the
same product definition within retailers. That is, prices of a specific Colgate brand will vary substantially across
retailers, but prices of Colgate varieties within a particular retailer will not be that different. The implication is
that dealing with variety bias is not that important for the ICP as it is to decide what the best sample of retailers
to audit is. This finding explains why alternative pricing rules in Table 5 yield similar results.

                                                            24
5    Conclusions
The availability of data on prices that can be collected online presents a new opportunity for
researchers to study prices and price behavior. Yet, as we documented in this paper, the un-
availability of information on quantities or expenditure introduces substantial measurement error,
and in many cases, bias. By treating all prices equally, researchers may overstate price stickiness,
understate inflation, and overstate price differences.
    To overcome the challenge imposed by the lack of expenditure data, we propose that researchers
use information on the retail distribution of sellers to impute expenditure shares. By exploiting
the convexity that characterizes the relation between the number of sellers and a product's market
share, one can build measures of imputed expenditure shares. Our approach, which we motivate
through evidence in the literature but also through a micro-founded framework (see the Online
Appendix), works because it helps researchers to identify the most important items within a prod-
uct group, and thus allows them to weight the data accordingly in the estimation. We demonstrate
that using weights imputed from the retail distribution substantially reduces bias in the frequency
of price changes, in annual inflation, and in ICP price comparisons across countries.
    Our results are based on scanner data, so applicability to the entire set of entry level items
that comprise the CPI needs to be studied further as most of the items are not barcoded. We
believe, however, that our methodology could potentially be applied to the entire set of entry level
items that comprise the CPI although further investigation is needed to assess the extent to which
this is possible. There are several challenges, but also potential ways around them. First, not
all items are barcoded or the coding standard applied may vary across retailers. For that, one
may use product definition to check availability. In the ICP exercise we conducted, we used the
product definitions provided by the World Bank, and not barcodes, to identify the availability of
these items across each of the GCC countries. Second, data may come from a limited number of
outlets. This does not appear to be a problem based on our analysis. Specifically, in the exercise
above using Chinese data we showed that the measures of the retail distribution based on less
than a dozen outlets from each city were good proxies for actual expenditure shares (Figure 1).
Furthermore, in the ICP exercise we showed that the improvements gained from imputing shares
from retail distribution metrics obtained from auditing 10 outlets was not much different from that
obtained when 50 outlets were audited (Table 5). Third, there may be items such as services that
our way of measuring availability using retail distribution may not be applicable. In such a case,
availability could potentially be captured in more creative ways, such as the number of results
on Google searches, the number of reviews on online marketplaces, or the number of mentions on
social media. Finally, note that availability can be used either to impute weights (as we have done
here) or simply as an additional way for the BLS to perform sampling selection. How well this
approach may work, and for what items, is an open question but it could potentially complement
and extend the methodology that we have presented here.


                                                25
References
Antoniades, Alexis, "The future of price statistics: Innovations in data, technology, and meth-
 ods," 2016.

  and Nicola Zaniboni, "Exchange rate pass-through into retail prices," International Economic
  Review, 2016, 57 (4), 1425­1447.

Borin, Norm A, Cynthia Van Vranken, and Paul W Farris, "A pilot test of discrimination
 in the Japanese distribution system," Journal of Retailing, 1991, 67 (1), 93.

Cavallo, Alberto, "Online and official price indexes: Measuring Argentina's inflation," Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (2), 152­165.

  , "Are online and offline prices similar? evidence from large multi-channel retailers," American
  Economic Review, 2017, 107 (1), 283­303.

  , "Scraped data and sticky prices," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (1), 105­119.

   and Roberto Rigobon, "The distribution of the Size of Price Changes," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

   and , "The billion prices project: Using online prices for measurement and research," Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (2), 151­78.

Deaton, Angus and Bettina Aten, "Trying to understand the PPPs in ICP 2011: Why are
 the results so different?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (1), 243­64.

Farris, Paul, James Olver, and Cornelis De Kluyver, "The relationship between distribution
  and market share," Marketing Science, 1989, 8 (2), 107­128.

Feenstra, Robert C, Mingzhi Xu, and Alexis Antoniades, "What is the Price of Tea in
  China? Goods Prices and Availability in Chinese Cities," The Economic Journal, 2020, 130
  (632), 2438­2467.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Rebecca Hellerstein, "A structural approach to iden-
 tifying the sources of local currency price stability," Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (1),
 175­210.

Goolsbee, Austan D and Peter J Klenow, "Internet rising, prices falling: Measuring inflation
 in a world of e-commerce," American Economic Review, 2018, 108, 488­92.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Michael Weber, "Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the
 stock market," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (1), 165­99.

  , Slavik Sheremirov, and Oleksandr Talavera, "Price setting in online markets: Does IT
  click?," Journal of European Economic Association, 2018, 16, 1764­1811.

Hottman, Colin J, Stephen J Redding, and David E Weinstein, "Quantifying the sources
 of firm heterogeneity," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291­1364.



                                               26
Inklaar, Robert and DS Rao, "Cross-country income levels over time: did the developing
  world suddenly become much richer?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9
  (1), 265­90.

International Monetary Fund, "Calculating consumer price indices in practice." Chapter 8 in
  Consumer Price Index Manual," Technical Report, International Monetary Fund 2020.

Kruger, Michael and Brian Harper, "Market Share and Product Distribution: Re-Tested and
 Extended," 2006.

Kuksov, Dmitri and Amit Pazgal, "Research note: the effects of costs and competition on
 slotting allowances," Marketing Science, 2007, 26 (2), 259­267.

Mercer, Alan, Implementable Marketing Research, Prentice Hall, 1992.

Nakamura, Emi and J´   on Steinsson, "Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu cost
 models," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (4), 1415­1464.

Nuttall, Colin, "The relationship between sales and distribution of certain confectionery lines,"
 Commentary, 1965, 7 (4), 272­285.

Rao, Akshay R and Humaira Mahi, "The price of launching a new product: Empirical
 evidence on factors affecting the relative magnitude of slotting allowances," Marketing Science,
 2003, 22 (2), 246­268.

Reibstein, David J and Paul W Farris, "Market share and distribution: A generalization, a
 speculation, and some implications," Marketing Science, 1995, 14 (3 supplement), G190­G202.

World Bank, Purchasing power parities and the real size of world economies: a comprehensive
 report of the 2011 International Comparison Program, The World Bank, 2014.




                                               27
Online Appendix
A. Table Appendix

Table A.1: Availability of Chinese Product Prices Scraped from the Mobile Application for 2014

             Laundry Detergent     Personal Wash Items        Shampoo            Toothpaste
City         EANs    Retailers     EANs     Retailers     EANs Retailers      EANs Retailers
Beijing       929       11         1,273       11         1,041     10        1,024     11
Changsha      874       10         1,471       11         1,063     9          960      10
Chengdu       778       8          1,214        7          957       8         560       7
Chongqing     870       10         1,419       10          998      11         880       9
Dalian        661       6           986         4          775       5         655       3
Guangzhou     902       14         1,524       16         1,071     12         826      13
Hangzhou      805        8         1,210        8          975       8         788       8
Harbin        729       6          1,063        5          902       6         555       6
Hefei         968       10         1,325       10         1,090      9        1,069      8
Jinan         731       8          1,092        8          901       8         621       7
Kunming       579       5           978         5          773       5         422       5
Ningbo        676       7          1,074        8          842       7         569       7
Shanghai      999       12         1,456       12         1,226     10        1,032     12
Shenyang      929       10         1,383       10         1,084     11         847      10
Shenzhen      966        9         1,674        9         1,195      9         868       9
Suzhou        754       7          1,159        7          956       8         581       7
Tianjin       873        7         1,298        7         1,076      7         900       7
Wuhan         933       11         1,270       12         1,030     10         992      12
Wuxi          798       7          1,164        7          908       7         932       7
Xiamen        896       9          1,551        9         1,067      9         873       9
Xi'an         946        8         1,334        7         1,075      7          -        -




                                             28
         Table A.2: Examples of Products that Fit the Same ICP PPP Product Description

Cornflakes Kellogg's 500 gram, range 250-600 gram,                        Tooth paste, tube, 80 mL,
milled corn (maize) pre-packed, ready to eat cereals,              range 50-100 mL, Colgate, Classic Total,
           sugar and(or) other ingredients                                    exclude whitening
 1   KELLOGG'S CORNFLAKES 375GR (F)(ARABIC)                   1   COLGATE   100ml TOTAL
 2   KELLOGG'S CORNFLAKES 500GR (F) (ARABIC)                  2   COLGATE   100ml TOTAL PUMP
 3   KELLOGG'S CRUNCHY NUT CORNFLAKES 500GR(F                 3   COLGATE   50ML TOTAL 12 CLEAN MINT (FAC)
 4   KELLOGG'S HONEYNUT CORNFLKE.375GR(F)(ARA                 4   COLGATE   50ml TOTAL
 5   KELLOGGS 375g CORN FLAKES                                5   COLGATE   50ml TOTAL 12 CLEAN MINT
 6   KELLOGGS 375g CRUNCHY NUT CORN FLAKES                    6   COLGATE   TOTAL 100 ML
 7   KELLOGGS 375g HONEY NUT CORN FLAKES                      7   COLGATE   TOTAL 100ML
 8   KELLOGGS 500g CORN FLAKES                                8   COLGATE   TOTAL 100ML PD
 9   KELLOGGS 500g HEALTH WISE BRAN FLAKES                    9   COLGATE   TOTAL 100ML PD(M.BEN/FL)
10   KELLOGGS ALL BRAN FLAKES 375 GM PKT                     10   COLGATE   TOTAL 100ML PUMP
11   KELLOGGS C/F 250G (F)                                   11   COLGATE   TOTAL 100ml PD
12   KELLOGGS C/F 375G (F)                                   12   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 100ML PUMP
13   KELLOGGS C/F 500G (F)                                   13   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 50ML
14   KELLOGGS CHOCO CF 375g (ARABIC)                         14   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 50ml
15   KELLOGGS CORN FLAKES 250GR PKT                          15   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 CLEAN MINT 50ML GUM
16   KELLOGGS CORN FLAKES 375GR PKT                          16   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 CLEAN MINT 50ML(FAC)
17   KELLOGGS CORN FLAKES 500 GR PKT                         17   COLGATE   TOTAL 12 CLEANMINT 50ML (COS)
18   KELLOGGS CORNFLAKES 375g ARABIC                         18   COLGATE   TOTAL 50ML
19   KELLOGGS CORNFLAKES 500g BOX ARABIC                     19   COLGATE   TOTAL 50ML (GUM)
20   KELLOGGS CRUMBS CORN FLAKES 595GR(A)ENG                 20   COLGATE   TOTAL 50ML CLEAN MINT PROT. GUM
21   KELLOGGS CRUNCHYNUT CORNFLAKES 375g ARAB                21   COLGATE   TOTAL 50ML(GUM)
22   KELLOGGS FROSTED FLAKES 496GR (ENG)(C)                  22   COLGATE   TOTAL 50ml
23   KELLOGGS FROSTED FLAKES CORN 397GR(CRT)C                23   COLGATE   TOTAL CLEAN MINT 50ml
24   KELLOGGS HONEY NUT C/F 375GR (A)                        24   COLGATE   TOTAL FRESH STRIPE 100ML
25   KELLOGGS HONEY NUT CORN FLAKES 375GR
26   KELLOGGS HONEY NUT CORN FLAKES 375g BOX
27   KELLOGGS M.GRAIN CORNFLAKES 375G(A)CRT(E
28   KELLOGGS MULTIGRAIN C/FLAKES 375GR PKT
29   KELLOGS C.F 250GM
30   KELLOGS C.F 375GM
31   KELLOGS C.F 500GM
32   KELLOGS C.F ARABIC 250GM
33   KELLOGS C.F ARABIC NEW 375GM
34   KELLOGS C.F. ARABIC 375GM
35   KELLOGS C.F. ARABIC 500GM
36   KELLOGS CRUNCHY NUT C.F.500GM
37   KELLOGS HONEY NUT C.F.375GM




                                                        29
      Table A.3: Regression Summary by Product Category : GCC Region and the U.S.

   (i) Distribution Measure: NUM Distribution         (ii) Distribution Measure: PCV Distribution
                           GCC Average      U.S.                               GCC Average      U.S.
                                ^
                                b             ^
                                              b                                     ^
                                                                                    b             ^
                                                                                                  b
Pooled data                    4.9           5.2   Pooled data                     5.0            5.3

By Category                                        By Category
        Beans                  6.7           5.4           Beans                   5.6            5.3
        Blades                 5.2           5.0           Blades                  7.2            4.9
       Bouillon                3.7           5.7          Bouillon                 4.7            5.6
        Cereals                6.8           5.8           Cereals                 5.2            5.7
        Cheese                 5.0           5.7           Cheese                  4.6            5.6
    Chewing gum                5.1           5.8       Chewing gum                 5.0            5.9
      Chocolate                4.9           5.6         Chocolate                 5.3            5.4
      Cigarette                4.5           n.a         Cigarette                 4.8            n.a
     Cooking oil               5.8           5.4        Cooking oil                5.2            5.3
Carbonated soft-drinks         4.1           6.3   Carbonated soft-drinks          4.4            6.2
      Deodorant                9.6           4.9         Deodorant                 4.9            4.8
     Detergents                4.8           4.9        Detergents                 5.2            4.8
     Dish washer               7.3           5.0        Dish washer                6.3            4.9
    Energy drinks              5.0           6.4       Energy drinks               5.2            6.3
  Fabric conditioner           5.8           4.8     Fabric conditioner            4.8            4.7
     Insecticides              4.9           5.3        Insecticides               4.6            5.3
        Juices                 5.0           4.3           Juices                  4.8            4.4
   Liquid cordials             6.6           5.2      Liquid cordials              6.6            4.8
   Male grooming               5.5           5.4      Male grooming                5.2            5.1
         Milk                  4.9           5.3            Milk                   4.9            5.3
     Milk powder               4.6           5.0        Milk powder                4.8            4.9
  Powder soft-drink            6.5           4.9     Powder soft-drink             6.0            4.8
      Shampoo                  6.6           4.7         Shampoo                   5.1            4.7
       Skincare                5.5           5.6          Skincare                 4.7            5.3
    Skin cleansing             6.0           4.7       Skin cleansing              5.3            4.6
       Sun-care                5.2           5.0          Sun-care                 3.9            4.8
         Tea                   6.0           5.5            Tea                    5.9            5.4
     Toothbrush                8.1           4.5        Toothbrush                 5.5            4.5
     Toothpaste                4.9           4.8        Toothpaste                 5.0            4.9
        Water                  6.4           5.6           Water                   5.6            5.4

Summary Statistics                                 Summary Statistics
       Min                     3.7          4.3           Min                      3.9           4.4
       Max                     9.6          6.4           Max                      7.2           6.3
      Mean                     5.7          5.3          Mean                      5.2           5.2
     Median                    5.4          5.3         Median                     5.1           5.1




                                              30
          Table A.4: By Country and Category Regressions: Numeric Distribution

                                                ^
                                                b (slope)
                            U.S.   KUW     QTR BAH OMN          UAE    KSA       Average ^
                                                                                         b
Pooled data                 5.2      4.7    3.8  4.5     5.2     4.8    5.0         4.6

By Category
        Beans                5.4     7.0    4.7    8.7    7.4    7.0    5.5         6.5
        Blades               5.0     9.9    3.0    4.0    4.4    5.9    4.2         5.2
       Bouillon              5.7     5.1    3.2    2.3    3.3    5.5    2.6         3.9
        Cereals              5.8     7.3    4.4    6.3    7.2    6.7    9.1         6.7
        Cheese               5.7     6.3    3.5    5.1    5.0    5.1    5.1         5.1
    Chewing gum              5.8     4.8    3.7    4.5    8.1    5.0    4.3         5.2
      Chocolate              5.6     5.6    3.3    4.6    6.4    4.5    5.1         5.0
      Cigarette              n.a     4.1    4.1    4.5    4.8    4.8    4.5         4.5
     Cooking oil             5.4     8.6    3.9    4.4    6.2    4.6    7.2         5.8
Carbonated soft-drinks       6.3     4.2    3.5    4.7    4.3    3.6    4.1         4.4
      Deodorant              4.9     7.2    8.2    7.6   12.1   10.1   12.2         8.9
     Detergents              4.9     4.3    3.2    4.1    6.6    4.5    5.8         4.8
     Dishwasher              5.0     8.6    4.2    4.9   11.5    6.1    8.3         6.9
    Energy drinks            6.4     5.4    4.2    4.7    5.5    5.7    4.6         5.2
  Fabric conditioner         4.8     6.2    4.5    3.7    8.2    4.4    7.8         5.6
     Insecticides            5.3     5.7    3.1    4.4    6.2    4.8    5.1         4.9
        Juices               4.3     4.6    3.8    4.5    5.5    5.5    5.9         4.9
   Liquid cordials           5.2     7.1    4.9    6.3    6.4    6.5    8.4         6.4
   Male grooming             5.4     6.0    3.3    4.4    5.0    8.7    5.5         5.5
         Milk                5.3     5.7    4.0    4.8    5.2    5.3    4.3         4.9
     Milk powder             5.0     4.7    3.5    3.4    6.1    5.0    5.1         4.7
  Powder soft-drink          4.9     7.4    6.8    5.0    6.2    6.2    7.4         6.3
      Shampoo                4.7     6.3    4.5    5.6    6.3    5.7   11.0         6.3
       Skincare              5.6     5.1    3.5    4.5    6.4    6.0    7.8         5.5
    Skin cleansing           4.7     7.5    4.5    5.5    6.6    5.7    6.3         5.8
       Sun-care              5.0     7.8    4.4    4.4    3.9    6.4    4.6         5.2
         Tea                 5.5     6.1    4.9    5.2    7.4    6.6    5.9         5.9
     Toothbrush              4.5    15.5    2.8    4.1    5.0   10.6   11.0         7.6
     Toothpaste              4.8     6.1    3.1    4.2    5.5    5.1    5.6         4.9
        Water                5.6     6.5    5.0    6.3    5.1    5.2   10.3         6.3

Summary Statistics
       Min                  4.3     4.1    2.8    2.3    3.3    3.6     2.6         3.9
       Max                  6.4    15.5    8.2    8.7    12.1   10.6   12.2         8.9
      Mean                  5.3     6.5    4.1    4.9    6.3    5.9     6.5         5.6
     Median                 5.3     6.1    4.0    4.6    6.2    5.6     5.7         5.3




                                           31
       Table A.5: By Country and Category Regressions: Product Category Volume

                                                 ^
                                                 b (slope)
                          U.S. KUW QTR          BAH OMN UAE KSA             Average ^
                                                                                    b
Pooled data                5.3   4.8 4.7          5.0     5.1 5.0 5.0          4.9

By Category
        Beans               5.3    5.9    5.5    5.6    5.6    5.8   5.1         5.5
        Blades              4.9    7.2    6.1    7.1    6.3    7.3   9.0         6.8
       Bouillon             5.6    6.3    4.3    3.3    4.3    5.9   4.1         4.8
        Cereals             5.7    4.8    5.6    5.3    5.5    4.7   5.2         5.3
        Cheese              5.6    4.6    4.6    4.8    4.4    4.6   4.9         4.8
    Chewing gum             5.9    5.1    4.1    4.9    6.6    4.8   4.6         5.1
      Chocolate             5.4    5.6    4.8    5.1    6.1    4.5   5.5         5.3
      Cigarette             n.a    4.7    4.5    5.0    4.8    4.6   5.0         4.8
     Cooking oil            5.3    5.3    4.6    5.2    5.1    4.9   5.9         5.2
Carbonated soft-drinks      6.2    4.9    3.7    4.7    4.6    4.2   4.3         4.6
      Deodorant             4.8    3.4    4.9    5.8    5.5    5.1   5.0         4.9
     Detergents             4.8    5.3    4.1    5.3    5.8    5.3   5.6         5.2
     Dishwasher             4.9    6.4    5.4    7.6    6.3    5.6   6.4         6.1
    Energy drinks           6.3    5.1    4.6    5.1    5.1    6.1   5.0         5.4
  Fabric conditioner        4.7    5.2    5.2    4.4    5.1    4.4   4.7         4.8
     Insecticides           5.3    4.1    3.7    4.6    5.2    4.9   5.3         4.7
        Juices              4.4    4.8    4.5    4.3    5.0    5.0   5.1         4.7
   Liquid cordials          4.8    6.5    6.0    6.0    7.4    6.3   7.5         6.4
   Male grooming            5.1    5.1    4.4    5.8    5.6    5.8   4.5         5.2
         Milk               5.3    5.5    4.7    4.6    5.0    5.2   4.5         5.0
     Milk powder            4.9    4.8    4.5    4.4    5.6    5.0   4.5         4.8
  Powder soft-drink         4.8    5.8    7.1    5.8    6.2    5.7   5.6         5.9
      Shampoo               4.7    4.8    5.1    5.3    4.8    4.7   5.8         5.0
       Skincare             5.3    4.2    4.4    5.1    5.3    4.8   4.6         4.8
    Skin cleansing          4.6    4.8    5.6    6.0    5.1    5.3   5.3         5.2
       Sun-care             4.8    4.4    3.7    2.5    4.2    4.2   4.4         4.0
         Tea                5.4    5.8    5.9    5.7    6.2    6.0   5.7         5.8
     Toothbrush             4.5    5.1    5.8    5.7    5.9    5.7   5.0         5.4
     Toothpaste             4.9    4.4    5.0    5.2    5.1    5.7   4.9         5.0
        Water               5.4    5.7    6.0    6.0    4.9    4.7   6.6         5.6

Summary Statistics
       Min                 4.4    3.4    3.7    2.5    4.2    4.2    4.1         4.0
       Max                 6.3    7.2    7.1    7.6    7.4    7.3    9.0         6.8
      Mean                 5.2    5.2    4.9    5.2    5.4    5.2    5.3         5.2
     Median                5.1    5.1    4.8    5.2    5.2    5.1    5.1         5.1




                                         32
B. Figure Appendix

                                                  Bahrain                                                                                                      Kuwait




                                                                                                                      115
            120
            115




                                                                                                                      110
     Inflation




                                                                                                          Inflation
       110




                                                                                                                      105
            105
            100




                                                                                                                      100
              01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                          Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                          Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                 (a)                                                                                                      (b)
                                                      Oman                                                                                                     Qatar
            125




                                                                                                                      125
            120




                                                                                                                      120
               115




                                                                                                                    115
       Inflation




                                                                                                            Inflation
     110




                                                                                                          110
            105




                                                                                                                      105
            100




                                                                                                                      100




              01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                          Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                          Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                 (c)                                                                                                      (d)
                                                      KSA                                                                                                      UAE
                                                                                                                      130
            125
            120




                                                                                                                      120
              115
       Inflation




                                                                                                          Inflation
     110




                                                                                                                      110
            105
            100




                                                                                                                      100




              01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                          Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                          Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                 (e)                                                                                                       (f)

                     Figure B.1: Alternative Aggregate GCC Inflation Measures (No Weights)




                                                                                                     33
                                             Bahrain                                                                                                      Kuwait
       125




                                                                                                                 120
       120




                                                                                                                 115
          115
 Inflation




                                                                                                     Inflation
                                                                                                         110
 110




                                                                                                                 105
       105
       100




                                                                                                                 100
         01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                     Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                     Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                            (a)                                                                                                      (b)
                                                 Oman                                                                                                     Qatar

                                                                                                                 125
       125




                                                                                                                 120
       120




                                                                                                               115
          115
   Inflation




                                                                                                       Inflation
                                                                                                     110
 110




                                                                                                                 105
       105




                                                                                                                 100
       100




         01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                     Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                     Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                            (c)                                                                                                      (d)
                                                 KSA                                                                                                      UAE
                                                                                                                 130
       130




                                                                                                                 120
          120
 Inflation




                                                                                                     Inflation
                                                                                                                 110
       110
       100




                                                                                                                 100




         01jan2006              01jan2008               01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008                 01jan2010                   01jan2012

                     Benchmark (uses expenditure)           No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)             No Weights used
                     Numeric Distribution (ND)              Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)                Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                            (e)                                                                                                       (f)

Figure B.2: Alternative Aggregate GCC Inflation Measures (Expenditure Weights)




                                                                                                34
                                        Dairy (weight=.28)                                                                                 Dry Grocery (weight=.61)




                                                                                                                    125
            120




                                                                                                                    120
        110




                                                                                                                 115
Inflation




                                                                                                         Inflation
                                                                                                        110
            100




                                                                                                                    105
                                                                                                                    100
            90




             01jan2006              01jan2008              01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008           01jan2010                   01jan2012

                         Benchmark (uses expenditure)          No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)       No Weights used
                         Numeric Distribution (ND)             Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)          Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                (a)                                                                                                     (b)
                            General Merchandise (weight=0)                                                                        Health & Beauty Care (weight=.03)
            120




                                                                                                                    110
            115




                                                                                                                    105
         110
 Inflation




                                                                                                        Inflation
105




                                                                                                                    100
            100
            95




                                                                                                                    95




             01jan2006              01jan2008              01jan2010                   01jan2012                     01jan2006              01jan2008           01jan2010                   01jan2012

                         Benchmark (uses expenditure)          No Weights used                                                   Benchmark (uses expenditure)       No Weights used
                         Numeric Distribution (ND)             Weighted Distribution (WD)                                        Numeric Distribution (ND)          Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                (c)                                                                                                     (d)
                             Non-Food Grocery (weight=.07)
            115
            110
Inflation
            105
            100




             01jan2006              01jan2008              01jan2010                   01jan2012

                         Benchmark (uses expenditure)          No Weights used
                         Numeric Distribution (ND)             Weighted Distribution (WD)




                                                (e)

                                                        Figure B.3: US Inflation by Department




                                                                                                   35
                            Candy                                                         Gum




                                                                 140
150




                                                                 130
140
130




                                                                 120
120




                                                                 110
110




                                                                 100
100




                                                                 90
 01jan2006      01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008            01jan2010   01jan2012




                            (a)                                                           (b)
             Juice, Drinks - Canned, Bottled                                              Soup




                                                                 115
115




                                                                 110
110




                                                                 105
105




                                                                 100
100
95




                                                                 95




 01jan2006      01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008            01jan2010   01jan2012




                            (c)                                                           (d)
                  Vegetables - Canned                                                     Cereal
140




                                                                 115
130




                                                                 110
120




                                                                 105
110




                                                                 100
100




                                                                 95




 01jan2006      01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008            01jan2010   01jan2012




                            (e)                                                           (f)
              Packaged Milk And Modifiers                                            Shortening, Oil
160




                                                                 160
                                                                 140
140




                                                                 120
120




                                                                 100
100




 01jan2006      01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008            01jan2010   01jan2012




                            (g)                                                           (h)

                             Figure B.4: US Inflation by Group (Part I)

                                                            36
                           Tea                                                 Carbonated Beverages




                                                               120
110




                                                               115
105




                                                               110
                                                               105
100




                                                               100
                                                               95
95




 01jan2006    01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006      01jan2008                01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (a)                                                               (b)
             Soft Drinks-Non-Carbonated                                                     Cheese
105




                                                               130
100




                                                               120
                                                               110
95




                                                               100
90
85




                                                               90




 01jan2006    01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006      01jan2008                01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (c)                                                               (d)
                           Milk                                                            Detergents
                                                               120
120




                                                               115
                                                               110
110




                                                               105
                                                               100
100




                                                               95




 01jan2006    01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006      01jan2008                01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (e)                                                               (f)
                   Laundry Supplies                                         Insecticds/Pesticds/Rodenticds
                                                               120
110




                                                               115
105




                                                               110
                                                               105
100




                                                               100
                                                               95
95




 01jan2006    01jan2008           01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006      01jan2008                01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (g)                                                               (h)

                          Figure B.5: US Inflation by Group (Part II)

                                                          37
                         Deodorant                                                         Hair Care
105




                                                                  110
                                                                  105
100




                                                                  100
95




                                                                  95
90




                                                                  90
 01jan2006   01jan2008               01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008               01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (a)                                                              (b)
                     Oral Hygiene                                                    Shaving Needs
                                                                  130
110
105




                                                                  120
100




                                                                  110
                                                                  100
95
90




                                                                  90




 01jan2006   01jan2008               01jan2010   01jan2012         01jan2006   01jan2008               01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (c)                                                              (d)
             Skin Care Preparations
105
100
95
90




 01jan2006   01jan2008               01jan2010   01jan2012




                          (e)

                          Figure B.6: US Inflation by Group (Part III)




                                                             38
C. Theory Appendix

C1. Theoretical Foundation of Convexity
Having reviewed evidence from the literature and the data for the convex relation between mar-
ket share and the retail distribution, in this section we propose a theoretical model that provides
some micro-foundations to account for such a pattern. The theory, based on a standard set of
assumptions building on the Melitz (2003) model, characterizes both manufacturers' and retailers'
decisions under alternative market structure settings. As featured in the model, it is the interac-
tion between heterogeneous firms and varying "slotting fee" that yields the convex relation that is
observed in the data. We show that assuming heterogeneity in the slotting fee incurred by manu-
facturers is sufficient to generate the convex relation between sales and the distribution measure,
which is robust to alternative market structures.

The Consumer

We study a closed economy, but our analysis could readily be extended to an open economy. The
consumer's utility depends on the consumption of differentiated varieties, which are purchased
from a set of retailers. Each manufacturer produces a single variety for simplicity, and they choose
to which retailers they sell their product. We index manufacturers with j or , and retailers with
r. The utility function follows Hottman et al. (2016); Feenstra et al. (2020), and is assumed to be
nested CES, as follows:
                                                                                 
                                       -1     -1                          -1     -1
                                       
                       U=          Xr              , Xr =               xrj
                                                                          
                                                                                      , >           (10)
                               r                                 j Jr

where  and  denote the elasticity of substitution across retailers and across varieties within
retailers. The collection of varieties within retailer r is Jr , and the set of retailers is denoted as .
The demand for variety j served in r is,

                                        xrj = p-   -  -1
                                               rj Pr P Y.                                           (11)

The term Pr- P -1 Y reflects the total demand (in terms of market size) of retailer r, which will
depend on the economy-wide total income (Y ), as well as the price indexes given by:
                                                     1                                 1
                                                    1-                                1-
                                               -
                            Pr =            p1
                                             rj          , P =                Pr1-                  (12)
                                     j Jr                               r


The Suppliers

Two types of firms function as suppliers: manufacturers and retailers. Each manufacturer produces
a single product and sells it to retailers, as already noted, while consumers purchase consumption


                                                      39
goods from retailers. In the subsequent analysis, both retailers and manufacturers are assumed to
be profit maximizers that employ their optimal strategies simultaneously.
     Manufacturers and retailers are heterogeneous in the model, and we denote them as  and
r, respectively. The manufacturers differ in productivity (). Retailers differ in terms of the
slotting fee, which we call the slotting fee. For simplicity, we treat the slotting fee as exogenous
(i.e., not chosen by retailers) so that it becomes a slotting fee and paid by manufacturers.28 Both
manufacturers' productivity and retailers' slotting fees are exogenous in the model. The total
measure of manufacturers is M , and their productivities are i.i.d. distributed with a c.d.f. of
G().
     There are many retailers, and the measure of retailers serving the economy is fixed and denoted
by N . We line up retailers and rank them in order of their slotting fees from low to high. To
simplify the following analysis, we treat retailers as if they are continuous, and we index them in
relative terms (i.e., r  [0, 1]) where a retailer of r = 0 has the lowest slotting fee and a retailer of
r = 1 has the highest slotting fee (f /r > 0). We study the equilibrium in which manufacturers
will prefer to sell in retailers with lower slotting fee. That is, we assume that manufacturers go to
retailers with the lowest slotting fee first and then to those with increasing higher slotting fee until
it is no longer profitable to sell to other retailers. Let r  [0, 1] denote the scope of the retailers
to which manufacturer  is possibly able to sell, and we formalize this assumption as follows.29

    Assumption 1: The manufacturer lines up retailers according to their slotting fees and sells
to the lower-slotting-fee retailers [0, r ] until the manufacturer's additional profit goes to zero at r .

The numeric distribution of the product produced by manufacturer  is exactly r  N /N , where
N denotes the largest discrete index of retailers that manufacturer  could serve. We assume re-
tailers and manufacturers make their optimal decisions simultaneously to maximize profits; that
is, retailers set retail prices taking wholesale prices as given, and manufacturers choose wholesale
prices taking retailers' markups as given.
     Manufacturers observe the pricing rule of the retailers and are aware that their pricing rule
will affect the market outcome. Given the production efficiency , the marginal cost of this
manufacturer is w/ where w is labor wages. Manufacturer  maximizes profit by choosing its
prices qr for the retailers [0,r ] to which it sells its product:
  28
     The marketing literature refers to the slotting fee (f (r)) as the slotting fee (or fixed trade spending), a fee
charged to manufacturers by retailers in order to have manufacturers' products placed on retailers' shelves. It has
also been well established that slotting fees differ across retailers (Rao and Mahi (2003); Kuksov and Pazgal (2007)).
Retailers' slotting fees could reflect some other factors out of their control that affect manufacturers' willingness to
sell goods in them (e.g., poor locations, traffic or logistics could increase such fixed costs), and we assume those
obstacles are borne by the manufacturers.
  29
     In the general scenario, multiple equilibria are possible, and we need this assumption for tractability in the
analysis of the model.




                                                          40
                                            r                     r
                            max                 r dr = max            (qr xr - f (r)) dr,                   (13)
                                  qr    0                qr   0

where r is manufacturer 's profit collected from retailer r, xr is the demand for product 
by retailer r, f (r) denotes the slotting fee charged by retailer r to allow a manufacturer to sell
on its shelves, and r indicates the scope of the retailers that manufacturer  is possibly able to
serve. Manufacturers set wholesale prices taking retailers; markups as given. As shown in (13), qr
denotes the wholesale price, and the final price paid by consumers would be pr = µr qr where µr is
the markup charged by retailer r. The pricing rule of retailers is specified later, and manufacturers
take it as given and are aware that their wholesale prices will affect the market price pr . The first
order condition with respect to qr solves for the optimal prices:

                                                     w
                                        qr =           , r  [0, r ].                                        (14)
                                                    -1
We solve for the profit generated by selling to retailer r as:
                                                 
                           1        -1
                    r =                             Y P -1 w1- × µ-   -
                                                                  r Pr  × -1 - f (r) .
                           -1       
The cutoff productivity r of the manufacturer just able to make a profit by selling to retailer r
while paying the slotting fee f (r) is computed by setting r equal to zero:
                                            
                        1        -1
                                                Y P -1 w1- × µ-   -
                                                              r Pr  × r
                                                                        -1
                                                                           = f (r) .                        (15)
                        -1       
As multiple equilibria are possible in the general scenario, we employ Assumption 1 to focus
on the equilibrium in which the retailers embedded with lower slotting fees always host more
manufacturers (i.e., if f (r1 ) < f (r2 ) then r1 < r2 ).30 Then in equilibrium, only manufacturers
with productivity  greater than r sell to retailer r. With the mass of manufacturers denoted as
M , the measure of manufacturers serving retailer r is M (1 - G (r )).
   We are now more specific about the distribution of manufacturers' productivity  in the econ-
omy. We assume that  follows a Pareto distribution with a c.d.f. of G () = 1 - /      ¯ k,       ¯,
with k >  - 1. We can use this distribution to solve for the price index Pr as defined in (12):
  30
    In the equilibrium we studied, the market power (markup) of low-slotting-fee supermarkets cannot be large
enough to overturn the advantage for manufacturers to sell products in them (due to low slotting fees). Other-
wise, there may not exist a positively monotone pattern between (r , f (r)). That is, manufacturers may choose
supermarkets with slightly higher slotting fees to avoid the profit reduction resulting from the high markup of a
low-slotting-fee supermarket.




                                                         41
                                      +                          1/(1- )
                                                -
                           Pr = M            p1
                                              r g    () d
                                     r
                                                          1
                                           k             1-         k
                                                                 ¯ 1-     1
                                                                       M 1- w × µ   -1 ,
                                                                                                 k- +1
                              =                                                  r r                         (16)
                                -1       k-+1

Substituting (16) back to (15), we could solve the cutoff of productivity r :

                                                  r1 = A1 f (r) µr,                                          (17)

where   1   and A1 are defined as:


                          (k - 1) ( -  ) +  + 1
                   1                            ,
                                   -1
                                                                    -
                                             
                                                    k               -1
                                                                         ¯
                                                                             k( - )         -
                 A1  ( - 1)                                                    -1     M -1 w-1 P 1- Y -1 .
                                  -1              k-+1

The observed sales (pr xr ) of product  through retailer r would be:
                                                         1-                        ( -1)
                                                                             1-
                                     Rr = -1 A1 1 f (r) 2 µr                         1
                                                                                           ,                 (18)

where the equality uses (17). It can be easily shown that 2  1 - -        1
                                                                            1
                                                                              > 0 given the imposed
restriction that k >  - 1. As the last step, we derive the total sales of product  in the economy,
where we also change notation from r to n to denote the numeric distribution:


                                             r
                                 R =             Rr dr
                                         0
                                             n
                                     =           Rr dr
                                         0
                                                    1-       n                     ( -1)
                                                                             1-
                                     = -1 A1 1                   f (r) 2 µr          1
                                                                                           dr.               (19)
                                                         0


Proposition 1. Under Assumption 1, and if retailers charge the same markups to consumers
(i.e., µr = µ,r  [0, 1]), product sales are convex in the numeric distribution, defined as n 
N /N .

    Proposition 1 is easily proved by taking the first and second derivatives of product sales R
with respect to the numeric distribution n (see Appendix C2). It corresponds to a preliminary
scenario in which retailers do not take their market shares into consideration when setting their
retail prices, i.e. they do not see themselves as multi-product sellers. We next examine the case in


                                                         42
which retailers optimally charge differing markups.

Product Sales with Variable Retailer Markups

In the more general case, the markups charged by retailers will differ. Retailers choose their prices
for the range of products, taking into account that a change in any prices will affect their market
shares for all their products. We first consider the case in which retailers fail to realize that the
pricing rules could also affect the entry of manufacturers and hence profits. Let us call this case
a "shortsighted" retailer. Manufacturers have to overcome the exogenous slotting fee to sell to a
retailer, which implies that only manufacturers with productivity above the threshold can sell in
that retailer. The profit maximization problem for retailer r is:

                                                                +
               max               (prj - qrj ) xrj  max     M        (pr - qr ) xr g ()d           (20)
              prj ,j Jr                           pr ,>r       r
                          j Jr

where pr is the retail price and qr is the wholesale price of product . This problem is solved in
Feenstra et al. (2020), and the pricing rule of retailer r is:

                                                               1
                          pr = µr qr , with µr  1 +                       ,  > r ,                (21)
                                                         ( - 1) (1 - sr )
where sr is the market share of retailer r over all its products sold and µr is retailer r's markup,
which is equal across products sold by that retailer. Bigger retailers (larger sr ) would charge a
higher markup.
Proposition 2. When retailers are shortsighted, retailers' markups positively depend on their
market shares as in (21), and product sales are convex in the numeric distribution if:

                                                  ( - 1)2 -  - 1
                                          k 1+                   .
                                                      -

    The proof of Proposition 2 is in Appendix C3, and the above condition is sufficient for convexity.
For cases outside the range as indicated in Proposition 2, we find that the convex relation between
market sales and the numeric distribution still holds empirically, as we shall demonstrate below.
    Next, we study the case of farsighted retailers; that is, retailers who are aware that their retail
prices would affect both the intensive margin of sales (the sales conditional on the measure of
manufacturers selling in those retailers) and the extensive margin of sales (the measure of the
manufacturers selling in those retailers). Retailer r chooses a retail markup to maximize profit:
                                              +
                                    max M         (pr - qr ) xr g ()d .
                                     µr      r

Given that pr = µr qr andpr qr = f (r)1 -  -1
                                          , with g () = k ¯k -k-1 , we can integrate
                                      r
retailer r's profit to obtain:

                                                    43
                                            kM ¯k
                                    max           f (r) (µr - 1) -
                                                                 r
                                                                   k
                                                                     ,
                                     µr    k-+1
which could be further simplified given (17) as:

                                         -k
                                                                  
                                      ¯k
                                   kM  A1 1
                                                 1- k         - k

                              max           f (r) 1 (µr - 1) µr 1  .                                           (22)
                               µr  k-+1

The first order condition of (22) with respect to µr implies that:31

                                                         1
                                    µr = 1 +                            ,                                      (23)
                                               k/ 1 [ - ( - 1) sr ] - 1
where 1  (k-1)(-      )+ +1
                    -1
                            . To guarantee a meaningful markup µr > 1, we require k/                       1   > 1,
                    32
which implies that:
                                                +1
                                       k >1+            .                                                      (24)
                                                ( - 1)
Similar to the pricing rule for shortsighted retailers in (21), the markup of a farsighted retailer also
positively depends on its market share. Therefore, we derive a proposition similar to Proposition
2.33

Proposition 3. When retailers are farsighted, retailers' markups positively depend on their market
shares as in (23), and product sales are convex in the numeric distribution if:

                                                   ( - 1)2 -  - 1
                                          k 1+
                                                       -

   The proof of Proposition 3 follows the similar steps in the proof of Proposition 2. Thus, we
have completed the theoretical foundation to explain the observed sales pattern, which however
provides with sufficient conditions. Nevertheless, we can go beyond model parameters and develop
some inferences about the convex relationship between product sales and the numeric distribution
based on data.

Proposition 4. Under Assumption 1, and when markups positively depend on market shares, if
retailers' sales rank satisfies sr2 < sr1 for r2 > r1  [0, 1] so that retailers hosting more products
also have bigger total sales, product sales are convex in the numeric distribution.

   The proof of Proposition 4 is in Appendix C4. The condition in Proposition 4 that retailers
hosting more products also have bigger total sales is not trivial, though it is the case on average in
the data (see Figure 2). Conditional on entry, incumbent manufacturers will sell more to overcome
 31
    The derivation also takes into account that  ln P / ln µr = ln P / ln Pr = sr , given that  ln Pr / ln µr = 1.
 32
    In the extreme case in which there is only one retailer, the markup is µr = k/ 1 / (k/ 1 - 1).
 33
    Proposition 3 implicitly assumes that model parameters satisfies (24).


                                                       44
higher slotting fee. In the case in which there is a substantial number of big manufacturers, the
deterring effect of a high slotting fee on entry would be mitigated. In turn, the high slotting fee
would bring more sales that are generated by incumbent manufacturers, and this would potentially
break the positive relationship between the number of products a retailer hosts and its total sales.

Model Simulation

To provide an overview of how well the model generates the convex relation between product
market share and the retail distribution, we perform a simulation exercise for the case in which
retailers are shortsighted.34 In the simulation, we simulate the sales and the numeric distribution
of a large number of products under three scenarios, and one of them (k = 16) corresponds
to the case in which restriction of model parameters in Proposition 2 and 3 is satisfied. Our
purpose is to demonstrate how our model can replicate the convex relationship between sales and
the numeric distribution, and investigate whether the convex relationship is robust to various
candidate parameters of the distribution of productivity k with the minimum constraint k >  - 1.
    To give a brief idea of the procedure, setting parameters to satisfy the restriction, we simulate
the economy in which consumers, manufacturers and retailers are specified by (10), (13), and (20).
In practice, we specify the slotting fee as f (r) = er ( > 0 and  > 1) and simulate 10,000 draws
u from a uniform distribution from zero to one. The corresponding Pareto productivity draws are
               1
 = (1 - u)- k    ¯. Given the functional forms, we solve the model by solving for the equilibrium
retailer markups. Figure C.1 presents the simulation results by values of k . In all three scenarios,
we observe a convex relationship between product market share and the numeric distribution.35
    To summarize, in this analysis, we present a micro-foundation for the observed convexity in
the sales-distribution measure relation. Our model is based on the standard assumptions in the
literature. We show that the implied convexity pattern is robust to various market structure
settings, as long as the slotting fee incurred by manufacturers to sell in retailers vary across
retailers. Our theoretical results further corroborate the robustness of using the retail distribution
to approximate product sales when they are absent.


  34
     The pattern for farsighted retailers remains similar, as is also discussed in Proposition 3. The detailed procedure
for simulation is provided in Appendix C5.
  35
     In Figure C.2 and C.3, we also simulate the model with different functional forms for the slotting fee f (r), and
the convex relationship between product market share and the numeric distribution remains robust. Analogously,
the alternative measure of the weighted distribution could be shown to perform similarly to the numeric distribution.
As the numeric distribution requires less information than the weighted distribution in practice, implementing it is
more feasible.




                                                          45
Notes: Parameter value k = 16 satisfies parameter restriction in Proposition 2 and 3.

                   Figure C.1: Convexity between Sales and Numeric Distribution




                                                       46
C2. Proof of Proposition 1
Since retailers charge the same markups, we denote it as µr = µ r  [0, 1]. Product sales of 
can be written as:
                                                   1-             ( -1)               n
                                           -1               1-
                                R =             A1  1
                                                        µ           1         ×           f (r) 2 dr.
                                                                                  0

The first and second derivative of R with respect to n are (                                  2   > 0):


   R       1-
                 1-
                     ( -1)                              2 R                                       1-
                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                                               ( -1)                   f (n)
     = -1 A1 1 µ       1   f (n) 2 > 0,                     =                 2 
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                    A1 1 µ                       1       f (n) 2 -1          > 0,
   n                                                   n2                                                                              n

where the first inequality holds given that there is no negative term, and the second inequality
holds given that slotting fee f (r) increase in r.




C3. Proof of Proposition 2
We rewrite (19) as:


                                 1-
                                    -1
                                         1-
                                               ( -1)             n                1            ( -1)            1   1-
                                                                                                                          ( -1)
                           -1                                                  2-     1-                        
                R =             A11              1
                                                       ×             f (r)                       1        r                 1
                                                                                                                                  dr
                                                             0
                                 1-
                                      -1
                                         1-
                                               ( -1)             n                        1       1-
                                                                                                        ( -1)
                                                                                  1
                   = -1 A1 1                                         f (r)1-  r
                                                                                          
                                                 1
                                                       ×                                                  1
                                                                                                                dr,
                                                             0

                                         -1            1     1
where the first equality uses µr = A1  f (r)-  r as implied by (17), and the second equality uses
         -1
 2  1 - 1 . The first and second derivative of R with respect to n satisfy:


                R             1-
                                 - 1
                                     1-
                                         ( -1)
                                                       1 1 1-  ( -1)
                                                                              2 R
                      = -1 A1 1                f (n)1-  n
                                           1                     1
                                                                      > 0,         > 0,
                 n                                                            n2
where first inequality holds given there is no negative term, and the second inequality holds given
                                                                                          ( -1)2 - -1
that slotting fee f (r) and r increase in r,  > 1 and 1 - (-   1
                                                                 1)
                                                                     > 0 (implied by k >      -
                                                                                                      ).
                      2
                                                                                                   -1/
   When k = (-1)   -
                    - -1
                          , we can rewrite (17) as µr 1
                                                      r
                                                        -
                                                          = A1 f (r)-1/ (as an intermediate
step, one can show that the equality 1 =  ( - 1) holds). We substitute the new term into
                                            -1/
Rr = -1 f (r) µr 1  r
                      -
                        to obtain Rr = A1 -1 f (r)1-1/ . Product sales of  will be:
                                                                          n
                                                  -1/  -1
                                      R = A1                                  f (r)1-1/ dr
                                                                      0

The first and second derivative of R with respect to n satisfy:


                                                             47
     R    -1/                                      2 R     -1/      1                             f (n)
       = A1 -1 f (n)1-1/ > 0,                         2
                                                        = A1 -1 1 -                    f (n)-1/         >0
     n                                            n                                               n

where the first inequality holds given that there is no negative term, and the second inequality
holds given that slotting fee f (r) increase in r.
                                    2
   Under the example k = (-1)      -
                                      - -1
                                           , when f (r) is exponential, i.e., f (r) = er ( > 0 and
 > 1), the sales of product  become


                                                                     n
                                             -1              1                  1
                                   R = A1  -1  1-                        e(1-  )r dr
                                                                 0
                                            -1        1
                                           A1  -1  1-                       1
                                       =                         e(1-  )n - 1 .
                                                    1
                                              1-    


As long as  > 0, product sales are a convex function of the numeric distribution n.


C4. Proof of Proposition 4
                                                                 2
In case of 1 - (-  1
                     1)
                         0 (which implies k  (-1)     -
                                                       - -1
                                                            ), the proof follows the same steps as
                                                    ( -1)
Proposition 2. So consider the case in which 1 - 1 < 0. Given the observed sales of product
 in (19), the first derivative of R with respect to n is:
                                              1-             ( -1)
                              R           -1          2
                                                         1-
                                   =  A1 f (n) µn
                                               1               1
                                                                   > 0.
                               n
Given that sales decrease in retailer index r in the equilibrium studied, retailer markups also
decrease in retailer index r where retailer markup is given in (21) or (23). This implies that both
                   ( -1)
             1-
f (n) 2 and µn       1
                           increase in n, which confirms convexity:

                                                    2 R
                                                        >0
                                                   n2

C5. Model Simulation Procedures
Table C.1 displays the parameters used in the simulation. Given the parameters, we simulate
the economy in which consumers, manufacturers, and retailers are specified by (10), (13), and
(20). The slotting fee is specified as f (r) = er ( > 0 and  > 1). We simulate 10,000 draws
u from a uniform distribution from 0 to 1. The corresponding Pareto productivity draws are
             1
 = (1 - u)- k  ¯. Then we solve the model by solving for the equilibrium retailer markups by the
following procedures (i denotes the i-th loop):



                                                        48
                                                                   (1)
   Step 1: Set the initial value of retailers' markups as r = -   1
                                                                    if it is the start of loop (i = 1);
              (i)   (i-1)          (i-1)
otherwise set r = r , where r            is obtained from Step 4 of the last loop (i  2).
                                                                             (i)
   Step 2: Solve the productivity cutoff r using (17) and the r obtained from Step 1 .
   Step 3: Given the productivity cutoff for each retailer (obtained from Step 2 ), calculate
the sales of each product in each retailer Rr , using equation (18) (set Rr = 0 if  < r ).
With manufacturers' sales in each market, we add them up to get total market sales and the
corresponding market shares sr for each retailer r.
   Step 4: Calculate retailers' markups using market shares sr (obtained from Step 3 ) and
                                            (i)
equation (21). Denote the derived markup as r .
                                             (i)      (i-1)
   Step 5: If the difference between r and r   is smaller than the tolerance, we stop the loop.
Otherwise, we loop over Step 1 through Step 5 until markups converge.
    Figure C.1 in the main text displays the relationship between product shares and the numeric
distribution. Through all different values of k , the convexity remains robust.

                                    Table C.1: Simulation Parameters

        Parameter     Description                                                                 Value
                      Elasticity of substitution (varieties)                                        4.5
                      Elasticity of substitution (retailers)                                         3
            k         Shape parameter of productivity distribution                               [4,8,16]
            ¯
                      Shift parameter of productivity distribution                                   1
            M         Number of manufacturers                                                     10,000
                      Shift parameter of slotting fee                                              100
                      Elasticity of slotting fee with distance from the cheapest retailers           4
             N        Number of retailers                                                           10
             P        Aggregate price index                                                         10
             w        labor cost                                                                     1
             Y        GDP                                                                         1,000
            T ol      Tolerance for markup convergence                                             1e-6
   Notes: k = 16 corresponds to the example case (i.e., the sufficient condition to guarantee the convexity between
   product shares and the numeric distribution).



    We also simulate the model with different functional forms for the slotting fee f (r), with all
other parameters fixed as displayed in Table C.1. In Figure C.2, we specify f (r) in the form of
power function, i.e., f (r) = r where we choose  = 100 and  = 2. In Figure C.3, we instead
specify f (r) as a concave function of r, i.e., we choose  = 100 and  = 0.2 in the simulation. The
relationship between product share and the numeric distribution remains convex.




                                                       49
Figure C.2: Convexity between Sales and Numeric Distribution (f (r) = r ,  = 2)




                                      50
Figure C.3: Convexity between Sales and Numeric Distribution (f (r) = r ,  = 0.2)




                                       51
