                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE EFFECT OF PRINCIPAL REDUCTION ON HOUSEHOLD DISTRESS:
                   EVIDENCE FROM MORTGAGE CRAMDOWN

                                       Jacelly C. Cespedes
                                         Carlos R. Parra
                                         Clemens Sialm

                                       Working Paper 28900
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28900


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021


We are grateful to Hengjie Ai, Vimal Balasubramaniam, Ed Boltz, Peter Ganong, Borja Larrain,
Feng Liu, Gonzalo Maturana, Felipe Severino, Jose Tessada, Tracy Wang, and seminar
participants at the 2020 Virtual Real Estate Seminar, the 2021 CEPR European Workshop on
Household Finance, the 2021 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Research Conference, the
2021 University of Connecticut Finance Conference, the Pontificia Universitad Catolica de Chile,
the Universidad Adolfo Ibanez, the University of Minnesota, and the University of Texas at
Austin. In addition, we thank Tal Gross, Matthew Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang for sharing
their PACER dockets data and Joshua Goodman and Adam Levitin for sharing their data on the
cramdown court rulings. Clemens Sialm is an independent contractor with AQR Capital
Management. This research received generous financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation NBER Household Finance small grant program. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28900.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jacelly C. Cespedes, Carlos R. Parra, and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Principal Reduction on Household Distress: Evidence from Mortgage Cramdown
Jacelly C. Cespedes, Carlos R. Parra, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 28900
June 2021
JEL No. G21,G28,G41,G51,H31,H73,K25,K35

                                          ABSTRACT

Mortgage cramdown enabled bankruptcy judges to discharge the underwater portion of a
mortgage during Chapter 13 bankruptcy before the Supreme Court disallowed this practice in
1993. We exploit the random assignment of cases to judges to quantify the ex-post effects of
Chapter 13 bankruptcy over the period from 1989 to 1993. We find that a successful Chapter 13
filing in a cramdown court substantially decreases the five-year foreclosure rate, the propensity to
move, and the crime rate. Our results suggest that principal write-down considerably reduces
homeowner's distress.

Jacelly C. Cespedes                              Clemens Sialm
University of Minnesota                          University of Texas at Austin
321 19th Avenue South, 3-135                     McCombs School of Business
Minneapolis, Mn 55455                            2110 Speedway; B6600
United States                                    Austin, TX 78712-1276
cespe013@umn.edu                                 and NBER
                                                 clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Carlos R. Parra
PUC Chile
Avenida Vicuna Mackenna 4860
Macul 7820436
Chile
parra.c.carlos.r@gmail.com
1         Introduction

The United States experienced an unprecedented number of home foreclosures dur-
ing the Great Recession of 2007­2009. To limit defaults and deadweight losses, the
government implemented various policies that reduced monthly payments (i.e., Home
Affordable Modification Program (HAMP)) and facilitated mortgage refinancing (i.e.,
Home Affordable Refinancing Program (HARP)). However, various frictions in interme-
diation brought about only modest success for these initiatives.1 An alternative policy
proposal that was not implemented during the Great Recession would have allowed
mortgage cramdown by judges as part of the Chapter 13 bankruptcy process. In these
restructurings, the underwater portion of the mortgage is treated as unsecured debt and
can be discharged during bankruptcy. Our paper investigates this alternative policy by
estimating the effects of bankruptcy discharge on borrowers who benefit from mortgage
cramdown.
        Chapter 13 bankruptcy allows debtors to restructure almost all types of debt, except
for loans on the principal place of residence.2 However, some bankruptcy courts had
been discharging the underwater portion of the mortgage during bankruptcy until the
Supreme Court disallowed this practice in 1993. Although borrowers have to maintain
the obligation to meet their monthly mortgage payments following the original terms of
the loans, cramdown is beneficial for underwater borrowers because it reduces the debt
owed on the property. Cramdown thereby diminishes the incentives for homeowners to
default on their properties and decreases the likelihood of households being forced to
move from their homes.
        In this paper, we estimate the effect of mortgage cramdown on foreclosure and
other economic outcomes. To this end, we estimate the causal effect of the bankruptcy
    1
       Agarwal et al. (2015) and Agarwal et al. (2017) show that securitization, which made renegotiations
difficult, and servicers' organizational capacity hampered the impact of these policies.
     2
       Other debts that cannot be discharged in bankruptcy are domestic support obligations, criminal
penalties, penalties owed to government agencies, taxes, student loans, and fraudulent debts.




                                                    1
discharge using the judge's leniency as an instrumental variable for bankruptcy protec-
tion, similar to Dobbie and Song (2015) and Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Yang
(2017).3 As indicated by Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook (1994), Norberg and Compo
(2007), and Chang and Schoar (2013), the variation in leniency across judges is sub-
stantial. The main identifying assumptions are that judge assignments are associated
with bankruptcy protection and that these assignments only impact debtor outcomes
through the probabilities of receiving bankruptcy protection.
       We also investigate whether the discharge decisions and the subsequent borrower
outcomes depend on the characteristics of the filers for bankruptcy protection. In
particular, we study whether judges impose differential thresholds on female filers and
whether the benefits of bankruptcy protection differ by gender.4
       To estimate the impact of cramdown in Chapter 13 bankruptcy on debtor's home
foreclosures and other economic outcomes, we compile a new data set. First, we collect
information from the Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) system,
and we complement our data with bankruptcy information from Gross, Notowidigdo,
and Wang (2014). Second, we match this data set with two other data sources to
study debtors' mortgage defaults and other post-filing outcomes. Our sample contains
bankruptcy records from 14,517 cases: 6,100 in cramdown courts and 8,417 in non-
cramdown courts. To obtain information about the courts that allowed cramdown, we
merge our data set with data collected by Goodman and Levitin (2014).
       Our main result shows that a bankruptcy discharge in Chapter 13 in a cramdown
court has a large impact on future mortgage distress. We find that a discharge in a
cramdown court reduces the five-year foreclosure rate by 29 percentage points and in-
   3
      A similar empirical strategy has been used to estimate the ex-post impact of the sentence length
on earnings (Kling, 2006), foster care effects (Doyle, 2007), juvenile incarceration (Aizer and Doyle Jr,
2015), and corporate bankruptcy (Chang and Schoar, 2013).
    4
      There is a large literature studying the gender gap in consumer financial decisions and a smaller
literature on the gender gap in personal bankruptcy. Driscoll (1994) concludes that the "bankruptcy
system does not appear to operate in a manner that overtly or intentionally discriminates against
women." Agarwal, He, Sing, and Zhang (2018) argue that the gender gap in bankruptcy risk in
Singapore is mainly driven by risk-taking behavior.


                                                   2
voluntary sales (i.e., property sales for less than the mortgage amount) by 26 percentage
points. We also find that discharge in cramdown courts stabilizes living arrangements
and circumstances of households. Households are less likely to move overall, and when
they do, they are more likely to move to neighborhoods with higher income levels.
Furthermore, households whose debt is discharged in cramdown courts experience a
significant reduction in subsequent criminal filings.
   We find beneficial effects of discharge in cramdown courts across different demo-
graphic groups. However, the benefits are more pronounced for female filers. For
example, involuntary sales decline by 41 percentage points for female and by only 22
percentage points for male filers. These economically large differences may occur be-
cause judges might require a higher threshold for female filers to qualify for Chapter 13
debt discharge. Indeed, the discharge rate for female filers is 4 to 5 percentage points
lower than for male filers after controlling for other filer characteristics and court fixed
effects. The differential treatment of female filers by judges may be due to systematic
patterns of "in-group" tolerance, as discussed by Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2018) in the
context of misconduct in the financial advisory industry.
   It remains unclear whether the beneficial discharge effects are driven by the cram-
down provisions or by other features of debt restructuring through Chapter 13. To
address this question, we combine our samples from cramdown and non-cramdown
courts and study whether the effects differ across the two samples. We find that the
five-year foreclosure rate declines by 29 percentage points in cramdown courts and by
5 percentage points in non-cramdown courts. Thus, our results indicate that the cram-
down provision is the main driver of the beneficial effects of bankruptcy discharge in
cramdown courts. Therefore, given the substantial costs of foreclosure, cramdown has
significant benefits for homeowners (Diamond, Gureny, and Tan, 2020).
   We also provide a partial-equilibrium back-of-the-envelope calculation of how many
foreclosures could have been avoided had the United States allowed mortgage cram-



                                             3
down during the 2008­2013 period. Our estimates indicate that more than half a
million foreclosures could have been avoided with mortgage cramdown. This estimate
supports the hypothesis that cramdown would have been an effective policy tool to re-
duce foreclosures.5 However, these benefits can potentially be partially offset by higher
costs imposed on borrowers who do not declare bankruptcy and mortgage lenders.
       Our paper builds on an important literature in household finance that studies the
impact of bankruptcy on foreclosures and other economic outcomes. Our paper is most
related to Dobbie and Song (2015), who use random judge assignments to study the
impact of unsecured debt relief from Chapter 13 protection on subsequent earnings,
foreclosures, and mortality over the period from 1992 to 2005. They document signifi-
cant economic benefits for households with successful bankruptcy filings. Furthermore,
Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Yang (2017) also study the effect of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection on financial health. Our paper studies the benefits of principal
reductions (secured debt relief) over the period from 1989 to 1993. We are the first
to provide estimates of the ex-post impact of mortgage cramdown from Chapter 13 on
mortgage default and other outcomes using a newly compiled data set. Whereas Dob-
bie and Song (2015) estimate a large effect of unsecured debt relief through Chapter 13
on avoiding foreclosure, we show that the effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts is
substantially larger relative to the standard Chapter 13 protection.
       By estimating the ex-post effect of principal reduction, our paper also contributes to
the literature on cramdown. White and Zhu (2010) examine how filing for bankruptcy
helps financially distressed homeowners and present a model that evaluates the effects
of introducing a cramdown provision after the 2005 bankruptcy reform. Goodman and
Levitin (2014) analyze whether cramdown affects the cost of credit in the mortgage
market, whereas Li, Tewari, and White (2014) estimate the effect of cramdown on the
   5
    Luzzetti and Neumuller (2014), Agarwal et al. (2015), Agarwal et al. (2017), Abel and Fuster
(2018), Ganong and Noel (2018), Piskorski and Seru (2018a), Piskorski and Seru (2018b), Gross et al.
(2019), and Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2020) also study the impact of alternative policies on the
financial crisis.


                                                 4
supply of mortgages. Interestingly, both of these papers find small effects on the supply
side. Goodman and Levitin (2014) find that home loans closed during the time when
cramdown was allowed had interest rates 12-16 basis points higher than loans closed
in the same state when cramdown was not allowed, which translates to a roughly 1%
increase in the monthly payments. Similarly, Li, Tewari, and White (2014) find that
the Supreme Court decision led to a short-term reduction of 3% in mortgage interest
rates and a short-term increase of 1% in mortgage approval rates, but only the approval
rate effect persists in longer sample periods.
       A growing literature studies the mechanisms that explain household default and the
effect of various debt-relief interventions. Regarding the drivers of default, there is a
longstanding debate on whether mortgage default is triggered by adverse life events
(Riddiough, 1991), negative equity (Foster and Van Order, 1984), or both (Foote, Ger-
ardi, and Willen, 2008). Concerning interventions, Ganong and Noel (2018) document
that maturity extensions that increase liquidity have substantial benefits on debtors,
while (small) principal reductions have no effect. Dobbie and Song (2020) find that in-
terest write-downs provide positive benefits, whereas immediate payment reductions do
not help debtors. Ganong and Noel (2020) find that negative equity exclusively causes
a small fraction of defaults. We contribute to this literature by estimating the effect of
large principal reductions on mortgage loans and documenting substantial effects, even
in the short term, on debtors for this type of intervention. In addition, relative to other
papers that study unsecured debt-relief interventions, our setting allows us to examine
the mortgage debt overhang motive for defaulting.6
       The remainder of our paper is structured as follows: We discuss the institutional
background and the differences between Chapters 7 and 13 bankruptcy in Section 2.
Section 3 describes the data sources and summary statistics. Section 4 presents the
   6
    Elul et al. (2010), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2013), Mayer, Morrison, Piskorski, and Gupta
(2014), Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2017), Gerardi, Herkenhoff, Ohanian, and Willen (2018), Abel and
Fuster (2018), and Gupta and Hansman (2020) also study the determinants of mortgage default and
evaluate debt-relief interventions.


                                                5
research design. Section 5 presents our main results, and Section 6 compares outcomes
of bankruptcy filings in cramdown with non-cramdown courts. Section 7 discusses our
results and Section 8 concludes.



2         Institutional Background

The United States has two personal bankruptcy provisions: Chapter 7 and Chapter
13. Chapter 7 provides unsecured debt relief and protection from wage garnishment in
exchange for a debtor's non-exempt assets. In contrast, Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers
must forgo part of their future earnings to repay creditors. Therefore, debtors seeking
to retain their assets are more likely to file for Chapter 13. Overall, both bankruptcy
provisions allow total or partial forgiveness of unsecured obligations, such as credit card
debt, unpaid rent, and medical bills.
        Based on the 1978 Bankruptcy code, which was amended in 1984, Chapter 13
debtors are required to use all their disposable income to propose a three-year repay-
ment plan (White, 1987).7 The main restriction is that the total proposed repayment
cannot be less than the value of a debtor's non-exempt assets under Chapter 7. Filers
need to submit a bankruptcy petition, a repayment plan, a summary of financial af-
fairs, a copy of tax returns, and the standardized forms of income, expenditures, and
assets and liabilities. Subsequently, within each bankruptcy office, filers are typically
assigned to judges using a blind rotation system. The debtor meets with a bankruptcy
trustee who reviews the claims by creditors and debtors, challenges any aspects of the
bankruptcy case if needed, and collects the bankruptcy proceeds during the repayment
plan. Finally, the filer appears before the bankruptcy judge at the plan confirmation
hearing. This is the only time when the judge and the filer meet. The main role of the
assigned judge is to decide all matters connected to a case, in particular, whether or
not to dismiss the filing.
    7
        After the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform, the repayment plans last between three and five years.


                                                    6
       Chapter 13 allows debtors to restructure almost all types of debt, except home
mortgage loans. In particular, Section 1322(b)(2) of the Bankruptcy Code provides
that a Chapter 13 repayment plan may "modify the rights of holders of secured claims,
other than a claim secured only by a security interest in real property that is the debtor's
principal residence" (11 U.S.C. §1322(b)(2)). Therefore, any mortgage arrears, late fees,
and regular installments should be paid off according to their original terms; otherwise,
the mortgagee has the right to foreclose on the property (Goodman and Levitin, 2014).
The rationale behind restricting mortgage cramdown for a principal residence is to
encourage the flow of capital into the home lending market (Levitin, 2009).
       Although mortgage modification is typically prohibited in Chapter 13 bankruptcy,
some bankruptcy courts allowed principal mortgage reduction, a practice known as
mortgage cramdown, between 1981 and June 1993. These decisions were not built on
policy analysis; instead, they were based on statutory interpretations (Levitin, 2009).
In particular, these courts understood cramdown as a simple reclassification of the loan
in bankruptcy. The main argument was that the prohibitive clause (the "other than") of
§1322(b)(2) was limited to the value of the collateral, whereas any negative equity could
be classified as unsecured debt and, thus, was dischargeable through bankruptcy.8 Thus,
the mortgage loans were "bifurcated" into a secured component, corresponding to the
value of the property, and an unsecured component, corresponding to the underwater
portion of the loan, that could be discharged.9
   8
       Mullaugh (1994) states that the courts that approved the cramdown under Chapter 13 plans based
their decisions on four factors: "First, and perhaps most importantly, the courts felt that the plain
language of the statutory provisions commanded the conclusion that bifurcation was permissible in the
case of undersecured home mortgages. Second, the long-settled rules of statutory construction led to the
same result as the plain language. Third, the legislative history, though sparse, evinced a Congressional
intent to balance the interests of the debtor and the home mortgage lender through a compromise
between the House and the Senate drafts of the relevant statutory provisions. Lastly, the policy
underlying the bankruptcy framework, especially the policies underlying Chapter 13 reorganization,
favored allowing the debtor to `strip down' an undersecured home mortgage to better achieve the
bankruptcy goal of a `fresh start' for debtors."
     9
       11 U.S.C. §506(a) reads, in pertinent part: "An allowed claim of a creditor secured by a lien on
property in which the estate has an interest [..] is a secured claim to the extent of the value of such
creditor's interest [..] and is an unsecured claim to the extent that the value of such creditor's interest
[..] is less than the amount of such allowed claim."


                                                    7
       In practice, a Chapter 13 filer had to propose a repayment plan with the remaining
secured claim. Under this plan, the filer had to pay the arrearages in full within a
reasonable time and continue to make the monthly payments following the original
terms of the loan until the principal had been paid in an amount equal to the value
of the property. In courts that allowed cramdown, any negative equity portion of the
mortgage was automatically forgiven if the Chapter 13 filing was discharged.10
       In June 1993, the Supreme Court prohibited cramdown after ruling on the issue in
Nobelman v. American Savings Bank (508 U.S. 324 [1993]), a decision that banned
cramdown in all states. The Supreme Court's rationale was to provide special protection
to home mortgage lenders to enable them to offer lower interest rates and thus promote
homeownership.11
       Prior to the Supreme Court's decision on Nobelman v. American Savings Bank in
1993, four different circuit courts had allowed the practice of cramdown (i.e., the 2nd,
3rd, 9th, and 10th).12 However, the 5th circuit court did not approve the practice
after hearing the Nobelman case in August 1992. Prior to Nobelman, no circuit court
had explicitly barred cramdown in Chapter 13, and several bankruptcy courts in other
circuits had approved Chapter 13 reorganization plans that included cramdowns of
undersecured home mortgages (Mullaugh, 1994). It is important to note that a judge's
decision in a bankruptcy case might change law. However, any decision affects only the
jurisdiction (district) in which the judge is presiding, a fact that generates differences in
law across districts within a circuit court (Li, Tewari, and White, 2014). In particular,
between 1981 and 1993, 38 courts in 29 states allowed mortgage principal reduction; 32
of them permitted cramdown after 1988.
  10
     An example is the Wilsons' bankruptcy filing. In 1983, the Wilsons purchased their home. By
1988, the balance of the mortgage was $38,176.75, while the market value of the Wilson's home had
depreciated to $22,000. Wilsons' Chapter 13 plan bifurcated the mortgage debt under section 506(a),
thus limiting the secured claim to $22,000 (Wilson v. Commonwealth Mortgage Corp., 895 F.2d 123,
128 (3d Cir. 1990)).
  11
     Nobelman v. American Savings Bank, 508 U.S. 324 (1993).
  12
     There are 11 circuit courts in the United States, and each circuit court covers two to nine states.
Each state is divided into one to four bankruptcy court regions.


                                                   8
3     Data Sources and Summary Statistics

To estimate the impact of cramdown in Chapter 13 bankruptcy on debtors' home
foreclosures and other outcomes, we assemble several data sets obtained from different
sources.


3.1    Data Sources

We compile a new data set from the PACER system. We received fee exemptions to the
docket records of 59 bankruptcy district courts in 36 states. In addition, we complement
our data with bankruptcy data from Gross, Notowidigdo, and Wang (2014). Thus, our
sample contains bankruptcy records from 84 (out of 94) courts. This data set contains
individual filer information, such as the debtor's name, address, and last four digits of
their social security number, and case information, such as the chapter filed, filing date,
court, office, outcome (i.e., discharged or dismissed), and judge and trustee names.
    To obtain information about the courts that allowed cramdown, we merge our data
set with data collected by Goodman and Levitin (2014). This data set comprises all
judicial rulings on the permissibility of cramdown from federal bankruptcy, district,
and circuit courts between October 1979 and June 1993.
    Our final sample comprises Chapter 13 bankruptcy filers in those district courts in
which bankruptcy cases are randomly assigned to judges and the Chapter 13 filers for
whom we obtain real estate data. To this end, we follow Dobbie and Song (2015) and
impose several data filters. First, we drop offices with a single Chapter 13 bankruptcy
judge and exclude filings in courts that assign all cases to a single judge, since in
these two situations, there is no randomization of the bankruptcy cases. Second, we
exclude office-by-year bins in which a retiring judge's cases have been reassigned with
no documentation about the original judge. Third, we drop office-by-year-by-judge
bins with fewer than ten cases. Fourth, we restrict our analysis of first-time filers to
the period 1989 to 1993, the period in which most of the cramdown rulings occurred.

                                            9
Finally, we restrict our sample to Chapter 13 filers that we matched to real estate
data purchased from Attom using the address data and the last name provided in the
bankruptcy dockets.
   These filters leave us with 14,517 Chapter 13 filers in 28 offices, 22 bankruptcy
courts, and 18 states. In particular, 6,100 cases in 18 offices in 12 states correspond to
courts that adopted mortgage cramdown between 1989 and 1993. Panel A of Figure 1
depicts court locations by state, whereas Panel B shows the states in our sample in
which at least one court allowed cramdown. The final sample includes 209 office-year-
judge observations. The number of cases in each office-year-judge bin ranges from 10
to 599, with an average of 195 cases.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]

   For outcome variables, we rely on two proprietary sources. The first includes foreclo-
sure data from Attom Data Solutions (former RealtyTrac), one of the leading foreclosure
listing data providers. Attom collects five types of filings from legal documents submit-
ted by lenders during their foreclosure process. The first two filings, a notice of default
(NOD) and a lis pendens (LIS), or written notice of a lawsuit, are submitted before a
foreclosure auction. Two of the subsequent filings, a notice of a trustee sale (NTS) and
a notice of a foreclosure sale (NFS), are directly associated with a foreclosure auction.
Attom also collects information on whether the foreclosed home is purchased by the
lender at auction or is real estate owned (REO). From the counties in which Attom has
coverage starting in 1989, we successfully match 67% of the cases using only address
data from the bankruptcy dockets and 31% using the filer's address and last name.
This approach ensures that the debtor was the effective owner at the time of the filing.
Prior work has used Attom to obtain foreclosure data (e.g., Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi,
2015; Currie and Tekin, 2015).
   The second source of outcome and covariate variables is LexisNexis (LN) Public
Records. LN aggregates data on over 500 million U.S. individuals, both alive and

                                            10
deceased, from a variety of sources, such as birth records, death records, property tax
assessment records, criminal records, and voting records. LN provides a panel data
set of records for U.S. individuals over time. Specifically, we obtain data about gender,
age, history of addresses, and real property records. We successfully match 99% of filers
using the names and social security numbers provided in the bankruptcy dockets.13


3.2       Summary Statistics

In Column (1), Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all first-time Chapter 13
bankruptcy filers between 1989 and 1993 along with the statistics for the cramdown
and non-cramdown samples in Columns (2)­(4) and (5)­(7), respectively.
       We have 14,517 cases in our total sample. Around two-thirds of cases are discharged
in the overall sample. The average filer is 42 years old at the time of filing. More than
three-quarters of filers are male.

                                 [INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]

       Regarding filer characteristics at the ZIP code level, the average filer in our sample
lives in a neighborhood where around 40% are white, 9% are single, 7% have college
degrees, and the median income is close to $23,000 (in 1980s dollars).
       The household characteristics are fairly similar across the cramdown and non-
cramdown samples, with the exception of gender. In the cramdown sample, 82% of
filers are male, whereas 76% are male in the non-cramdown sample.
       The discharge rate is lower in cramdown courts; whereas around 69% of filings are
discharged in non-cramdown courts, 62% are discharged in cramdown courts. Thus,
the probability of a successful Chapter 13 filing is lower in cramdown courts, where
the benefits are likely higher because of the treatment of the underwater portion of a
mortgage as unsecured debt.
  13
    Prior work has used LexisNexis to obtain personal data on executives (Cronqvist, Makhija, and
Yonker, 2012; Yermack, 2014), fund managers (Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker, 2012; Chuprinin and
Sosyura, 2018), and financial journalists (Ahern and Sosyura, 2015).

                                               11
4        Research Design

Following Dobbie and Song (2015), we estimate the effect of receiving Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection with a principal reduction. We exploit the fact that some U.S.
bankruptcy courts use a blind rotation system to assign cases to judges within of-
fices. Although there are standard principles by which judges evaluate and dismiss
bankruptcy cases, the variation in the interpretation of these principles across judges is
substantial (Sullivan, Warren, and Westbrook, 1994; Norberg and Compo, 2007; Chang
and Schoar, 2013).
       Ordinary least squares specifications of bankruptcy post-filing outcomes on whether
the debtor receives Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed cramdown
is problematic for several reasons. For example, an omitted variable bias may occur
because of unobserved characteristics that can affect post-filing outcomes. To overcome
such identification problems, our research design uses the random assignment of judges.
In particular, we exploit the differences in judge discharge rates (i.e., leniency) as an
instrument for receiving cramdown in Chapter 13, within courts that allowed principal
mortgage reduction, through a two-stage least squares approach.
       Following the literature, we estimate judge styles every year by omitting the own
observations to address the own-observation bias problem.14 We define the judge's
leniency of filing i as the leave-one-out fraction of filings granted by judge j in court c
and year t:

                                          ncjt                         nct
                                   1                            1
              Leniencyicjt =                     Dk - Di -                   Dk - Di ,           (1)
                               ncjt - 1   k=1                nct - 1   k=1


where Di is an indicator variable for discharge, nct is the number of cases in court c in
year t, and ncjt is the number of cases by judge j in year t. We estimate the judge's
  14
    See, for example, Kling (2006); Doyle (2007); David and Houseman (2010); Chang and Schoar
(2013); Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad (2014); French and Song (2014); Aizer and Doyle Jr (2015); Maestas,
Mullen, and Strand (2013); Dobbie and Song (2015); Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Yang (2017),
and Cheng, Severino, and Townsend (2019).


                                                   12
leniency for each year during the period from 1989 to 1993.
   Subsequently, we estimate the causal effect of discharge in Chapter 13 bankruptcy
through a two-stage least squares regression using the judge's leniency as an instru-
mental variable for bankruptcy protection. Specifically, we focus this analysis only on
offices that allowed cramdown. Therefore, the second-stage estimating equation is


                              yi = ot +  Di +  Xi + i ,                                (2)


where y is consumer i's outcome in the period of interest (e.g., foreclosure within five
years after filing), D is an indicator of whether the Chapter 13 case was discharged,
ot are the office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects, and X is a vector of pre-treatment
covariates.  is the local average treatment effect (LATE) of receiving discharge in
Chapter 13 for filers whose outcomes are altered by judge assignment (Imbens and
Angrist, 1994). The first-stage estimating equation is


                         Di = ot +  Leniencyicjt +  Xi + i ,                           (3)


where Leniency is the systematic component of judge behavior. To account for any
serial correlation across filers at the level of randomization in both the first and second
stages, we cluster standard errors at the office-by-judge level.
   The three main identifying assumptions are (a) judge assignments are associated
with bankruptcy protection, (b) judge assignments only impact debtor outcomes through
the probabilities of receiving bankruptcy protection, and (c) the monotonicity assump-
tion.
   The exclusion restriction implies that the judge's leniency is unrelated to unob-
servable determinants of future outcomes. To partially test for this assumption, we
estimate in Table 2 whether any pre-treatment individual- or local-level characteristics,
such as age, gender, education, and income, can explain judge leniency. We control


                                            13
for office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the office-judge
level. None of our covariates is significantly related to leniency, and a joint F -test has
a p-value of 0.3108.15 We discuss the relevance of judge assignments in more detail in
Section 5.1.


                                  [INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]


       The exclusion restriction might be violated if the judge's leniency affects debtor
outcomes through variables other than bankruptcy protection. For example, if more le-
nient judges are also more likely to provide financial counseling to debtors, which might
also affect an individual's outcome. Since judges typically only interact with debtors at
the confirmation hearing, it seems unlikely that judges would influence debtors other
than through their ruling on the bankruptcy filing.
       Finally, to identify a local average treatment effect, we must assume monotonicity.
In our setting, the monotonicity assumption is that the probability of debt being dis-
charged in Chapter 13 does not decrease when assigned to a relatively more lenient
judge.16 A partial test of the monotonicity assumption is that the first-stage estimates
should be non-negative for different subsamples (Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad, 2014).
Section 6.2 provides evidence of a positive first stage based on filer characteristics.
       The local average treatment effect  in Equation (2) captures the total impact of
Chapter 13 discharge on debtor's future outcomes. Thus, it includes the direct effects
of cramdown as well as the indirect effect of the other debt discharge. We compare in
Section 6 the outcomes between cramdown and non-cramdown courts to shed light on
the importance of cramdown relative to other features of the bankruptcy discharge.
  15
     In Section 5.2, we also show that adding controls to the regressions do not lead to significant
changes in our estimates, consistent with the hypothesis that cases are randomly assigned to judges
(Dahl, Kostøl, and Mogstad, 2014).
  16
     Without the monotonicity assumption, the IV estimator will deliver a weighted average of the
marginal treatment effects (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin, 1996).




                                                14
5     Effect of Discharge on Cramdown Courts

We discuss in this section the effects of bankruptcy discharges in cramdown courts.
Households that desire to keep their homes typically prefer to file for Chapter 13 instead
of Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This preference is further strengthened if courts allow the
discharge of the underwater portion of the mortgage through cramdowns.
    Mortgage cramdown is beneficial for homeowners because it reduces the debt burden
if their mortgage debt exceeds the fair value of the home. However, homeowners will
still need to make their regular mortgage payments to avoid foreclosure. Furthermore,
refinancing a mortgage is not typically possible immediately after filing for Chapter
13 bankruptcy due to the deterioration of the credit score and because of the lack of
sufficient home equity.


5.1    First Stage

Figure 2 illustrates the relevance of the judge's leniency for bankruptcy discharges, ag-
gregated at the judge-year level. The figure shows the relation between the residualized
bankruptcy discharge rate (i.e., i from Equation (3) averaged for each judge-year level)
against the leave-one-out measure of the judge's leniency (i.e., Leniencyicjt from Equa-
tion (1) averaged for each judge-year level). The regression in Equation (3) includes
office-by-month fixed effects. By purging month and office effects, this procedure iso-
lates the variation among judges in the same office at the same time. Panel A depicts
the first-stage relation without demographic controls, and Panel B shows the relation
with controls for age; gender; the percentages of white, single, and college-educated
inhabitants; and the ZIP-code-level logarithm of the median income. We observe a
strongly positive relation between the judge's leniency and residualized bankruptcy
discharge both before and after, including control variables.


                             [INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE]


                                           15
   Interestingly, Figure 2 shows that the judge's leniency has a very broad range from
-0.3 to 0.6. Thus, the discharge rate for the most lenient judges is 60 percentage points
higher than that for the other judges in the same office at the same time, and the
discharge rate for the strictest judges is 30 percentage points lower than that of their
peer judges. This substantial range in lenience demonstrates important differences in
the interpretation of the standard principles of bankruptcy across judges. We also find
significant persistence in judge leniency. Figure 3 depicts current and lagged judge
discharge rates, with each point representing a separate judge by year observation.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE]

   Table 3 presents the linear-probability relation between bankruptcy discharge and
the judge's leniency using disaggregated individual-level data. The standard errors are
clustered at the office-by-judge level.
   Column (1) presents the estimates without any controls besides office-by-month
fixed effects. We find that a one-percentage-point increase in the judge's leniency in
other filings increases the probability that a debtor receives Chapter 13 protection by
0.894 percentage points. The estimates are similar when we include controls at the
individual level (Column (2)) and at the ZIP code level (Column (3)). The leave-one-
out measure of leniency, filer characteristics, and office-by-month fixed effects explain
only around 22% of the variation in discharge rates. Thus, a substantial proportion of
the variation cannot be explained by observable variables.

                               [INSERT TABLE 3 HERE]

   Interestingly, Chapter 13 filings by female debtors are less likely to be discharged
than those of male debtors. The discharge rate for female filers is around 4 percentage
points lower than the rate for male filers after controlling for various neighborhood
characteristics. Furthermore, filings by debtors living in ZIP codes with a larger fraction
of white inhabitants are more likely to be successful. These differences could be due to

                                            16
unobserved characteristics but also due to discrimination.17 Judges may impose higher
qualification thresholds on individuals who represent minority groups in bankruptcy
filings.18
       Altogether, Figure 2 and Table 3 confirm that the judge's leniency is highly pre-
dictive of receiving bankruptcy protection. Thus, the judge's leniency satisfies the
relevance criterion.


5.2       Foreclosure Rates

To study whether a Chapter 13 discharge in cramdown courts reduces future foreclo-
sures, we run the two-stage least squares specification, summarized in Equations (2) and
(3). Table 4 reports the estimates of the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection
in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on homeowners' distress events.
       We use two different distress events: foreclosures (Panel A) and involuntary sales
(Panel B).19 Home foreclosure is an indicator for a filer's home receiving a notice of
default, transfer or sale, or having been transferred to a real estate owned after the
bankruptcy filing. Involuntary sales capture cases where homeowners sell their prop-
erties for less than the amount due on the mortgage after the bankruptcy filing. The
controls include age; gender; the percentage of the ZIP code's population that is white,
single, and college educated; and the median log income in the ZIP code. All regressions
include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects, and the standard errors are clustered at
the office-by-judge level.20
  17
     Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, McMenamin, and Skiba (2010) use information on name and ZIP
code to calculate a Bayesian-likelihood estimate of individual debtors' race. Controlling for debtor
demographics and financial situation, their results show that white judges are 21% more likely to
dismiss the Chapter 13 petition of an African American debtor relative to a white debtor.
  18
     In untabulated results, we hand-collect data on the gender of the judges in our sample. We find
that, on average, the gender of the judge does not impact the probability of receiving Chapter 13
protection. In addition, we find no significant evidence of an interaction effect on the judge's gender
and the filer's gender.
  19
     In our sample, 69% of involuntary sales are associated with foreclosure events.
  20
     In panel A of Figure IA.1 in the Internet Appendix, we find similar results if we use a distress mea-
sure that includes other events, such as real-estate-owned (REO) liquidation, besides the foreclosure
events.


                                                   17
                                  [INSERT TABLE 4 HERE]

       Panel A of Table 4 reports that the discharge reduces foreclosures by 26 percentage
points after three years and by 29 percentage points after five years. The estimates
are highly statistically significant and very similar if we include additional demographic
control variables. Furthermore, the results are also economically meaningful, as the
average three- and five-year foreclosure rates in the sample of Chapter 13 dismissed
filers are 23.8 and 26.2 percentage points, respectively.21 Figure IA.2 in the Internet
Appendix plots average home foreclosure rates for discharged and dismissed Chapter
13 cases. At three years post-filing, foreclosure rates for discharged homeowners are
2.5 percent, relative to around 23 percent for dismissed filers. Overall, our estimates
of the five-year reduction of 29 percentage points in courts that allow cramdown are
comparable to Dobbie and Song (2015), who find a decrease in five-year foreclosure
rates of 19 percentage points between 1992 and 2005 in successful Chapter 13 filings.
       Panel A of Figure 4 depicts the yearly changes in home foreclosure rates after mort-
gage discharge in cramdown courts. The economic magnitude of the discharge effect is
relatively small in the first year but grows substantially over the next two years. The
discharge effect stabilizes after four years.

                                 [INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE]

       Panel B of Table 4 and Figure 4 report similar effects for involuntary sales. For
example, bankruptcy discharge decreases the probability of an involuntary sale over
the first five years by 26 percentage points, relative to the control group mean of 19
percentage points.
       We also study the heterogeneity of the discharge effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown
courts on foreclosures in recession periods relative to non-recession periods. Table IA.1
in the Internet Appendix shows that the difference is not statistically significant.
  21
     Because most of foreclosures result in a change of address, we use the dismissed filer mean for
reference, as we only observe an individual address at the time of filing.

                                                18
   The magnitude of the discharge effects could also depend on a state's recourse status
or homestead exemption generosity. Panel A of Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix
shows that the differences in the discharge effects are not statistically significant between
recourse and non-recourse states. In Panel B we test whether the discharge effects are
different between states with below- and above-median homestead exemptions. The
classification of homestead exemptions use data from 1996 and the medians are based
on states in our sample. We find that the estimates are statistically indistinguishable
between states with different exemption generosity.


5.3    Additional Benefits

The debt relief provided by successful Chapter 13 filings in cramdown courts may
have additional benefits for debtors. Mortgage discharge can stabilize the living ar-
rangements and circumstances of households. For example, households benefiting from
discharge may avoid having to move to a new home. Moving can be especially costly
for families with school-aged children, so precluding a move would be beneficial. Fur-
thermore, these households may have the flexibility to move to better neighborhoods
or purchase new properties. Finally, the stress of foreclosure or the resultant moves
may increase the propensity to commit crimes and even worsen the mortality rate for
households.
   Table 5 reports the effects of discharge in cramdown courts on these other outcomes.
The empirical specification is again the two-stage least squares summarized in Equations
(2) and (3), where we use alternative outcome variables.


                               [INSERT TABLE 5 HERE]


   We find that households with discharged debt are significantly less likely to move to
new addresses over the five years after filing. For example, the propensity to move to
a new address declines by around 20 percentage points for discharged debtors, a 25%


                                             19
decrease from the control group mean. Households are also less likely to voluntarily sell
their homes, which excludes short sells.
       Furthermore, we find that even if discharged debtors are less likely to change their
place of residence, if they move, they are more likely to move to ZIP codes with higher
median income levels. This result indicates that bankruptcy discharge with cramdown
increases the household's flexibility to enhance their living arrangements. In contrast,
we do not find that Chapter 13 discharge affects the probability of households purchas-
ing new properties. One interpretation is that these households face significant financial
constraints that prevent them from purchasing new properties in the years following a
bankruptcy filing.
       Refinancing a mortgage is difficult during the first years after a bankruptcy filing
(e.g., requires judge approval). Consistent with this, we find no significant increase in
refinancing in the first three post-filing years. However, we find a significant increase
in refinancing activity after five years. Homeowners start to refinance their mortgage
debt as they build up home equity and as their credit scores improve. In addition, after
five years, filers have completed their repayment plan. Thus, they do not require judge
approval for refinancing.
       Debt discharge in cramdown courts also has broader benefits for households, as
the rate of criminal filings decrease substantially over the subsequent years.22 On the
other hand, we do not find a significant impact on mortality, given that most filers are
relatively young.


5.4       Filer Characteristics

The benefit of mortgage discharge in cramdown courts may differ among households
with varying characteristics. Gender might matter because judges may treat female
  22
     Criminal filing is an indicator equal to one if the individual committed a traffic infraction or the
filer is found guilty of a misdemeanor or a felony. In terms of types of crime: 53% are traffic infractions
(e.g., speeding, DUI), 26% are misdemeanors, 8% are felonies, and 13% are not specified.



                                                    20
filers differently than male filers, as documented in Table 3. Female filers might also
be more reluctant to move, as they are more likely to be the main caregivers of depen-
dent children. Similarly, foreclosures may be more disrupting for younger debtors with
school-aged children. Finally, foreclosures could be more costly for individuals living
in single-family homes, since they may have customized their homes according to their
own preferences.
       Table 6 shows that while the discharge benefits are substantial across all the dif-
ferent demographic groups, female filers benefit more from discharge. For example,
foreclosures decline by 11.3 percentage points more for female than for male filers (i.e.,
36.1% vs. 24.8%) and involuntary sales decline by 19.3 percentage points more for
female than for male filers (i.e., 41.0% vs. 21.7%). Although these gender differences
are economically significant, they are only statistically significant for involuntary sales.
They could occur because female filers may have a stronger preference to remain in
their homes or because of discrimination, as judges may require a higher threshold for
female filers to qualify for Chapter 13 debt discharge for female filers, as shown in Table
3.23 The differential treatment of female filers mostly by male judges may be due to
systematic patterns of "in-group" tolerance, as discussed by Egan, Matvos, and Seru
(2018) in the context of misconduct in the financial advisory industry.

                                    [INSERT TABLE 6 HERE]

       Filers below 50 years old exhibit larger declines in the three-year foreclosure rate,
although the differences are not statistically significant. Similarly, filers owning single-
family homes also exhibit larger declines in foreclosure rates than owners in multi-family
units (e.g., condominiums). Because of the limited sample size, these differences are
also not statistically significant.
  23
     A potential concern with this result is how we define gender for joint filers. For joint filers, we
classify the filer's gender based on the first filer in the bankruptcy docket. To mitigate this concern, we
estimate the effects of receiving Chapter 13 protection for female, male, and joint filers. As in Table
6, in untabulated results, we find a similar difference in post-filing outcomes between female and male
filers. We also document a difference between female and joint filers.

                                                    21
6     Differential Effects between Cramdown and Non-

      Cramdown Courts

Our previous results show that debt discharge in cramdown courts has a large impact
on the economic circumstances of households. However, whether these effects are driven
by the cramdown provisions or by other features of debt restructuring through Chapter
13 is unclear. To address this question, we combine our samples from cramdown and
non-cramdown courts and study whether the effects differ across the two samples.


6.1    Differential Foreclosure Effects

In this section, we exploit both within- and across-district variation in cramdown adop-
tion by estimating the impact of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in cramdown courts
relative to non-cramdown courts. We augment Equation (2) by including: 1) the in-
teraction of an indicator of whether the Chapter 13 case was discharged (Di ) with an
indicator of whether the district court allowed cramdown at the time of filing and 2) the
interaction of Di with an indicator of whether the district court did not allow cramdown
at the time of filing. We instrument for the interaction of the discharge indicator and
the cramdown (and non-cramdown) indicator variable using the interaction between
judge leniency and the cramdown (and non-cramdown) indicator.
    Figure 5 provides the dynamics of the impact of debt discharge on the two distress
proxies between cramdown and non-cramdown courts. Debt discharge is substantially
more beneficial in cramdown courts because of the reduction of debt for underwater
homeowners. Table 7 confirms that the impact of debt discharge is substantially more
pronounced in cramdown courts. For example, the three-year foreclosure rate declines
by around 27 percentage points for cramdown courts and by four percentage points
for non-cramdown courts. The difference in the two coefficients is highly statistically
significant, as indicated by the small p-values. In addition, the results are robust if


                                           22
we exclude large states, such as California. These findings suggest that most of the
discharge effect is due to the principal reduction.

                             [INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE]

   One potential issue of these results is that the propensity to file for Chapter 13
may differ across cramdown courts and non-cramdown courts. For example, more
households may file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in cramdown courts because of the
potential discharge of the underwater portion of the mortgage. These additional filers
therefore may be less distressed. Furthermore, trustees and judges in cramdown courts
may follow different debt restructuring strategies. Judges may be more likely to approve
a restructuring plan in cramdown courts since these plans are more likely to succeed if a
write-down of mortgage debt is possible. However, Table 1 shows that judges discharge
a smaller proportion of cases in cramdown courts than in non-cramdown courts.

                              [INSERT TABLE 7 HERE]

   One concern is that the effects documented in Table 7 could be explained by across-
state differences. We focus on states with both cramdown and non-cramdown courts
to investigate this hypothesis. Thus, we are not comparing Chapter 13 effects between
cramdown and non-cramdown states. Since the cramdown adoption was staggered in
our sample period, we exploit in this test the variation across districts in cramdown
adoption and within-district variation in courts that allowed cramdown. The estimates,
reported in Table 8, are similar to those in Table 7. These findings support that across-
state differences do not explain the documented effects.

                              [INSERT TABLE 8 HERE]

   Another concern is that bankruptcy filers could be different across these two groups.
To partially test for this sample selection hypothesis, we exploit district variation in
cramdown status in a difference-in-differences approach on observable characteristics

                                           23
(age and gender) and chapter of filing composition.24 Table IA.3 in the Internet Ap-
pendix shows no evidence of changes in observable covariates or in the ratio between
Chapter 7 and 13 filings, both in our sample and on the complete PACER sample.
    Moreover, to investigate whether the mortgage cramdown feature significantly in-
creased Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings, we study the number of these filings around
the Supreme Court decision of June 1993 that prohibited mortgage cramdown in all
states. Figure 6 shows no evidence of bunching in the number of filings around the
1993 Supreme Court decision. This result is also consistent with the small effect of
cramdown on credit supply and cost of credit documented by Goodman and Levitin
(2014) and Li, Tewari, and White (2014). Altogether, these results do not support the
sample selection hypothesis.


                                    [INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE]


6.2      Compliers versus Non-Compliers

Our IV estimates should be interpreted as the local average treatment effects of filers
receiving Chapter 13 protection in cramdown courts whose outcomes are altered by
judge assignments (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). Learning about the characteristics of
the complier group is of interest. In addition, examining the covariates of the compliers
allows us to compare the characteristics of the marginal filers of Chapter 13 in cramdown
and non-cramdown courts during our sample period.
    Table 9 presents characteristics of compliers, following Angrist and Pischke (2008).
Panel A reports the distributions of filers in cramdown courts. Column (1) presents
the proportion of the sample within each gender and age group (i.e., P (X = x)). For
example, 43.3% of filers in cramdown courts are men between 35 and 50 years of age,
   24
      As our treatment, in this case, is at the district level, we cluster the standard errors at the district
level (Abadie, Athey, Imbens, and Wooldridge, 2017). Since we have 22 districts in our sample, we
follow MacKinnon and Webb (2017) and apply the correction for the number of clusters by using
ordinary wild bootstrap.



                                                     24
whereas 9.2% of filers are women between 35 and 50 years. Column (2) shows the
first-stage estimates for each gender and age group, corresponding to Table 3. These
positive first-stage estimates for different subgroups are consistent with the monotonic-
ity assumption. In addition, the judge's leniency in cramdown courts is less predictive
of discharge for female filers between the ages of 35 and 50 than for any other demo-
graphic group. Column (3) reports the distribution of compliers by gender and age (i.e.,
P (X = x|I1 > I0 )), calculated as the first-stage estimate for the gender-age groups times

the sample share, divided by the overall first-stage estimate. Although 9.2% of filers
are women between the ages of 35 and 50, only 6.6% of compliers are women in this age
group. The last column, which is defined as the ratio between the relative likelihood of
a filer belonging to a particular gender and age group in the complier group compared
with the relative likelihood in the sample, confirms that women between 35 and 50
years are underrepresented in the sample of compliers in cramdown courts.

                               [INSERT TABLE 9 HERE]

   Panel B reports the results for filers in non-cramdown courts. The estimates show
that males are somewhat overrepresented in the complier group, as in the cramdown
courts. However, the most important difference relative to the compliers in the cram-
down courts is the composition of female filers. Women aged 35­50 are equally rep-
resented in the complier group, while women older than 50 are unrepresented in the
complier group.


6.3    Mechanisms

In the previous sections, we document substantial benefits for homeowners of successful
Chapter 13 filings in cramdown courts. In addition, the comparison of the ex-post ef-
fects of successful filers in courts with and without cramdown provides evidence that the
principal reduction through personal bankruptcy offers substantial benefits for home-
owners.

                                            25
       Two potential explanations for the large economic magnitude of the effects merit
discussion. The first, which we call the liquidity hypothesis, is that the reduction in
short-term payments helps debtors by alleviating liquidity constraints. The second
is that the reduction in long-term obligations helps debtors by reducing their debt
relative to the value of their homes. We call this second explanation "the debt overhang
hypothesis" (Ganong and Noel, 2018; Dobbie and Song, 2020; Ganong and Noel, 2020).
       Two features in the setting shed light on the mechanism. First, in courts that
allowed cramdown, the negative equity portion of the mortgage is classified as unsecured
debt and thus is dischargeable. Second, in cramdown, the loan will not be modified.
That means debtors must continue making monthly payments following the terms of
the original loan until the principal payments total the present value of the collateral.
Thus, cramdown primarily provides debt relief in the form of the second hypothesis,
and it seems that the debt overhang channel plays an important role in explaining our
results.
       There are two challenges to this interpretation. First, debtors could have also re-
ceived some unsecured debt relief, in addition to the principal reduction in Chapter 13.
The comparison of cramdown in Chapter 13 to standard Chapter 13 (as shown in Figure
5), where we find that the impact of cramdown is substantially larger on foreclosures,
alleviates this concern.25
       The second challenge is that debtors could have received unsecured or secured credit
following Chapter 13 bankruptcy. However, in the case of unsecured debt, after filing
for Chapter 13, lenders can cancel the debtor's account. Also, the trustee may confis-
cate the filer's credit cards since the trustee must supervise the debtor's finances for
three to five years (Elias, 2013). In addition, Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Yang
(2017) do not find an effect on unsecured credit following Chapter 13. In the case of se-
  25
     Another challenge is that successful Chapter 13 cases in cramdown courts could also have done lien
stripping of second and third mortgages. However, this procedure can also be done in standard Chapter
13 cases, and thus, comparing the discharge effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown versus non-cramdown
lessens this concern.


                                                  26
cured lending, it could be that debtors refinanced their mortgages following cramdown.
However, as shown in Table 5, refinancing is typically unavailable in the first post-filing
years following Chapter 13, and it is difficult in practice. For example, the debtor typ-
ically needs to have a good credit score, which is unlikely after receiving a bankruptcy
flag, and sufficient home equity to be approved for a mortgage. Furthermore, the filer
requires judge approval. Thus, it seems unlikely that debtors receive substantial access
to external financing at least during the first years following Chapter 13.
   A caveat of our findings is that our setting does not allow us to study the role of
liquidity constraints in foreclosure since we are estimating the impact of principal re-
ductions. Consequently, our results do not reject the importance of liquidity constraints
as a potential determinant for homeowner default. However, we provide evidence that
debt overhang considerations play a role in explaining homeowner default.
   Finally, one question that this discussion raises is why our estimates of the principal
reduction in Chapter 13 are substantially larger relative to the documented effect of
principal reduction policies implemented during the Great Recession. One potential ex-
planation is that the principal reduction programs employed during the financial crisis
(e.g., HAMP) were relatively small and thus, homeowners were probably still under-
water following these loan modifications. In contrast, homeowners in the cramdown
courts had their total negative equity portion forgiven in Chapter 13 bankruptcy and
therefore had greater incentives to avoid default.


6.4    Cramdown Proposal during the Financial Crisis

The United States experienced an unprecedented number of home foreclosures during
the Great Recession of 2007­2009. The government implemented various policies to re-
duce defaults and the deadweight losses of foreclosures (e.g., HAMP, HARP). However,
Agarwal et al. (2015) and Agarwal et al. (2017) show that various frictions hampered
the impact of these policies. One alternative proposal in 2008 was to allow mortgage


                                            27
cramdown by judges through Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The proposal passed the House
of Representatives but failed in the Senate. In this section, we provide a back-of-the-
envelope calculation of the potential benefits that cramdown would have had during
the financial crisis.
       To estimate the number of foreclosures avoided, we extrapolate our estimates in a
partial equilibrium approach. We make several assumptions: First, we assume similar
effects across groups (i.e., compliers vs. non-compliers). Second, we assume that the
effect of cramdown would have been the same during the Great Recession as during
our sample period. Third, the number of total filers is the same with and without
cramdown. Fourth and finally, we do not consider general equilibrium effects (e.g.,
credit supply, interest rate, home values, spillover effects of foreclosures).
       We start with 7.6 million total filings of Chapters 7 and 13 bankruptcies between
2008 and 2013. The homeownership rate during this time period equaled 64%, resulting
in around 4.9 million filings by homeowners, which would be expected to file for Chapter
13. During this time period 49% of Chapter 13 filings were discharged, resulting in 2.4
million successful bankruptcy filings. Table 7 documents that cramdown reduced five-
year foreclosure rates by around 24 percentage points relative to non-cramdown. Using
this estimate, we find a reduction of around 0.57 million foreclosures over the five years
after the bankruptcy.
       Our estimates potentially underestimate the effect of cramdown during the Great
Recession since the decline in house prices was greater during this time period.26 Fur-
thermore, the proportion of households that filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy could
have increased with a more generous bankruptcy procedure. This analysis might also
potentially overestimate the effect of cramdown since we identify the causal impact of
cramdown for the compliers. However, our estimates for the compliers are relevant for
  26
    Although the average drop in home prices was not as pronounced during our sample period as
during the Great Recession, there were markets in our sample, such as Massachusetts, where house
prices declined by 23% between 1988 and 1993 (Foote, Gerardi, and Willen, 2008).




                                              28
policy since reforms aimed at introducing cramdown will likely have the largest effect
on debtors on the margin of program participation.27



7        Discussion

The assessment of consumer bankruptcy laws typically involves the evaluation of two
effects. The first effect is that bankruptcy provides partial insurance by helping house-
holds smooth consumption when hit by a particularly adverse event (e.g., health shocks).
The second effect is the greater borrowing costs due to a higher risk of default, which
reduces households' ability to smooth expected changes in earnings (e.g., Athreya, 2002;
Li and Sarte, 2006; Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt, 2007; Chatterjee and Gordon, 2012;
Gross, Kluender, Liu, Notowidigdo, and Wang, 2019).
       Our paper focuses on the first effect of changes in the generosity of the personal
bankruptcy code: The ex-post benefits of cramdown in Chapter 13. We document
substantial ex-post effects for marginal filers on household distress. Since filers are sub-
stantially more likely to keep their homes, cramdown also stabilizes living arrangements.
Given the high costs of foreclosure (Diamond, Gureny, and Tan, 2020), particularly for
marginal debtors who are most responsive to foreclosure mitigation policies and the
negative spillovers of foreclosure, cramdown has significant ex-post benefits for home-
owners.28
       However, this policy might be costly for borrowers ex-ante or could hurt other
market participants ex-post. In particular, the introduction of cramdown could lead to
higher borrowing costs. Goodman and Levitin (2014) and Li, Tewari, and White (2014)
find relatively small effects of cramdown on interest rates and other mortgage terms.
  27
     Cramdown potentially would have pushed more banks to modify mortgages, and thus our partial
equilibrium analysis could underestimate the overall reduction in foreclosures by cramdown.
  28
     Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015) and Guren and McQuade (2020) find that foreclosures have large
market-level effects. While Immergluck and Smith (2006), Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011),
Harding, Rosenblatt, and Yao (2009), Anenberg and Kung (2014), Gerardi, Rosenblatt, Willen, and
Yao (2015), and Gupta (2019) provide evidence of localized foreclosure spillovers.



                                               29
The former finds that when cramdown was allowed, home loans had interest rates that
were 16 basis points higher, and the latter finds that when the Supreme Court abolished
mortgage cramdown, this led to a short-term reduction of 3% in mortgage interest rates
and an increase of 1% in mortgage approval rates. Furthermore, Levitin (2009) argues
that the market is unlikely to price against bankruptcy modifications since lenders face
smaller losses from bankruptcy modifications than from foreclosures.
   Mayer, Morrison, and Piskorski (2009) discuss some risks of introducing cramdown
legislation during the Great Recession. They state that cramdown could generate a
massive number of bankruptcy filings and impose large burdens on bankruptcy judges
and trustees. As mentioned, Figure 6 shows no significant bunching in the bankruptcy
filings in cramdown courts in June 1993. Furthermore, bankruptcy filings in cramdown
courts did not significantly decrease after the Supreme Court decision, as Chapter
13 bankruptcy became less beneficial. This result is consistent with Indarte (2019)
who finds only a small incidence of strategic bankruptcy filings. In addition, during
our sample period, bankruptcy was substantially less popular, which also alleviates
concerns about strategic behavior from bankruptcy filers.
   Furthermore, Mayer, Morrison, and Piskorski (2009) discuss that cramdown mort-
gage modifications would be more aggressive than other types of modifications and
would impose excessive losses on lenders. The question of whether lenders benefit from
cramdown depends on the magnitude of the underwater portion of the debt and on the
preferences of households to remain in their homes. If the cost due to negative equity is
less than the private benefits, borrowers would not walk away and default, but rather
continue making their mortgage payments even if the value of their home is less than
what they owe. In this case, cramdown would impose a loss on the lenders equal to the
amount that is being written off. If the underwater portion of the mortgage is relatively
large, households would likely decide to default on their mortgage if no cramdown is
offered. The losses to the lenders and to the mortgage investors would in this case



                                           30
likely be higher than the underwater portion of the loan due to various frictions of the
foreclosure process.29



8      Conclusions

We document that mortgage cramdown has significant ex-post benefits for bankruptcy
filers. We find that in cramdown courts, a successful Chapter 13 filing reduces the five-
year foreclosure rate by 29 percentage points and reduces the number of moves post-
bankruptcy. We also find that cramdown explains the vast majority of the reduction in
foreclosure rates for Chapter 13 filers. Our results indicate that cramdown is an effective
policy for reducing home foreclosures and enhancing the living standards of bankruptcy
filers. Our results suggest that debt overhang considerations play an important role in
explaining homeowner default.




  29
     For example, Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011) show that houses sold after foreclosure, or close
in time to the death or bankruptcy of a seller, suffer discounts of around 27 percent of the value of a
home.


                                                  31
References

Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. W. Imbens, and J. Wooldridge (2017). When should you
  adjust standard errors for clustering? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Abel, J. and A. Fuster (2018). How do mortgage refinances affect debt, default, and
  spending? Evidence from HARP. Technical report. Working Paper.

Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, I. Ben-David, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru
  (2017). Policy intervention in debt renegotiation: Evidence from the home affordable
  modification program. Journal of Political Economy 125 (3), 654­712.

Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Landvoigt, T. Piskorski, A. Seru,
  and V. Yao (2015). Mortgage refinancing, consumer spending, and competition:
  Evidence from the home affordable refinancing program. Technical report, NBER
  Working Paper 21512.

Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, R. McMenamin, and P. M. Skiba (2010). Dismissal
  with prejudice? Race and politics in personal bankruptcy. Technical report, SSRN.

Agarwal, S., J. He, T. F. Sing, and J. Zhang (2018). Gender gap in personal bankruptcy
  risks: Empirical evidence from singapore. Review of Finance 22 (2), 813­847.

Ahern, K. R. and D. Sosyura (2015). Rumor has it: Sensationalism in financial media.
  The Review of Financial Studies 28 (7), 2050­2093.

Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle Jr (2015). Juvenile incarceration, human capital, and fu-
  ture crime: Evidence from randomly assigned judges. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130 (2), 759­803.

Anenberg, E. and E. Kung (2014). Estimates of the size and source of price declines
  due to nearby foreclosures. The American Economic Review 104 (8), 2527­51.

                                         32
Angrist, J. D., G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin (1996). Identification of causal effects
  using instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association 91 (434),
  444­455.

Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton
  University Press.

Athreya, K. B. (2002). Welfare implications of the bankruptcy reform act of 1999.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (8), 1567­1595.

Bhutta, N., J. Dokko, and H. Shan (2017). Consumer ruthlessness and mortgage default
  during the 2007 to 2009 housing bust. The Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2433­2466.

Campbell, J. Y., S. Giglio, and P. Pathak (2011). Forced sales and house prices. The
  American Economic Review 101 (5), 2108­31.

Chang, T. and A. Schoar (2013). Judge specific differences in chapter 11 and firm
  outcomes. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge.

Chatterjee, S. and G. Gordon (2012). Dealing with consumer default: Bankruptcy vs
  garnishment. Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S1­S16.

Cheng, I.-H., F. Severino, and R. Townsend (2019). How do consumers fare when
  dealing with debt collectors? Evidence from out-of-court settlements. Technical
  report, Tuck School of Business Working Paper.

Chuprinin, O. and D. Sosyura (2018). Family descent as a signal of managerial quality:
  Evidence from mutual funds. The Review of Financial Studies 31 (10), 3756­3820.

Cronqvist, H., A. K. Makhija, and S. E. Yonker (2012). Behavioral consistency in
  corporate finance: CEO personal and corporate leverage. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 103 (1), 20­40.



                                           33
Currie, J. and E. Tekin (2015). Is there a link between foreclosure and health? American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1), 63­94.

Dahl, G. B., A. R. Kostøl, and M. Mogstad (2014). Family welfare cultures. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1711­1752.

David, H. and S. N. Houseman (2010). Do temporary-help jobs improve labor market
  outcomes for low-skilled workers? Evidence from "work first". American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3), 96­128.

Diamond, R., A. Gureny, and R. Tan (2020). The effect of foreclosures on homeowners,
  tenants, and landlords. Technical report. Working Paper.

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, and C. S. Yang (2017). Consumer bankruptcy and
  financial health. Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (5), 853­869.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015). Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the
  effects of consumer bankruptcy protection. The American Economic Review 105 (3),
  1272­1311.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2020). Targeted debt relief and the origins of financial dis-
  tress: Experimental evidence from distressed credit card borrowers. The American
  Economic Review 110 (4), 984­1018.

Doyle, J. J. J. (2007). Child protection and child outcomes: Measuring the effects of
  foster care. The American Economic Review 97 (5), 1583­1610.

Driscoll, S. (1994). Consumer bankruptcy and gender. The Georgetown Law Journal 83,
  525­557.

Egan, M., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2018). When Harry fired Sally: The double standard
  in punishing misconduct. Technical report. Working Paper.

Elias, S. (2013). The new bankruptcy: Will it work for you? Nolo Berkeley CA.

                                          34
Elul, R., N. S. Souleles, S. Chomsisengphet, D. Glennon, and R. Hunt (2010). What
  "triggers" mortgage default? The American Economic Review 100 (2), 490­94.

Foote, C. L., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2008). Negative equity and foreclosure:
  Theory and evidence. Journal of Urban Economics 64 (2), 234­245.

Foster, C. and R. Van Order (1984). An option-based model of mortgage default.
  Housing Fin. Rev. 3, 351.

French, E. and J. Song (2014). The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (2), 291­337.

Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2018). Liquidity vs. wealth in household debt obligations:
  Evidence from housing policy in the great recession. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Ganong, P. and P. J. Noel (2020). Why do borrowers default on mortgages? A new
  method for causal attribution. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Gerardi, K., K. F. Herkenhoff, L. E. Ohanian, and P. S. Willen (2018). Can't pay or
  won't pay? unemployment, negative equity, and strategic default. The Review of
  Financial Studies 31 (3), 1098­1131.

Gerardi, K., E. Rosenblatt, P. S. Willen, and V. Yao (2015). Foreclosure externalities:
  New evidence. Journal of Urban Economics 87, 42­56.

Goodman, J. and A. Levitin (2014). Bankruptcy law and the cost of credit: The impact
  of cramdown on mortgage interest rates. The Journal of Law and Economics 57 (1),
  139­158.

Gross, T., R. Kluender, F. Liu, M. J. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2019). The economic
  consequences of bankruptcy reform. Technical report. NBER Working Paper 26254.

                                           35
Gross, T., M. J. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2014). Liquidity constraints and consumer
  bankruptcy: Evidence from tax rebates. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (3),
  431­443.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2013). The determinants of attitudes toward
  strategic default on mortgages. The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1473­1515.

Gupta, A. (2019). Foreclosure contagion and the neighborhood spillover effects of
  mortgage defaults. The Journal of Finance 74 (5), 2249­2301.

Gupta, A. and C. Hansman (2020). Selection, leverage, and default in the mortgage
  market. Available at SSRN 3315896 .

Guren, A. M. and T. J. McQuade (2020). How do foreclosures exacerbate housing
  downturns? The Review of Economic Studies 87 (3), 1331­1364.

Harding, J. P., E. Rosenblatt, and V. W. Yao (2009). The contagion effect of foreclosed
  properties. Journal of Urban Economics 66 (3), 164­178.

Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994). Identification and estimation of local average
  treatment effects. Econometrica 62 (2), 467­475.

Immergluck, D. and G. Smith (2006). The external costs of foreclosure: The impact of
  single-family mortgage foreclosures on property values. Housing Policy Debate 17 (1),
  57­79.

Indarte, S. (2019). The impact of debt relief generosity and liquid wealth on household
  bankruptcy. Available at SSRN 3378669 .

Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2020). The housing boom and bust: Model
  meets evidence. Journal of Political Economy 128 (9), 3285­3345.

Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration length, employment, and earnings. The American
  Economic Review 96 (3), 863­876.

                                          36
Levitin, A. J. (2009). Resolving the foreclosure crisis: Modification of mortgages in
  bankruptcy. Wisconsin Law Review , 565­655.

Li, W. and P.-D. Sarte (2006). Us consumer bankruptcy choice: The importance of
  general equilibrium effects. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (3), 613­631.

Li, W., I. Tewari, and M. J. White (2014). Using bankruptcy to reduce foreclosures:
  Does strip-down of mortgages affect the supply of mortgage credit? Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Livshits, I., J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2007). Consumer bankruptcy: A fresh start.
  The American Economic Review 97 (1), 402­418.

Luzzetti, M. N. and S. Neumuller (2014). Bankruptcy reform and the housing crisis.
  Technical report. Working Paper.

MacKinnon, J. G. and M. D. Webb (2017). Wild bootstrap inference for wildly different
  cluster sizes. Journal of Applied Econometrics 32 (2), 233­254.

Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, and A. Strand (2013). Does disability insurance receipt
  discourage work? Using examiner assignment to estimate causal effects of SSDI
  receipt. The American Economic Review 103 (5), 1797­1829.

Mayer, C., E. Morrison, and T. Piskorski (2009). A new proposal for loan modifications.
  Yale Journal of Regulation 26 (2), 417­429.

Mayer, C., E. Morrison, T. Piskorski, and A. Gupta (2014). Mortgage modification
  and strategic behavior: Evidence from a legal settlement with countrywide. The
  American Economic Review 104 (9), 2830­57.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2015). Foreclosures, house prices, and the real
  economy. The Journal of Finance 70 (6), 2587­2634.



                                          37
Mullaugh, E. P. (1994). The feath of mortgage cramdown in chapter 13: Nobelman v.
  American Savings Bank. Journal of Law and Commerce 14, 141.

Norberg, S. F. and N. S. Compo (2007). Report on an empirical study of district
  variations, and the roles of judges, trustees and debtors' attorneys in chapter 13
  bankruptcy cases. American Bankruptcy Law Journal 81, 431.

Piskorski, T. and A. Seru (2018a). Debt relief and slow recovery: A decade after lehman.
  Technical report. NBER Working Paper 25403.

Piskorski, T. and A. Seru (2018b). Mortgage market design: Lessons from the great
  recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 429­499.

Pool, V. K., N. Stoffman, and S. E. Yonker (2012). No place like home: Familiarity
  in mutual fund manager portfolio choice. The Review of Financial Studies 25 (8),
  2563­2599.

Riddiough, T. J. (1991). Equilibrium Mortgage Default Pricing with Non-optimal Bor-
  rower Behavior. Ph. D. thesis, The University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Sullivan, T. A., E. Warren, and J. L. Westbrook (1994). Persistence of local legal
  culture: Twenty years of evidence from the federal bankruptcy courts. Harvard
  Journal of Law and Public Policy 17, 801.

White, M. J. (1987). Personal bankruptcy under the 1978 bankruptcy code: An eco-
  nomic analysis. Indiana Law Journal 63, 1.

White, M. J. and N. Zhu (2010). Saving your home in chapter 13 bankruptcy. Journal
  of Legal Studies 39, 33­61.

Yermack, D. (2014). Tailspotting: Identifying and profiting from ceo vacation trips.
  Journal of Financial Economics 113 (2), 252­269.



                                          38
                        Panel A. District Courts in Sample




            Panel B. District Courts in Sample that Allowed Cramdown




            Figure 1. Bankruptcy district courts that allowed cramdown
These panels depict all courts in our sample and those courts that randomly assigned
cases and allowed mortgage principal reduction. The dark gray shading in Panel A
represents all the district courts in our sample, whereas in Panel B, the dark gray
shading represents the courts in our sample that adopted mortgage cramdown between
1989 and 1993.




                                        39
                                                                  Panel A. First stage without controls




                                                      .5
                  Residualized Bankruptcy Discharge
                                                      .3
                                                      .1
                                                      -.1
                                                      -.3




                                                            -.3               0                    .3     .6
                                                                                  Judge Leniency



                                                                   Panel B. First stage with controls
                                                      .5
                  Residualized Bankruptcy Discharge
                                                      .3
                                                      .1
                                                      -.1
                                                      -.3




                                                            -.3               0                    .3     .6
                                                                                  Judge Leniency




  Figure 2. First stage: Relation between judge leniency and bankruptcy discharge
These panels plot Chapter 13 discharge against the leave-one-out measure of judge
leniency in cramdown courts. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers
between 1989 and 1993. To construct the binned scatterplot in Panel A, we regress an
indicator variable for Chapter 13 discharge on office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects and
calculate residuals. Subsequently, we calculate the mean residual in each judge-by-year
bin. In Panel B, we follow the same procedure, but we include pre-treatment covariates
at the filer and ZIP code levels.




                                                                                     40
                                    1
                                    .8
             Discharge Propensity
                                    .6

                                                                                 0.930
                                                                                 (0.024)
                                    .4
                                    .2




                                         .2   .4            .6              .8             1
                                              Lagged Discharge Propensity



              Figure 3. Persistence of Chapter 13 judge discharge rates
This figure shows the correlation between judge-specific Chapter 13 discharge rates in
the current and lagged years. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers
between 1989 and 1993 in the offices that randomly assigned filings to judges, which
allowed for mortgage cramdown in this period.




                                                       41
                                                             Panel A. Home foreclosure
                                                                                                                                                                         Any Distress E
                                        0                                                                                                         0

                  Home Foreclosure                                                                                         Any Distress Event
 0                                                                                          0

                                       -.1                                                                                                       -.1


-.1                                                                                        -.1

                                       -.2                                                                                                       -.2



-.2                                                                                        -.2

                                                                                                                                                 -.3
                                       -.3


                                                                                           -.3
-.3
                                                                                                                                                 -.4
                                       -.4
                                                 0           2            4              6                 8               10                          0            2        4
                                                                      Year Following Bankruptcy
                                                                                        -.4                                                                              Year Following Ban
-.4
      0    2          4              6                   8           10                          0                 2           4              6             8           10
                  Year Following Bankruptcy                                                                                Year Following Bankruptcy
                                                             Panel B. Involuntary sale                                          Involuntary Sale
                                                                                                  0


                                             0

                                                                                                 -.1


                                        -.1

                                                                                                 -.2


                                        -.2

                                                                                                 -.3


                                        -.3

                                                                                                 -.4
                                                                                                       0               2            4              6            8            10
                                                                                                                                Year Following Bankruptcy
                                        -.4
                                                     0           2            4              6                 8            10
                                                                          Year Following Bankruptcy




                              Figure 4. Home foreclosures and involuntary sales
          These panels plot two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
          bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on home foreclosures
          and involuntary sales. Home foreclosure is an indicator for a filer's home receiving a
          notice of default, transfer or sale, or having been transferred to a real estate owned in
          or before the indicated year. Involuntary sale is an indicator for when a home short sale
          is registered in or before the indicated year. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence
          intervals from standard errors clustered at the office-by-judge level.




                                                                                  42
                              Panel A. Home foreclosure
                   0



                  -.1



                  -.2



                  -.3



                  -.4
                        0      2          4           6          8      10
                                    Year Following Bankruptcy

                                   Cramdown              Non-cramdown


                               Panel B. Involuntary sale

                  0



                 -.1



                 -.2



                 -.3


                        0     2          4            6          8      10
                                    Year Following Bankruptcy

                                   Cramdown              Non-cramdown



                    Figure 5. Cramdown versus non-cramdown courts
These panels plot the two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection on home foreclosures and involuntary sales in cramdown and
non-cramdown courts. Home foreclosure is an indicator for a filer's home receiving a
notice of default, transfer or sale, or having been transferred to a real estate owned in
or before the indicated year. Involuntary sale is an indicator for when a home short sale
is registered in or before the indicated year. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence
intervals from standard errors clustered at the office-by-judge level.




                                              43
              Chapter 13 Filings in Cramdown Courts               Chapter 13 Filings in Non-cramdown Courts



       6000




                                                           6000
       4500




                                                           4500
       3000




                                                           3000
       1500




                                                           1500
       0




                                                           0

          Jun-92   Dec-93    Jun-93    Dec-94     Jun-94      Jun-92     Dec-93     Jun-93   Dec-94    Jun-94




Figure 6. Time series of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings around the Supreme Court
decision in June 1993
The figure depicts the monthly number of Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings before and
after the Supreme Court disallowed cramdown in June 1993. The sample consists of all
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings included in the PACER sample from June 1992 through
June 1994. The sample consists of all Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings from June 1992 to
June 1994 in the district courts for which we have docket data from PACER. Each dot
in the panels represents the total count of Chapter 13 filings for that month.




                                                      44
                            Table 1. Summary statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the sample consisting of first-time Chapter
13 filers between 1989 and 1993 in the offices that randomly assign filings to judges.
The cramdown sample comprises the district courts that adopted mortgage cramdown
in Chapter 13 between 1989 and 1993. The non-cramdown sample consists of those
courts that did not allow mortgage cramdown during the same period. Age data come
from the Lexis-Nexis (LN) public records and correspond to the individual's age at the
time of filing. Gender data are from LN. ZIP-code-level pre-treatment characteristics
are from the 1980 Centennial Census. Discharge is an indicator for receiving Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection.

                                       Full sample               Cramdown                          Non-cramdown
                                          Mean        Mean          SD       Median       Mean          SD      Median
                                            (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)      (7)

Age                                       41.65        42.20       10.68         41        41.24       10.82         40
Male                                     78.40%       81.62%      38.73%          -       75.73%      42.87%          -
Percentage white (ZIP code)              40.10%       40.45%      33.69%      37.82%      39.85%      34.79%      33.88%
Percentage single (ZIP code)             9.28%         9.36%      8.81%        6.71%      9.22%        8.85%       7.78%
Percentage college degree (ZIP code)      7.40%        7.86%      8.93%        4.86%       7.06%      8.21%        4.86%
Median income (ZIP code)                22,744.86    23,174.47   20,674.57   20,952.90   22,427.39   20,097.67   21,072.44

Number of cases                          14,517        6,100         -           -         8,417         -           -
Cases discharged                         65.55%       61.54%      48.65%         -        68.55%      46.43%         -




                                                     45
                            Table 2. Randomization test
This table presents reduced-form estimates testing the random assignment of fil-
ings to judges. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1989
and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases and allowed mortgage
cramdown in this period. The estimates are from an OLS regression of judge le-
niency on the variables listed and office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Judge le-
niency, measured between 1989 and 1993, is the leave-one-out mean rate of grant-
ing bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out mean rate
of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing year. The p-
value reported is for an F -test of the joint significance of the variables. Standard
errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


                                                        Leniency
                                                          (1)

                 Age                                    -0.000118
                                                        (7.82e-05)

                 Female                                  -0.00389
                                                        (0.00263)

                 Percentage white (ZIP code)             0.00549
                                                        (0.00499)

                 Percentage single (ZIP code)             -0.0318
                                                         (0.0215)

                 Percentage college degree (ZIP code)     -0.0483
                                                         (0.0313)

                 ln (Median income) (ZIP code)           0.000280
                                                        (0.000687)

                 Joint F-test                            0.3108
                 Office x Month FE                          Y
                 Observations                             6,100
                 R-squared                                0.046




                                          46
                                 Table 3. First stage
This table reports the first-stage estimates.      The sample consists of all first-
time Chapter 13 filers between 1989 and 1993 in the district courts that ran-
domly assigned cases and allowed mortgage cramdown in this period.           Judge
leniency, measured between 1989 and 1993, is the leave-one-out mean rate of
granting bankruptcy protection for the assigned judge minus the leave-one-out
mean rate of granting bankruptcy protection for the court in the same filing
year. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Standard er-
rors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


                                                            Discharge
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)

         Leniency                               0.894***   0.895***     0.891***
                                                (0.0311)   (0.0316)     (0.0315)

         Age                                                0.000891     0.000952
                                                           (0.000605)   (0.000597)

         Female                                            -0.0468***   -0.0430***
                                                            (0.0120)     (0.0123)

         Percentage white (ZIP code)                                    0.0772**
                                                                        (0.0332)

         Percentage single (ZIP code)                                    -0.276*
                                                                         (0.144)

         Percentage college degree (ZIP code)                            -0.0946
                                                                         (0.121)

         ln (Median income) (ZIP code)                                  0.000597
                                                                        (0.00259)

         Office x Month FE                         Y           Y            Y
         Observations                            6,100       6,100        6,100
         R-squared                               0.211       0.214        0.215




                                          47
Table 4. The effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts on homeowners' distress events
This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on homeowners'
distress events. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1989
and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases and allowed mortgage
cramdown in this period. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates for the three-year post-
filing outcomes, with and without any controls, respectively. Columns 3 and 4 present
the estimates for the five-year post-filing outcomes. Home foreclosure is an indica-
tor for a filer's home receiving a notice of default, transfer or sale, or having been
transferred to a real estate owned in or before the indicated year. Involuntary sale
is an indicator for when a homeowner sells her property for less than the amount
due on the mortgage in or before the indicated year. Controls include age and gen-
der of the filer, and ZIP-code-level controls are the percentage of white population,
percentage of single individuals, percentage of individuals with a college degree, and
median log income. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


        Panel A
                                                 Foreclosure
                                Year 3 post-filing         Year 5 post-filing
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

        Discharge             -0.256***    -0.263***    -0.284***     -0.292***
                               (0.0349)     (0.0324)     (0.0338)      (0.0307)

        Control group mean              0.238                      0.262

        Controls                  N               Y          N               Y
        Office x Month FE         Y               Y          Y               Y
        Observations            6,100           6,100      6,100           6,100
        R-squared               0.088           0.090      0.094           0.097

        Panel B
                                               Involuntary sale
                                Year 3 post-filing         Year 5 post-filing
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

        Discharge             -0.236***    -0.244***    -0.258***     -0.267***
                               (0.0419)     (0.0386)     (0.0402)      (0.0371)

        Control group mean              0.181                      0.191

        Controls                  N               Y          N               Y
        Office x Month FE         Y               Y          Y               Y
        Observations            6,100           6,100      6,100           6,100
        R-squared               0.047           0.048      0.035           0.036
                                                48
       Table 5. The effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts on other outcomes
This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on other filers' out-
comes. Each cell represents a separate regression. The sample consists of all first-time
Chapter 13 filers between 1989 and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned
cases and allowed mortgage cramdown in this period. New address is an indicator for
the filer having at least one change of the principal address in or before the indicated
year. Voluntary sale is an indicator for a property sale different from a home short sale
in or before the indicated year. Moving to a better ZIP is an indicator for the filer
moving for the first time post-filing to a ZIP code with a median income higher than
the ZIP code at the time of bankruptcy filing. New property is an indicator for the filer
buying a new property in or before the indicated year. Refinancing is an indicator for
the filer refinancing a mortgage in or before the indicated year. Criminal filings is an
indicator for the filer committing a traffic infraction or the filer being guilty of a misde-
meanor or a felony in or before the indicated year. Mortality is an indicator for the filer
having died in or before the indicated year. Controls are analogous to those in Table 4.
All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. The mean of the control
group is reported for those filers who did not receive Chapter 13 bankruptcy discharge.
Standard errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p
<0.01.


                            Year 3 post-filing                 Year 5 post-filing
                      Control group                      Control group
                         mean         2SLS Results          mean         2SLS Results
                           (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)

 New address               0.662         -0.208***            0.769          -0.195***
                                          (0.0470)                            (0.0487)
 Voluntary sale            0.157         -0.0819**            0.186          -0.0868**
                                          (0.0348)                            (0.0387)
 Moving better ZIP         0.122          0.0550**            0.125           0.0606**
                                          (0.0263)                            (0.0275)
 New property              0.074           -0.0384            0.121            -0.0117
                                          (0.0347)                            (0.0440)
 Refinancing               0.046          -0.00724            0.107         0.0595***
                                          (0.0196)                            (0.0187)
 Criminal filings          0.039        -0.0301***            0.062         -0.0492***
                                         (0.00879)                           (0.00815)
 Mortality                 0.019           0.00146            0.029            0.00527
                                         (0.00800)                            (0.0210)

 Controls                                    Y                                  Y
 Office x Month FE                           Y                                  Y




                                             49
     Table 6. The effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts by filer characteristics
This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on homeowners' dis-
tress events. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1989 and
1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases and allowed mortgage cram-
down in this period. The table reports estimates for the three-year post-filing outcomes
with controls. Home foreclosure is an indicator for a filer's home receiving a notice of
default, transfer or sale, or having been transferred to a real estate owned in or before
the indicated year. Involuntary sale is an indicator for when a homeowner sells her
property for less than the amount due on the mortgage in or before the indicated year.
Controls are analogous to those in Table 4. All regressions include office-by-month-of-
filing fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1;
**p <0.05; ***p <0.01.

 Panel A
                                                          Foreclosure
                                                       Year 3 post-filing
                           Gender                     Age at filing                     Property type
                       Male     Female       lower 35    35-50      50 and up    Single-family Multi-family
                       (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)

 Discharge           -0.248***   -0.361***   -0.266***   -0.267***   -0.247***    -0.276***           -0.195***
                      (0.0292)    (0.132)     (0.0466)    (0.0318)    (0.0595)     (0.0339)            (0.0690)

 p-value                    0.385                          0.818                              0.264

 Controls                     Y                              Y                                  Y
 Office x Month FE            Y                              Y                                  Y
 Observations               6,100                          6,100                              5,641

 Panel B
                                                       Involuntary sale
                                                       Year 3 post-filing
                           Gender                     Age at filing                     Property type
                       Male     Female       lower 35    35-50      50 and up    Single-family Multi-family
                       (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)

 Discharge           -0.217***   -0.410***   -0.272***   -0.245***   -0.192**     -0.257***            -0.144*
                      (0.0332)    (0.118)     (0.0319)    (0.0461)   (0.0786)      (0.0414)           (0.0839)

 p-value                    0.047                          0.553                              0.183

 Controls                     Y                              Y                                  Y
 Office x Month FE            Y                              Y                                  Y
 Observations               6,100                          6,100                              5,641




                                                 50
          Table 7. Cramdown and non-cramdown in Chapter 13 bankruptcy
This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection on homeowners' distress events for courts that did and did not
allow cramdown. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1989
and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases in this period. Discharge
is an indicator for a case being filed in a court that allowed cramdown at the time of the
filing. Non-cramdown is an indicator for a case being filed in a court that prohibited
cramdown at the time of the filing. Outcome variables and controls are analogous to
those in Table 4. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


  Panel A
                                                     Foreclosure
                                   Year 3 post-filing           Year 5 post-filing
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)

  Discharge x Cramdown           -0.264***    -0.267***      -0.291***     -0.294***
                                  (0.0345)     (0.0327)       (0.0339)      (0.0316)
  Discharge x Non-cramdown      -0.0384***   -0.0392***     -0.0513***    -0.0526***
                                 (0.00485)    (0.00497)       (0.0121)      (0.0118)

  p-value                          0.000          0.000        0.000         0.000

  Controls                           N               Y           N            Y
  Office x Month FE                  Y               Y           Y            Y
  Observations                    14,517          14,517       14,517       14,517
  R-squared                        0.070           0.071       0.074        0.075

  Panel B
                                                   Involuntary sale
                                   Year 3 post-filing           Year 5 post-filing
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)

  Discharge x Cramdown           -0.232***    -0.234***      -0.253***     -0.256***
                                  (0.0392)     (0.0377)       (0.0375)      (0.0365)
  Discharge x Non-cramdown      -0.0517***   -0.0522***     -0.0483***    -0.0483***
                                 (0.00884)    (0.00894)       (0.0128)      (0.0126)

  p-value                          0.000          0.000        0.000         0.000

  Controls                           N               Y           N            Y
  Office x Month FE                  Y               Y           Y            Y
  Observations                    14,517          14,517       14,517       14,517
  R-squared                        0.039           0.039       0.027        0.028



                                             51
Table 8. The effect of Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection within states with both cram-
down and non-cramdown courts
This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection on homeowners' distress events within states with both cram-
down and non-cramdown courts. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers
between 1989 and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases in this pe-
riod. Discharge is an indicator for a case being filed in a court that allowed cramdown
at the time of the filing. Non-cramdown is an indicator for a case being filed in a court
that prohibited cramdown at the time of the filing. Outcome variables and controls
are analogous to those in Table 4. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05;
***p <0.01.

  Panel A
                                                     Foreclosure
                                   Year 3 post-filing           Year 5 post-filing
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)

  Discharge x Cramdown           -0.264***    -0.268***      -0.291***     -0.296***
                                  (0.0346)     (0.0320)       (0.0340)      (0.0309)
  Discharge x Non-cramdown      -0.0405***   -0.0417***     -0.0562***    -0.0580***
                                 (0.00436)    (0.00447)       (0.0150)      (0.0143)

  p-value                         0.000           0.000        0.000         0.000

  Controls                          N               Y            N             Y
  Office x Month FE                 Y               Y            Y             Y
  Observations                    9,475           9,475        9,475         9,475
  R-squared                       0.073           0.073        0.079         0.080

  Panel B
                                                   Involuntary sale
                                   Year 3 post-filing           Year 5 post-filing
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)

  Discharge x Cramdown           -0.232***    -0.232***      -0.253***     -0.257***
                                  (0.0393)     (0.0393)       (0.0376)      (0.0362)
  Discharge x Non-cramdown      -0.0545***   -0.0545***     -0.0523***    -0.0521***
                                 (0.00851)    (0.00851)       (0.0155)      (0.0152)

  p-value                         0.000           0.000        0.000         0.000

  Controls                          N               Y            N             Y
  Office x Month FE                 Y               Y            Y             Y
  Observations                    9,475           9,475        9,475         9,475
  R-squared                       0.045           0.044        0.033         0.033

                                             52
          Table 9. Complier characteristics: Cramdown and non-cramdown
This table presents the characteristics of compliers. Column (1) reports the distribution
of the sample by gender and age, P (X = x). Column (2) shows the first-stage estimates
for each gender and age group. Column (3) reports the distribution of compliers by
gender and age, P (X = x|I1 > I0 ), calculated as the first-stage estimate for the gender
minus age group times the sample share, divided by the overall first-stage estimate.
Column (4) shows the relative likelihood of a filer belonging to a particular gender
and age group, in the complier group compared with the sample. Panel A reports
the complier characteristics for the cramdown sample, whereas Panel B presents the
complier characteristics for the non-cramdown sample.


 Panel A
                     P (X = x)       First stage    P (X = x|I1 > I0 ) P (X = x|I1 > I0 )
                                                                          /P (X = x)
                        (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
 Men
 Age<35                0.207            0.998             0.231               1.116
 35<=Age<=50           0.433            0.886             0.430               0.991
 Age>50                0.174            0.972             0.189               1.087

 Women
 Age<35                0.043            1.003             0.048               1.122
 35<=Age<=50           0.092            0.641             0.066               0.717
 Age>50                0.051            0.858             0.049               0.960
 Overall               1.000            0.894             1.000               1.000

 Panel B
                     P (X = x)       First stage    P (X = x|I1 > I0 ) P (X = x|I1 > I0 )
                                                                          /P (X = x)
                        (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
 Men
 Age<35                0.229            0.931             0.239               1.041
 35<=Age<=50           0.377            0.991             0.418               1.109
 Age>50                0.151            0.975             0.165               1.091

 Women
 Age<35                0.064            1.127             0.081               1.261
 35<=Age<=50           0.122            0.916             0.125               1.025
 Age>50                0.057            0.763             0.049               0.853
 Overall               1.000            0.894             1.000               1.000




                                           53
                         Internet Appendix
                                                                        Panel A. Cramdown courts

oreclosure
                                                      0




                                                     -.1




                                                     -.2




                                                     -.3




                                                     -.4

        6            8         10                          0            2          4              6           8      10
ing Bankruptcy                                                                 Year Following Bankruptcy



                                    Involuntary Sale               Panel B. Non-cramdown courts
            0
                                                       0



           -.1                                       -.1



                                                     -.2
           -.2


                                                     -.3

           -.3
                                                     -.4

                                                               0         2         4            6             8      10
                                                                              Year Following Bankruptcy
           -.4
                 0        2             4              6            8           10
                                    Year Following Bankruptcy                Cramdown                 Non-cramdown



                                Figure IA.1. Any distress event in cramdown and non-cramdown courts
                          These figures plot two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
                         bankruptcy protection on any distress event in cramdown and non-cramdown courts.
                         Any distress event is similar to the foreclosure indicator described in the Figure 4 vari-
                         able plus other events, such as real-estate-owned liquidation (REO) in or before the
                         indicated year. Panel A depicts the estimates for any distress events in courts that
                         allowed cramdown in Chapter 13, whereas Panel B presents the estimates for non-
                         cramdown courts. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from standard
                         errors clustered at the office-by-judge level.



                                                                                        54
                                     Home Foreclosure
                .3




                .2




                .1




                0
                     0        2           4             6              8   10
                                     Year Following Bankruptcy

                                      Discharge            Dismissed



 Figure IA.2. Home Foreclosure of discharged vs. dismissed filers in cramdown courts
These figure plots average home foreclosure for granted and dismissed Chapter 13
bankruptcy filers in courts in which cramdown was allowed. Home foreclosure is an
indicator for a filer's home receiving a notice of default, transfer or sale, or having been
transferred to a real estate owned in or before the indicated year.




                                              55
Table IA.1. The effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts on foreclosure in recession
periods

This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on foreclosures
during recession. The sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between
1989 and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases in this pe-
riod. Recession is an indicator variable for a case being filed between July 1990
and March 1991 (NBER). Outcome variables and controls are analogous to those
in Table 4. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


                                               Foreclosure
                            Year 3 post-filing              Year 5 post-filing
                        Recession Non-recession        Recession Non-recession
                           (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)

    Discharge           -0.287***      -0.262***     -0.353***      -0.285***
                         (0.0600)       (0.0403)      (0.0883)       (0.0437)

    p-value                         0.736                        0.543

    Controls                          Y                            Y
    Office x Month FE                 Y                            Y
    Observations                    6,100                        6,100
    R-squared                       0.090                        0.095




                                            56
Table IA.2. The effect of Chapter 13 in cramdown courts on foreclosure based on states'
recourse status and homestead exemption generosity

This table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection in courts that allowed mortgage cramdown on foreclosures based
on a state's recourse status and homestead exemption generosity. The sample con-
sists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between 1989 and 1993 in the district courts
that randomly assigned cases in this period. Recourse is an indicator equal to one
if the case is filed in a recourse state. Above median equals is an indicator equal
to one if the case is filed in a state with homestead exemption above the median.
Homestead exemption median is computed using only the states in our sample and
the 1996 homestead exemptions. Outcome variables and controls are analogous to
those in Table 4. All regressions include office-by-month-of-filing fixed effects. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at office-by-judge level. *p <0.1; **p <0.05; ***p <0.01.


 Panel A
                                               Foreclosure
                          Year 3 post-filing                Year 5 post-filing
                       Recourse    Non-Recourse          Recourse    Non-Recourse
                         (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)

 Discharge              -0.194**           -0.291***     -0.236**           -0.317***
                        (0.0965)            (0.0276)      (0.113)            (0.0254)

 p-value                           0.327                            0.483

 Controls                            Y                                Y
 Office x Month FE                   Y                                Y
 Observations                      6,100                            6,100
 R-squared                         0.095                            0.099

 Panel B
                                                Foreclosure
                           Year 3 post-filing                 Year 5 post-filing
                                           Homestead exemption
                     Above median Below median          Above median Below median
                         (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)

 Discharge              -0.349**           -0.263***     -0.386**           -0.292***
                         (0.171)            (0.0323)      (0.176)            (0.0307)

 p-value                           0.627                            0.598

 Controls                            Y                                Y
 Office x Month FE                   Y                                Y
 Observations                      6,100                            6,100
 R-squared                         0.089                            0.095
                                              57
Table IA.3. The effect of cramdown on filers' observable covariates and bankruptcy
Chapter composition

This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of cramdown on
homeowners' observable covariates and districts' bankruptcy type composition. Cram-
down is an indicator equal to one if the district allowed cramdown in month t and zero
otherwise. In Panel A, the sample consists of all first-time Chapter 13 filers between
1989 and 1993 in the district courts that randomly assigned cases in this period. The
outcome variables are a dummy equal to one if the filer is female and the age at filing,
respectively. In Panel B, the sample period is between 1988 and 1995. The outcome
variable is the share of Chapter 7 cases relative to the total bankruptcy cases (Chapter
7 and 13) at the district-month level. The first column in Panel B consists of all dis-
tricts that randomly assigned cases (22 districts). The second column consists of the
84 districts for which we have docket data. All regressions include district and month
fixed effects. The table reports ordinary wild bootstrap p-values in parentheses.


                         Panel A
                                        Female       Age
                                          (1)        (2)

                         Cramdown        0.0220     -0.930
                                        (0.4384)   (0.2132)

                         District FE        Y        Y
                         Month FE           Y        Y
                         Observations    14,517    14,517
                         R-squared        0.019    0.030

                         Panel B
                                         Chapter 7 share
                                          (1)       (2)

                         Cramdown        -0.0308    -0.0258
                                        (0.6396)   (0.3423)

                         District          Y          Y
                         Month             Y          Y
                         Observations    2,031      6,365
                         R-squared       0.019      0.030




                                          58
