                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                IT AIN'T WHERE YOU'RE FROM, IT'S WHERE YOU'RE AT:
                 HIRING ORIGINS, FIRM HETEROGENEITY, AND WAGES.

                                       Sabrina L. Di Addario
                                         Patrick M. Kline
                                          Raffaele Saggio
                                         Mikkel Sølvsten

                                        Working Paper 28917
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28917


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2021




This paper was prepared for the Models of Linked Employer-Employee Data conference
celebrating the 20 year anniversary of the publication of "High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms.'' We thank Sydnee Caldwell, Marta De Philippis, Thibaut Lamadon, Fabian Postel-Vinay,
Jean Marc Robin, Benjamin Schoefer, Isaac Sorkin, Chris Taber, Eliana Viviano, and seminar
participants at NBER Labor Studies, the Junior Micro Macro Labor Conference, Columbia, UCL,
Booth, Berkeley, Mcgill University, and the Models of Linked Employer-Employee Data
conference for helpful comments. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Italy. The title of this paper is inspired by hip-
hop artist Rakim who, on the 1990 album Let The Rhythm Hit 'Em, delivers the lines "I come
correct, and I won't look back / Cause it ain't where you're from, it's where you're at". The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sabrina L. Di Addario, Patrick M. Kline, Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
It Ain't Where You're From, It's Where You're At: Hiring Origins, Firm Heterogeneity, and
Wages.
Sabrina L. Di Addario, Patrick M. Kline, Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten
NBER Working Paper No. 28917
June 2021
JEL No. C1,J3,J5

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a theoretically grounded extension of the two-way fixed effects model of Abowd et
al. (1999) that allows firms to differ both in the wages they offer new hires and the wages
required to poach their employees. Expected hiring wages are modeled as the sum of a worker
fixed effect, a fixed effect for the "destination" firm hiring the worker, and a fixed effect for the
"origin" firm, or labor market state, from which the worker was hired. This specification is
shown to nest the reduced form for hiring wages delivered by semi-parametric formulations
of the sequential auction model of Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002b) and its generalization in
Bagger et al. (2014). Using Italian social security records that distinguish job quits from
firings and layoffs, we find that origin effects explain only 0.7% of the variance of hiring
wages among job movers, while destination effects explain more than 23% of the variance.
Across firms, destination effects are more than 13 times as variable as origin effects.
Interpreted through the lens of Bagger et al. (2014)'s model, this finding requires that workers
possess implausibly strong bargaining strength. Studying a cohort of workers entering the Italian
labor market in 2005, we find that differences in origin effects yield essentially no contribution to
the evolution of the gender gap in hiring wages, while differences in destination effects explain
the majority of the gap at the time of labor market entry. These results suggest that where a
worker is hired from is relatively inconsequential for his or her wages in comparison to where he
or she is currently employed.

Sabrina L. Di Addario                             Raffaele Saggio
via 20 settembre 97/e                             Department of Economics
00187 Rome                                        University of British Columbia
Italy                                             6000 Iona Drive
sabrina.diaddario@bancaditalia.it                 Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
                                                  and NBER
Patrick M. Kline                                  rsaggio@mail.ubc.ca
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                Mikkel Sølvsten
530 Evans Hall #3880                              University of Wisconsin - Madison Office
Berkeley, CA 94720                                7430
and NBER                                          Department of Economics
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu                          William H. Sewell Social Science Building
                                                  1180 Observatory Drive
                                                  Madison, WI 53706
                                                  soelvsten@wisc.edu
   In their pioneering study of the French wage structure Abowd et al. (1999, henceforth AKM)
used high dimensional fixed effects methods to decompose wage inequality into components attributable
to unobserved worker and firm heterogeneity. The AKM decomposition is motivated by the notion
that there exists a stable wage hierarchy across firms. Hierarchies of this nature arise, for example,
in the wage posting model of Burdett and Mortensen (1998), where each employer commits to a
unique firm-wide wage premium. In practice, however, employers often possess information about
workers' outside options, which they may use to craft personalized wage offers. Seminal work by
Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002a,b) develops rigorously a notion of labor market competition where
firms offer the lowest wage necessary to poach workers from an existing employer or unemployment.
In these "sequential auction" models, hiring wages depend not only on the identity of the hiring
firm but also the firm (or labor market state) from which a worker was hired. Price discrimination
of this nature gives rise to a dual wage hierarchy: firms can be ranked both in terms of the wages
required to poach their employees and the wage premia they offer new hires.
   This paper studies empirically the relative importance of one's current employer ("where you're
at") and the employer or labor market state from which a worker was hired ("where you're
from") for the determination of wages. In contrast with most previous estimates of the sequential
auction framework (e.g., Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002b; Dey and Flinn, 2005; Cahuc et al., 2006;
Bagger et al., 2014) which jointly model worker mobility, hiring wages, and wage growth within
a match, we confine ourselves to studying the evolution of hiring wages across jobs, leaving the
adequacy of models for within-match wage growth and separation decisions to later research. As we
demonstrate, the moment of hiring presents a special opportunity to evaluate the empirical content
of sequential auction models, as one can typically infer the firms bidding for a given worker from
that worker's employment history. We further depart from past work in this literature by studying
hiring wage determination using a generalization of the AKM fixed effects model that allows for a
worker fixed effect, a fixed effect for the "destination" firm hiring the worker, and a separate fixed
effect for the "origin" of the hire, which may include various forms of non-employment. Because
the joint distribution of all three set of fixed effects is unrestricted, this "dual wage ladder" (DWL)
specification accommodates very rich patterns of worker-firm sorting and allows firms that are high
wage destinations to be high or low wage origins.
   To clarify the link between the DWL model and the sequential auction framework, we show that
our fixed effects specification nests the reduced form of hiring wages in the model of Postel-Vinay
and Robin (2002b, henceforth PVR) when flow utility is logarithmic. Origin effects are increasing
in productivity, as more productive firms can afford to counter more aggressive outside offers, while
destination effects are decreasing in productivity because workers are willing to take wage cuts to
join firms that offer greater prospects for future wage growth. Remarkably, the sum of a firm's
origin and destination effects yields its productivity. Because workers in this model always accept
offers from more productive firms, mobility is exogenous conditional on origin and destination fixed

                                                  2
effects. The PVR model places sharp restrictions on the covariance structure of firms' origin and
destination effects. The two sets of fixed effects must be negatively correlated because of their
opposite signed dependence on productivity, which is the only dimension along which firms are
differentiated.
   Extensions of the PVR model that allow workers to extract a positive share of the match surplus
(Cahuc et al., 2006; Bagger et al., 2014) also turn out to admit a DWL representation where the
sum of each firm's origin and destination effects corresponds to its productivity. When workers are
able to extract all of the match surplus from hiring firms, the origin fixed effects disappear and an
AKM style specification for hiring wages ensues. We show that the difference between the variances
of firm destination and origin effects can be used to obtain a lower bound on worker bargaining
power. When the variance of firm destination effects exceeds the variance of firm origin effects, the
model additionally restricts the correlation between origin and destination firm effects to obey a
positive lower bound that takes a simple analytic form. Finally, we derive some non-parametric
shape restrictions on the relationship between a firm's origin and destination effects and its latent
productivity level that can be scrutinized empirically with productivity proxies such as firm value
added per worker.
   Our empirical analysis relies on the INPS-INVIND panel of Italian social security earnings
records. In addition to recording the annual earnings and months worked associated with each
employer-employee match, these data contain information on the reason for each job separation.
We use this information to distinguish worker quits from job displacements involving a firing,
layoff, or contract non-renewal that are likely to substantially weaken a worker's outside options
at the time of hiring. We find that workers displaced from their first job experience less growth
in hiring wages between their first two jobs than workers who quit their first job. Surprisingly,
this displacement penalty appears to be roughly invariant to the mean co-worker wage levels of
those first two employers. We also find support for a key exclusion restriction suggested by the
PVR/DWL framework: the identity of the firm from which a worker is displaced appears to have
no effect on hiring wages. Evidently, what matters for hiring wage determination is not which
employer displaced a worker, but that they were displaced at all.
   Fitting the DWL model to a panel of workers with two or more jobs, we find an average wage
penalty for being new to the labor force of roughly 5% and a penalty for being displaced from one's
previous job of roughly 3%. To assess the overall contribution of origin and destination effects
to hiring wage inequality, we conduct bias corrected variance decompositions using the methods
developed in Kline et al. (2020). Adding origin fixed effects to a standard AKM specification
explains only half of a percentage point of additional wage variance. Extending the traditional
AKM variance decomposition, we find that person and destination effects respectively explain
roughly 29% and 24% of the variance of hiring wages, while origin effects explain only 0.7% of the
variance of hiring wages. We conclude that where a worker was hired from exerts a quantitatively

                                                 3
insignificant influence on his or her hiring wage in comparison to where he or she is currently
employed.
   To tie our estimates more closely to the sequential auction framework, we investigate the
covariance structure of firms' origin and destination effects. The size weighted variance across
firms of their destination effects is more than 13 times as large as that of their origin effects.
Rationalizing this finding in the model of Bagger et al. (2014) requires that workers capture at
least 88% of the rents in the employment relationship, far above the empirical estimates typically
found in the literature (Card et al., 2018). Moreover, this level of bargaining strength would require
a correlation between firm origin and destination effects of at least 0.84 to be rationalizable by the
model, well above the empirical size weighted correlation we estimate of 0.25. Both origin and
destination firm effects are found to increase with firm value added, but do so in a manner that
violates the model's non-parametric shape restrictions. Though the wage growth of job stayers
appears to be elevated at the most productive firms, it is difficult to discern how much of this
pattern is driven by offer matching.
   Our key finding that firm destination effects are an order of magnitude more variable than
firm origin effects echoes Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002a)'s early acknowledgment that "reality lies
somewhere in between our complete information story and Burdett's and Mortensen's incomplete
information assumption." One means of formalizing this middle ground comes from recent work
that allows wage posting firms to coexist with firms that renegotiate wages as in the sequential
auction framework (Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2004; Flinn et al., 2017; Caldwell and Harmon, 2019).
Consistent with the notion that firms differ in their wage setting strategies, we find substantial
variability across industries in the relative importance of firm origin and destination effects. For
example, origin effects appear to play an especially inconsequential role in the restaurant sector
but a fairly important role among law firms and employers in the financial sector. Yet even among
law firms, where origin effects are nearly as variable as destination effects, the empirical correlation
between origin and destination firm effects is far too low to be rationalized by the model of Bagger
et al. (2014), where firms are differentiated only by productivity. Our findings suggest it may
be necessary to treat firms as differentiated along two or more dimensions, even within narrowly
defined sectors, to match basic facts about the structure of hiring wages.
   We conclude our analysis by investigating the extent to which Italian women face a dynamic
disadvantage at the time of hiring attributable to the labor market state from which they were
hired. Extending earlier results by Card et al. (2015), we find that both origin and destination firm
effects differ by gender, with female hiring wages being less sensitive to measured firm productivity
than male wages. We then study the evolution of the gender gap in hiring wages for Italians entering
the labor market in 2005. The gender gap in hiring wages at labor market entry is almost entirely
explained by gaps in destination effects. However, as workers age into the labor market, the hiring
wage gap grows dramatically, while the gender gap in destination effects remains roughly constant.

                                                   4
By contrast, the contribution of gender gaps in origin effects to gender hiring wage gaps is trivially
small throughout the life-cycle. For gender gaps, and for hiring wage inequality as a whole, the
aphorism holds true: "it ain't where you're from, it's where you're at."



1     The DWL model
Our analysis centers on the behavior of hiring wages. For each worker i  {1, . . . , n} in a sample, let
m  {1, . . . , Mi } index her job matches in chronological order. The dependent variable of interest
is the log hiring wage of worker i in her m'th match, which we denote by yim .
    There are J firms in the labor market. We use j (i, m)  {1, . . . , J } to denote identity of the firm
employing worker i in her m'th match. The function h(i, m)  {N, U, 1, . . . , J } gives the employer
or labor market state from which worker i was hired into her m'th match. The state N corresponds
to new labor market entrants, who have never been employed, while U corresponds to workers who
were hired from non-employment. Empirically, we measure the state from which each worker was
hired based upon whether she quit her previous job (Qi,m-1 = 1), was "displaced" (Qi,m-1 = 0),
or has no prior labor market experience (m = 1). Hence, we can write h(i, m) as a function of m
and Qi,m-1 as follows:
                                   
                                    j (i, m - 1) , if Qi,m-1 = 1 and m > 1,
                                   
                         h (i, m) = U,             if Qi,m-1 = 0 and m > 1,
                                   N,              if m = 1.

    Our dual wage ladder extension of the AKM model takes the form:

                       yim = i +         j (i,m)           +      h(i,m)         +Xim  + im ,         (1)
                                    "destination effect"       "origin effect"


where Xim denotes a vector of time-varying covariates such as worker age and calendar year,
measured at the start of each job match. As in the traditional AKM model, the worker effect i
captures a component of earnings ability that is transferable across firms, while the destination
firm effect j (i,m) gives the impact of the firm who is hiring worker i on her hiring wage ­ an effect
she forfeits upon moving to a new job. What is new relative to the AKM benchmark is the origin
firm effect h(i,m) , which gives the influence of the firm or state from which worker i was hired on
her hiring wage. An important restriction of the DWL model is that the identity j (i, m - 1) of a
worker's past employer does not affect her wage if she is hired from non-employment. We scrutinize
this exclusion restriction later in our analysis. The coefficient vector  governs the effects of age
and calendar year at the time of hire, while the error term im captures unobserved match specific


                                                       5
factors determining hiring wages.
    The closest analogue to (1) of which we are aware is the dynamic wage specification considered
by Bonhomme et al. (2019), in which firms are assumed to fall into one of a finite number of classes
that govern the wages of both new hires and incumbent workers. In their model, a worker's wage
may depend upon the firm class of both her current and past employers and her own latent type.
However, they do not model the separate wage implications of quits and job displacements. By
contrast, a key feature of our DWL specification is that past employers only influence the hiring
wages that result from job quits, with job displacement and labor market entry yielding distinct
origin wage effects. Our fixed effects formulation additionally allows each firm to be its own two-
dimensional hiring wage type.


1.1      Exogenous mobility
                                                                M
The wage history of the i'th worker is denoted by yi = {yim }m=1
                                                              i
                                                                 , while

                                                                    M
                                Wi = {j (i, m), h(i, m), Xim , i }m=1
                                                                   i




collects her employment history, covariates, and the worker fixed effect i .         We assume that
{yi , Wi }n
          i=1   is an i.i.d. sample from a common unknown distribution. The wage types of the
firms  = (1 , . . . , J ) ,  = (1 , . . . , J ) and the values N , U ,  are treated as fixed parameters
("fixed effects") throughout.
    Letting i = (i1 , . . . , iMi ) denote the history of hiring wage errors, our key identifying
assumption is that

                                            E[i | Wi ] = 0.                                        (2)

This is a strict exogeneity assumption, or as it is often referred to in this context, an "exogenous
mobility" requirement. Equation (2) allows workers to base their mobility decision on any function
of their own fixed effect i and the wage types (, ) of the firms in their economy. For instance,
high skilled workers may be differentially likely to move from firms with lower  values and towards
those with higher  values. Equation (2) would be violated, however, if workers were to sort towards
firms on the basis of an idiosyncratic match component of wages. We show below that a variety
of sequential auction models imply the exogenous mobility requirement is satisfied for hiring wage
specifications, despite the presence of a match effect in incumbent wages.




                                                  6
1.2     Implied dynamics
To illustrate the wage dynamics implied by the DWL model we now study the hiring wage
trajectories of a few career paths, distinguished by the sorts of transitions workers experience
between their first three jobs. Workers following career path #1 are displaced from both of their
first two jobs (Qi1 = Qi2 = 0). Workers following career path #2 quit both their first and second
job (Qi1 = Qi2 = 1). Finally, workers following career path #3 are displaced from their first job
but quit their second job (Qi1 = 0, Qi2 = 1).
   The DWL model rationalizes the trajectory of hiring wages for these three career paths in
terms of a common set of origin and destination firm effects. First differencing equation (1) and
suppressing for the moment the time varying covariates Xim , we can write the expected change in
hiring wages between the second and third job for each career path as follows:

   · Career Path #1 (two displacements)

                                E[yi3 - yi2 | Qi1 = Qi2 = 0] = j (i,3) - j (i,2)


   · Career Path #2 (two quits)

                       E[yi3 - yi2 | Qi1 = Qi2 = 1] = j (i,3) - j (i,2) + j (i,2) - j (i,1)


   · Career Path #3 (a displacement followed by a quit)

                      E[yi3 - yi2 | Qi1 = 0, Qi2 = 1] = j (i,3) - j (i,2) + j (i,2) - U


Inspecting these equations reveals that non-employment serves the role of a large firm from which
workers can be poached. Because career path #1 involves being poached from the same firm
twice, the origin effects cancel. Hence, it is as if the standard AKM model applies: expected wage
growth depends entirely on the change in destination effects associated with the worker's second
job transition.
   The expected wage growth of a worker with career path #2 is substantially more complex,
depending on the identities of each of her first three employers. Wage growth between such a
worker's last two jobs will tend to be higher when her second job transition yields an improvement
in destination effects or when her first job transition yielded an increase in origin effects.
   The wage growth expected of a worker with career path #3 depends on the origin effect of her
second job. However, it does not depend at all on the identity of her first employer j (i, 1), from
which she was displaced. This exclusion restriction reflects a key assumption of standard sequential
auction models: upon being displaced, a worker's outside option becomes non-employment, which


                                                    7
has the same value regardless of which employer displaced her.                  We scrutinize this exclusion
restriction empirically in a later section and find that it provides a good approximation to the
wage dynamics found in our data.



2     Sequential auction models
In this section we develop a connection between the DWL specification and some popular variants
of the sequential auction model. We start with the textbook PVR model of Postel-Vinay and Robin
(2002b) and then progress to the extension of Bagger et al. (2014) that allows workers to extract a
share of the match surplus from the poaching employer. Each model is shown to map into a variant
of the DWL framework and to imply certain restrictions on the covariance structure of the origin
and destination effects.


2.1       The PVR model
Workers are indexed by their productivity level           and have flow utility over wages U (w). When
unemployed, workers receive flow utility with wage equivalent value b. Firms are indexed by
their productivity p. Workers engage in random search on and off the job, which leads them to
encounter firm types drawn from a common distribution F with bounded support and survival
                 ¯ . The marginal product of a worker of type when matched with a firm of type
function denoted F
p is p.
    Though workers engage in random search, firms have full information regarding worker reservation
wages. Upon meeting a worker, a firm will make a take it or leave it offer of a piece rate wage
contract. Mobility is efficient: workers only accept offers from more productive firms. If a less
productive firm contacts an employed worker, the incumbent firm offers the worker the smallest
raise necessary to retain her. If a more productive firm contacts a worker, it offers her the lowest
wage needed to compel her to leave the incumbent firm. PVR show that the "poaching wage"
( , p, q ) required to compel a worker of type      to quit a firm of type q for a firm of type p > q
solves:
                                                               p
                           U ( ( , p, q )) = U ( q ) -             ¯ (x) U ( x) dx,
                                                                   F
                                                           q

where the constant   0 is an increasing function of the offer arrival rate and a decreasing function
of the discount rate and an exogenous separation rate. In words, the flow utility of the poaching
wage must equal the flow utility that would result if the incumbent firm were to pay the worker her
full marginal product q , minus a compensating differential for the future wage growth expected
to result from moving to the more productive poaching firm (as it counters outside offers). When


                                                    8
workers cannot search on the job then  = 0 and this compensating differential disappears. The
same equation turns out to govern the wage  ( , p, b) required to hire a worker from unemployment,
which is effectively a firm with productivity b ­ an idea that we have generalized to other labor
market states in the DWL specification.
   We follow PVR in considering the case where U (x) = ln x, which yields a log-linear specification
for poaching wages:
                                                                                           p   ¯ (x)
                                                                                               F
                      ln  ( , p, q ) =         ln      +           ln q        -                     dx .
                                                                                       q         x
                                         person type       poached firm type
                                                                                   type upgrade


The log poaching wage is the sum of a person effect, a term summarizing the productivity of
the poached firm, and a compensating differential for the upgrade in firm productivity. By the
                                 p ¯                                             ¯
fundamental theorem of calculus  F   (x)/x dx = I (q ) - I (p), where I (z ) = 
                                           q                                    F (x)/x dx gives            z
the compensating differential associated with upgrading from a firm with productivity z to the
most productive employer in the economy. This representation allows us to rewrite the poaching
wage in the form of our earlier DWL specification:

                                 ln  ( , p, q ) = ln           + I (p) + ln q - I (q )                          (3)
                                                       = ( )       = (p)       =(q )


   Here, poaching wages are the sum of a person effect ( ), a destination firm effect  (p), and an
origin firm effect (q ). For any given firm, the sum  (p) + (p) of its origin and destination effects
gives its log productivity ln p. The assumption that both firm effects are driven by a common latent
factor p is a strong restriction that the DWL framework relaxes by treating  and  as potentially
unrelated parameters.
   The PVR model implies that  and  are negatively correlated across firms : it takes high
wages to poach from productive firms, while workers can be enticed to join productive firms at
                        d (p)                   d(p)
low wages. Formally,     dp     < 0 while        dp    > 0 implying the two effects are (globally) negatively
dependent. This dependence tends to be quite strong. For example, when firm productivity is
               ¯ (x) = 1 - x) the across-firm correlation between  (p) and (p) is bounded from
uniform (i.e., F
above by -0.98. Moreover, the variance of destination effects across firms must be strictly smaller
than the variance of origin effects. Intuitively, this ordering arises because destination effects
capture only compensating differentials while origin effects capture both these differentials and
employer productivity.
   Because the PVR model requires a worker to always accept an offer from a more productive
firm, the mobility decision depends entirely on p and q ­ or equivalently on  (p) and (q ) ­ which
is consistent with the exogenous mobility assumption in (2). Note that equation (3) does not


                                                               9
include an error term specific to the worker-firm match. Such errors arise after the match has
been consummated as workers begin to attract outside offers. Because we only apply the DWL
specification to hiring wages, these within match errors do not generate a violation of the exogenous
mobility requirement in (2).


2.2       Bargaining extensions
Cahuc et al. (2006, C-PVR) generalize the PVR model by allowing workers to negotiate a share
  [0, 1] of the surplus in the employment relationship. Because the C-PVR model assumes
linear utility, a DWL representation holds for wage levels rather than log wages.1 Subsequent
work by Bagger et al. (2014, BF-PVR) extends the C-PVR model to accommodate human capital
accumulation while assuming flow utility is logarithmic.
      Applying the fundamental theorem of calculus to equation 7 of Bagger et al. (2014) reveals that
the deterministic solution to the BF-PVR model yields a DWL representation for log hiring wages
of the form:

           ln  ( , p, q, X , E |  ) = ( ) + g (X ) + E +  ln p + I (p |  ) + (1 -  ) ln q - I (q |  ),   (4)
                                                               = (p)                  =(q )


where X represents labor market experience, which can be included in the DWL model's covariate
vector Xim , and E is a transitory worker-specific productivity shock that provides a structural
interpretation to the DWL errors im . Because workers always accept offers from more productive
firms, im satisfies our exogenous mobility requirement in (2).
                                              ¯
    The tail integral I (z |  ) = (1 -  )2  z F (x)/x / 1 +  F ¯ (x) dx is decreasing in both its
arguments. Note that I (z | 0) = I (z ); therefore, when  = 0, equation (4) specializes to the PVR
reduced form in (3), albeit with additional covariates and a time varying error. When  is positive,
workers are able to capture a share of the destination firm's log productivity, which becomes a part
of the destination effect  (p). When  = 1, the origin effects disappear and (4) collapses to an
AKM style specification for log hiring wages. This connection between the AKM specification and
the sequential auction framework appears to have gone unnoticed in past work.
      As in the PVR model, the sum of a firm's origin and destination effects equals its log productivity.
Unlike in the PVR model, however, the BF-PVR destination effects are increasing in the hiring
firm's productivity whenever  > 1/2 because the direct wage effects of productivity overwhelm
their indirect effects via I (p |  ) that are attributable to compensating differentials. Large values
  1
     See, for instance, Lemma 1 of Papp (2013) which establishes additive separability of origin and
destination effects in the case where = 1 for all workers. Introducing heterogeneity in the flow value
b of non-employment (e.g., as in Postel-Vinay and Robin, 2002a) generates additively separable workers
effects.


                                                       10
of  can therefore lead  (p) and (p) to covary positively and for the destination effects to exhibit
greater variance than the origin effects. As described in the next section, these comparative statics
imply some over-identifying restrictions on the covariance structure of firm origin and destination
effects. Finally, as shown in Appendix B, the tail integral I (p |  ) is convex in ln p for any value
of  . Consequently, the origin effects must be concave in log productivity, while the destination
effects must be convex in ln p. As we demonstrate later, these shape restrictions are testable using
data on firm value added per worker.



3     Variance components
The log-linear DWL specification in (1) admits a parsimonious summary of the model parameters
in terms of variance components. A first set of variance components summarizes heterogeneity
across firms and can be used to derive bounds on worker bargaining strength. A second set of
variance components is useful for decomposing hiring wage variability across workers.


3.1     Variability across firms
We summarize the offered wage distribution with the following firm -level variance components:

                                     VJ [ ],   VJ [],   CJ [, ],

where VJ [·] and CJ [·] denote, respectively, sample variances and covariances across the firms in our
sample, weighted by average firm size over time. The covariance is only identified among the firms
where both j and j are identified, which requires both that some workers be hired by and quit
from firm j over the sampling period. We therefore report variance components only for such firms.
    The textbook PVR model implies that VJ [ ] < VJ []. By contrast, the BF-PVR model can
rationalize destination effects that are more variable than origin effects, but only when workers have
substantial bargaining strength. From (4) we have that  equals  ln p plus the variable I (p |  )
which is negatively correlated with ln p. By standard omitted variables bias logic, the coefficient
from a population projection of  onto ln p must therefore be smaller than  . Evaluating the
expression for this projection coefficient and rearranging yields the following bound on worker
bargaining power:

                                           1 VJ [ ] - VJ []
                                             +              .                                     (5)
                                           2   2VJ [ + ]

This bound reflects the intuition that as  grows large, the BF-PVR reduced form approaches an
AKM specification, and the variance of destination firm effects must become large relative to the


                                                 11
variance of origin firm effects. Note from (5) that for destination effects to be more variable than
origin effects, workers must possess  > 1/2, implying significant bargaining strength.
   As shown in Appendix B, the BF-PVR model additionally restricts the derivative of I (p |  )
to be greater than -(1 -  )2 / . When   1/2, this restriction can be exploited to derive the
following lower bound on the correlation between origin and destination effects:

                                          VJ [ ]            3      VJ []
                          J (, )                       1-                                         (6)
                                         VJ [ +  ]          10   VJ [ +  ]

The logic of this bound can be described as follows. When destination firm effects are more variable
than origin firm effects,  must be large. But strong worker bargaining power requires both the
origin and destination firm effects to be globally increasing in firm productivity, which is the only
dimension along which firms differ. Hence, the origin and destination effects must be strongly
positively correlated. Because the DWL model treats origin and destination effects as potentially
unrelated parameters, we are able to evaluate whether this restriction is satisfied empirically in the
data. When it is satisfied, an additional set of bounds, described in Appendix B, can be used to
bracket  . When it is not, the model is rejected.


3.2     Variability across workers
We also consider worker -level variance components, which provide a summary of the distribution of
accepted wages. For any two variables w and z , Cn [w, z ] denotes sample covariance between w and
z weighted by worker-match observations, while Vn [w] = Cn [w, w] gives the corresponding sample
variance of w. Letting W = {Wi }n
                                i=1 , the expected sample variance across workers of (covariate
adjusted) log hiring wages can be decomposed as follows:

        E Vn y - X  | W = Vn [] + Vn [ ] + Vn [] + 2Cn [,  ] + 2Cn [, ] + 2Cn [, ]                (7)
                              + E[Vn [] | W ] .

Here, exogenous mobility implies that all covariances between  and the remaining variables are
zero. The first three terms in this decomposition give the expected contributions to log hiring
wage variance of variability in worker effects , destination effects  , and origin effects . The first
two terms are familiar from the standard AKM decomposition. The variance of the origin effects
provides a metric of the contribution of state dependence to wage inequality.
   The three covariances quantify different aspects of sorting. The first term Cn [,  ] captures
the extent to which high wage workers tend to be employed at high destination effect firms. This
term is conceptually similar to the worker-firm effect covariance proposed by Abowd et al. (1999)
as a measure of sorting. However, because we fit the model to hiring wages, the interpretation is


                                                  12
potentially quite different. With random (i.e., undirected) search, a high wage worker is no more
likely to draw an offer from a high wage firm. Hence, in the PVR model this covariance should
be zero. Bagger and Lentz (2019) add endogenous search effort to the C-PVR framework, which
can generate positive assortative matching between worker and firm productivities. Note however
that productivity based sorting need not yield a positive correlation between worker effects and
destination effects when workers exhibit low bargaining strength.
    The next term, Cn [, ] captures the extent to which high wage workers tend to be poached
from firms with high origin effects. We are not aware of previous estimates of this parameter.
Again, with random search, this covariance should be small. Finally, Cn [, ] captures the extent
to which workers poached from high origin effect firms tend to be hired by high destination effect
firms. In the PVR model, only highly productive (and therefore low  ) destination firms can poach
from high  sources, which implies this covariance will be negative when search is undirected.
    The last line of (7) gives the "unexplained" variance in log hiring wages. Because little is known
about the hiring wage errors, we avoid imposing that they are homoscedastic, instead allowing each
error im its own variance parameter. We provide evidence later in the paper that heteroscedasticity
is empirically important.
    The variance decomposition in (7) is only identified among worker-firm matches where the origin
and destination effects, j (i,m) and h(i,m) , are separately identified. A discussion of the mobility
patterns that yield identification of the DWL model is given in Appendix C. We note there that
pairwise differences among workers who share certain aspects of their career path play a crucial role
in identifying the parameters of the model. Furthermore, as established in Lemma 1 of Kline et al.
(2020), unbiased estimators of the variance components only exist if identification holds when any
single worker-firm match is dropped from the sample. We therefore restrict our estimation sample
to ensure that these requirements are satisfied using an algorithm described in Appendix D.



4     Leave-out estimation
We now briefly review the leave-out estimation procedure of Kline et al. (2020), which enables
consistent estimation of variance components in the presence of unrestricted heteroscedasticity.
One can think of this procedure as a high dimensional version of the asymptotic bias correction
procedure utilized by Krueger and Summers (1988), who estimated the variance of industry wage
effects by subtracting an average squared standard error from the sample variance of estimated
industry effects. With many regressors, robust standard errors can be heavily biased (Cattaneo
et al., 2018), which undermines the consistency of such approaches. The Kline et al. (2020) estimator
circumvents this problem by developing a (squared) standard error estimator that remains unbiased
when the number of regressors grow in proportion to the sample size.


                                                 13
       For expositional clarity, it is useful to map the observations in our data to a single index
                                  n
  {1, . . . , L} where L =        i=1 Mi   gives the total sample size. The DWL specification in (1) can
then be written compactly as:

                                      y =Z + ,           for     = 1, . . . , L,

where y = yim ,  = im , and Z collects the vectors of worker indicators, hiring firm indicators,
hiring origin indicators, and time varying covariates for the worker-firm match (i, m). The unknown
regression coefficients are collected in the vector  .
       Any of the variance components we study can be written as a quadratic form:

                                                      =  A

for some square matrix A.2 Let Szz =           L
                                                =1 Z   Z give the design matrix, which is invertible in our
restricted estimation sample. The OLS estimator of  is:

                                               L                        L
                                         -1                   -1
                                    ^ = Szz
                                                    Z y =  + Szz             Z.
                                               =1                       =1


The plug-in estimator of the variance component  is ^PI = ^ A^.
       We assume the hiring wage errors  are mutually independent across jobs. Some evidence for
this assumption will be provided later in the paper. Under independence, the plug-in estimator
exhibits a bias of
                                                                              L
                               E[^PI | W ] -  = trace (AV[^
                                                           | W ]) =                B 2,
                                                                              =1

                   -1   -1
where B       = Z Szz ASzz Z measures the influence of the 'th squared error 2 on ^PI and  2 =
V[ | W ] is the variance of the 'th error.
       To remove this bias, we follow Kline et al. (2020) in constructing estimators of each  2 . Denote
                                                               -1
the leave- -out estimator of  by ^- = Szz - Z Z                      l=     Zl yl . An unbiased estimator of  2 is

                                                                 y y -Z ^
                                    ^2 = y y - Z 
                                                 ^-          =            ,                                    (8)
                                                                   1-P

             -1
where P = Z Szz Z gives the statistical "leverage" of the 'th observation on ^ . Our corresponding
   2
       See Kline et al. (2020) or the appendix to Card et al. (2013) for examples.




                                                        14
bias corrected estimator of  can be written
                                                        L
                                       ^KSS = 
                                              ^ A^-          B ^2.
                                                        =1

                                                                        ^ [^
In sum, the procedure consists of forming an unbiased variance estimate V   | W ] comprised of
(squared) standard errors and covariances of the estimated worker and firm effects in ^ that is
subsequently used to remove the bias ­ trace (AV[^
                                                  | W ]) ­ of the plug-in estimator. Kline et al.
(2020) provide verifiable conditions on the worker mobility network that ensure the bias-corrected
estimator is also consistent.
    Computation of   ^KSS requires evaluating the {B , P }L=1 . Because our baseline model contains
more than 4 million parameters, brute force computation is intractable. We therefore rely on a
variant of the random projection method (Johnson and Lindenstrauss, 1984; Achlioptas, 2003)
described in Kline et al. (2020) to approximate ^KSS .



5         Data
Our data are derived from social security records spanning the years 1990-2015 maintained by the
Italian Social Security Institute (Istituto Nazionale Previdenza Sociale, INPS). These records cover
all private-sector workers who were employed at some point by a firm sampled by the Bank of
Italy's INVIND survey and have featured in a number of recent studies of Italian wage inequality
(Macis and Schivardi, 2016; Daruich et al., 2020).
        The INPS-INVIND dataset records the annual earnings, days worked, months of employment,
and establishment and tax unit identifiers for each job-spell observed in a given year. We take
as our concept of a firm the tax unit identifier (Codice Fiscale ).3 Starting in 2005, the INPS-
INVIND data also record the stated reason for the dissolution of each job match, which allows
us to distinguish between job separations resulting from worker resignations and instances where
a firm fires a worker, lays her off, or declines to renew her contract.4 To take advantage of this
information, we limit our analysis to the period 2005-2015; however, we use the records back to
1990 to determine whether a worker is entering the labor force for the first time. Appendix E
provides details on our processing of the data.
    3
     These identifiers should be thought of as somewhat broader than the EIN definition used by the US
Internal Revenue Service. Song et al. (2019) report that the 4,233 firms listed on the New York Stock
Exchange possess 13,377 distinct EINs. By contrast, each publicly listed Italian firm has a unique Codice
Fiscale.
   4
     In Italy, firms are permitted to terminate permanent employment contracts for objective reasons (i.e,
financial distress) or subjective reasons such as improper conduct by the worker. Firms can also allow
temporary employment contracts to expire, which is a source of many displacements (Cahuc et al., 2016;
Daruich et al., 2020).


                                                   15
       To code employment histories, we extract the job start and end dates of all workers with two
or more jobs. A job transition is coded as a quit (Qi,m = 1) whenever a worker formally resigns
from their job. When the reason for separation variable is missing, we code the separation as a
displacement if the job start date comes more than a month after the separation date.5 Because we
seek to characterize the sequence of jobs each worker holds, we depart from the usual practice of
restricting the sample to a single dominant earnings record in a year (e.g., as in Card et al., 2013).
Rather, each worker-month is assigned a dominant employer (or non-employment) based upon the
earnings records in that year. When workers transition between multiple jobs in a year, each hiring
event is entered as a separate record. Transitions between such jobs are coded according to the
stated reason for separation in the usual way.
       In principle, Italian firms may seek to circumvent firing costs by using severance packages
to bribe their employees to quit to unemployment or to accept outside offers they would not
otherwise (Postel-Vinay and Turon, 2014). To assess whether such behavior leads to a substantial
overstatement of quits, it is useful to compare our estimates to the U.S., which faces substantially
weaker employment protection. Roughly 31% of the transitions in our data are coded as quits. This
estimate aligns closely with data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS): 29%
of JOLTS separations were voluntary in May 2009 while 38% were voluntary in May 2019. Given
that the Italian unemployment rate averaged 9% over our sample period, it is somewhat reassuring
that our estimate is closer to the JOLTS figure for May 2009 than for May 2019.
       We measure the hiring wage with the logarithm of the average daily wage in a worker's first
calendar year on the job. If the worker transitions between multiple jobs in a year he or she will
have multiple hiring wages for that year. Importantly, if a worker's contract is renegotiated in their
first year on the job, as might occur if he or she happens to receive an outside offer, the INPS
data typically generate an additional (modified) record for the new contract, effectively registering
the revised contract as a new hiring event. In such cases, we take the first contract with the new
employer as the hiring wage in that year. This feature of the INPS provides us with what we believe
is an unusually accurate approximation to the hiring wage concept featured in sequential auction
models.
       In later sections, we also leverage data from two additional sources that we link with INPS-
INVIND. A file called Anagrafica contains national tax identifiers, firm size, and sector (2-Digit
Ateco 2007 codes) for the universe of Italian employers. Using the tax identifiers, we merge in firm
value added records from CERVED, a dataset which provides financial statements for the universe
of Italian limited liability companies. CERVED is used in conjunction with Anagrafica to compute
a measure of value added per worker.
   5
    Around one fourth of all observed transitions fail to report a reason for separation and roughly 70% of
these transitions are coded as displacements.



                                                    16
6         Descriptive statistics
Panel (a) of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on the worker-match panel derived from INPS-
INVIND. The data contain roughly 13 million hiring events involving around 4.9 million individuals,
2.9 million of whom are men and 2.0 million of whom are women. Over the course of our study
period, these workers quit jobs at 876 thousand distinct employers and are hired by roughly 1.5
million distinct employers. While most hires are from non-employment (i.e., displacement events),
roughly a third of hires involve quits from another firm, and approximately 10% of hires are of
workers new to the labor force. Women are slightly less likely to be poached from another firm
than men, with 33% of male hires but only 29% of female hires resulting from quits from a previous
employer. Each hiring event has attached to it a single hiring wage derived as the ratio of the
annual earnings associated with the first employment spell with the employer in question divided
by the number of work days in that spell.
        As mentioned in Section 3, unbiased estimation of the variance components associated with the
DWL model requires that the origin and destination effects be estimable when any single person-
job observation is dropped from the sample. Panel (b) of Table 1 shows the results of pruning the
sample to enforce this requirement. The estimation sample has roughly a quarter fewer observations
and workers than the starting sample. The number of origins and destinations falls by roughly a
half in the pruned sample, primarily because many firms are associated with only a single hire. In
the resulting estimation sample there are roughly 14 hires per destination firm and 8.6 quits per
origin firm. Reassuringly, both the mean and variance of hiring wages change little with pruning.
        Appendix Table A.1 provides summary statistics on the firms in our base and estimation sample
and compares them to the broader population of Italian firms monitored by INPS. While the sectoral
mix of firms in our estimation sample is broadly representative of the Italian economy, smaller firms
are under-represented.6 However, the standard deviation of log firm size in our estimation sample
is very close to that in the population INPS records, suggesting our firms are no more (or less)
heterogeneous than the broader population of Italian firms.
        Figure 3 shows the distribution of months of non-employment between jobs by transition type in
both our starting and estimation samples. The distribution of non-employment durations in the two
samples is quite similar, with slightly longer tails present in the starting sample. The vast majority
of quits in our estimation sample involve very short bouts of non-employment between jobs, with
fewer than 20% of such transitions entailing non-employment spells longer than three months.
Interestingly, a non-trivial fraction of displacements involve only a month of non-employment
between jobs. A disproportionate fraction of these cases correspond to workers that were subject
    6
    The median firm in the formal population INPS records has only 2 workers, as also reported by Akcigit
et al. (2018), while the median firm in the INPS-INVIND data has 4 workers, and our pruned estimation
sample has a median firm size of 8 workers.



                                                   17
to domestic outsourcing events.
    Appendix Table A.2 reports the probability of experiencing a nominal wage cut by transition
type and the nature of the contract at the origin firm. Though wage cuts are more common for
temporary workers, displaced workers exhibit a decrease in hiring wages 8-9 percentage points more
often than do workers who were poached, regardless of initial contract type. Displacement is also
associated with an elevated chance of being hired at a wage below that paid by a worker's prior
firm in his or her final year before the separation took place. These findings align closely with
the U.S. based analysis of Sorkin (2018), who reports that cuts in annualized earnings are roughly
ten percentage points more common among workers who experience an intervening spell of non-
employment than workers who switch jobs directly. In the next section, we examine more carefully
some restrictions the DWL model places on sequences of hiring wages by job transition type.



7     Diagnostics
Before estimating the parameters of our main specification, we consider some diagnostics meant to
probe the qualitative predictions of the DWL model. Our first diagnostic examines whether being
hired from non-employment, rather than from another firm, affects the hiring wage. Figure 1 plots
the mean change in log hiring wages between the first and second job of workers who were displaced
from their first job against the mean change of those who quit their first job to take the second
job. Following Card et al. (2013), these means are broken out by the quartile of coworker wages at
the first and second job, yielding 16 pairs of coworker wage groups in total.
    The traditional AKM specification predicts that the labor market state from which a worker
was hired is irrelevant, which implies the wage growth between jobs is attributable only to the
difference in destination effects. Consequently, the plotted means should lie on a 45 degree line
through the origin. By contrast, the DWL specification of equation (1) predicts a wage penalty
for being displaced rather than from poached from one's first job of j (i,1) - U > 0. Visually, this
penalty should lead the means to lie below the 45 degree line.
    In practice, a linear fit to the mean wage changes yields a slope of 1.01 and an intercept of
-0.06, suggesting that displacement generates an average penalty of roughly 6% on subsequent
hiring wages. The finding of both a slope and R2 near one indicates that the displacement from
firms with high and low coworker wages yields nearly identical penalties. Note that one possible
rationalization of this finding is that the origin effects j (i,1) are nearly constant across firms. We
explore in the next section whether ignoring origin effects entirely substantially biases conventional
AKM estimates of destination effects.
    Our second diagnostic probes a key restriction of the DWL model: upon being displaced, a
worker's prior employment history should not affect their hiring wage. To test this prediction, we


                                                  18
examine the growth in hiring wages between the second and third jobs for workers displaced from
both their first and second jobs. Recall that, without time-varying covariates, the DWL model
predicts the wage growth of such individuals will obey the equation:

                                  yi3 - yi2 = j (i,3) - j (i,2) + i3 - i2 .

Note that this is an AKM-style model that exhibits no dependence on the identity of the first
employer j (i, 1). To assess the excludability of the first employer, Figure 2 plots the wage growth
of workers whose first job fell in the first tercile of coworker wages (a low wage employer) against
the wage growth of workers whose first job fell in the last tercile of coworker wages (a high wage
employer). The means are again classified into 16 groups, this time based upon the coworker wage
quartiles of the second and third jobs. In accord with the DWL model, these means are tightly
clustered around the 45 degree line, indicating that the identity of the first job does not affect mean
wage growth between the second and third job.



8         Results
The diagnostics considered thus far suggest the DWL model provides a reasonably accurate approximation
to the structure of changes in hiring wages across jobs. We turn now to a quantitative assessment
of the explanatory power of the DWL model. Table 2 reports bias corrected estimates of R2 for
three linear models of hiring wages.7 The first model ("AKM") includes worker and destination
fixed effects, while the second ("Origin Effects") includes worker and origin fixed effects. The third
model ("DWL") contains worker, origin, and destination fixed effects. Each model includes controls
for a third order polynomial in age at hiring (centered at age 40) and a set of indicators for the
calendar year of the hiring event.
        The AKM model explains 72% of the variation in log hiring wages in our sample.8 Replacing
the destination effects in the AKM model with origin effects lowers the R2 by roughly 14 percentage
points to 58%. Evidently, origin effects are much less predictive, unconditionally, of hiring wages
than are destination effects. Adding origin effects to the AKM model yields the DWL model, which
achieves an R2 of 72.5%. That adding origin effects to the AKM model explains only an additional
0.5% of the variance of wages suggests that where a worker is hired from is far less important for
her wages than where she is currently employed.
    7
     See Kline et al. (2019) for discussion of this fit measure, which can be thought of as a heteroscedasticity
robust version of the conventional adjusted R2 .
   8
     This R2 estimate is lower than what has been found in past work using Italian wage records (Devicienti
et al., 2019; Kline et al., 2020) because our sample does not include firm stayers, who mechanically enjoy a
perfect fit to their match means.



                                                      19
   The subdued influence of origin effects is particularly evident for women, for whom the added
explanatory power of the origin effects is only 0.3 percentage points. Allowing the origin and
destination fixed effects to vary by gender raises the pooled explanatory power of the DWL model
by just under 2 percentage points. Interestingly, the DWL model's composite explanatory power
is greater for the wages of men than for women, revealing that gender is a potentially important
source of heteroscedasticity in the wage error variances. Appendix Figure A.1 shows that our leave
out estimates of error variance ^ 2 vary systematically by worker gender, age at hiring, and employer
value added.
   A useful point of reference for the findings in Table 2 comes from Bonhomme et al. (2019)
who report that moving from a static model of wage determination to a fully dynamic model with
origin effects and within match dynamics raised the share of wage variance explained in Swedish
administrative records from 74.9% to 77.9%. Though they included incumbent wages in their
sample and used different methods to estimate wage decompositions, their static model explained
roughly the same amount of wage variance as our AKM specification does for hiring wages in Italy.
We conjecture that the greater increase in explanatory power Bonhomme et al. (2019) obtain with
a dynamic model is primarily attributable to their inclusion of lagged wages as a predictor of wage
growth rather than the inclusion of origin effects.


8.1     Worker-level AKM decomposition
As a benchmark for our DWL estimates, Table 3 reports a standard AKM decomposition of the
variance of log hiring wages into components attributable to worker and firm effects. After bias
correction, we find that destination firm effects explain 24% of the variance of wages in our pooled
sample, while worker effects explain 30%. The bias corrected correlation between worker and
firm effects is 0.31, indicating substantial positive assortative matching of workers to firms. This
correlation is estimated to be somewhat stronger among women than men.
   Appendix Table A.3 reports the results of fitting a corresponding AKM specification to the
set of firms that remain connected when leaving out all records associated with any single worker.
Consistent with the findings of (Kline et al., 2020, Table A.1), bias correcting the variance of
the firm effects by leaving out all records associated with a worker yields results nearly identical to
those obtained by leaving out a single worker-firm match. This finding corroborates our maintained
assumption that the DWL errors im are approximately independent across matches.
   Our estimate that firm effects explain 24% of hiring wage variability lies substantially above
the bias corrected firm effect contribution to Italian wage inequality reported in Kline et al. (2020).
This discrepancy appears to be jointly attributable to our restriction of the estimation sample to
hiring wages and job movers. Table 4 shows that including the within match wages of job movers



                                                  20
lowers the bias corrected firm effect variance share to roughly 19%.9 Additionally including job
stayers in the sample reduces the variance share of firm effects to roughly 16%. Evidently, the AKM
specification provides a more informative summary of hiring wages than the wages of incumbent
workers.


8.2          Worker-level DWL decomposition
Returning now to our pruned sample of hiring wages among job movers, Table 5 reports estimates
of the DWL specification, which decomposes the variance of log hiring wages into components
attributable to worker effects, destination effects, origin effects, and their covariances.              After
correction for over-fitting, the destination firm effects explain roughly 24% of the variance of hiring
wages, rivaling the worker fixed effects which explain 29% of the variance.10 When disaggregated
by gender, the destination and worker effects explain nearly the same shares of variance, with
destination effects actually exhibiting slightly more variability than worker effects among women.
       Comparing Tables 3 and 5 suggests that omitting origin effects yields little change to the
estimated destination fixed effects, an impression corroborated by Appendix Figure A.2 which
shows that projecting the DWL destination effects against the AKM firm effects yields a linear
relationship with a slope of 0.999. This finding allays to some extent the concerns of PVR who
note regarding AKM decompositions that "Estimating a static error component model when the
data generating process is dynamic will therefore attribute all historical differences (in the states
of individual wage trajectories at the first observation date) to person effects." In practice, person
effects are not especially sensitive to the omission of origin effects, both because origin effects are
not particularly variable and because they exhibit weak correlation with the worker effects.
       When included, the origin effects explain only 0.7% of the variance of hiring wages. Later we
demonstrate that these origin effects, though muted, exhibit systematic variation with respect to
firm value added that allows us to formally reject the null hypothesis that they are comprised
entirely of noise. The variance of origin effects among workers who quit (i.e., were "poached" from)
their previous job is nearly twice as large as that among all job movers, reflecting primarily that
non-employment serves as a single large firm in our framework. From panel (b) of Table 1, roughly
28% of hires are poaching events. Hence, variability of origin effects among the poached explains
         2
(0.076) ×0.28
          2     × 100  83.5% of the total variance of origin effects.
   (0.044)
       While the vast majority of the variance in origin effects is attributable to variation in origin
effects among workers who were poached from their previous job, the wage penalties associated
with job displacement or entering the labor force are non-trivial. New labor market entrants face
   9
      To bias correct the samples in this table we leave-out all wage observations per worker-firm match, which
allows for unrestricted correlation in the errors within a match.
   10
      Uncorrected estimates of the DWL variance components are provided in Appendix Table A.4.



                                                      21
an average hiring wage penalty of 5.1 log points relative to the average poached worker. The
wage penalty for job displacement (j (i,m) - U ) is estimated to average 2.5 log points among
workers actually involved in displacements and 3.5 log points among poached workers. This modest
difference in mean origin firm effects between workers who quit their job and those who were
displaced may indicate that less productive firms are more likely to engage in layoffs or to rely on
temporary work.
   As in the earlier AKM specification, we find that high wage workers sort to high wage destinations:
the correlation between the worker effects and destination firm effects is 0.32. By contrast, the
correlation between worker effects and origin effects is only 0.12, perhaps because skilled workers are
often displaced in our sample. Origin and destination effects are estimated to be nearly uncorrelated.
While women exhibit a stronger correlation between worker and destination effects than men, the
correlation between worker effects and origin effects is stronger among male than female workers.
Evidently, women are more assortatively matched to destinations, while men are more assortatively
matched to origins. We examine in a later section what role these sorting differences may play in
the evolution of the gender wage gap.


8.3     Firm-level DWL decomposition
Table 6 provides a variance decomposition across firms of the two dimensional fixed effect vector
(j , j ). The correlation across firms between their origin and destination effects is 0.25, indicating
that quitting a high wage firm tends to yield elevated wages at one's next job. Evidently, firms
that are good to be at are also good to be from. As noted in section 2, rationalizing this pattern
in the sequential auction framework requires that workers possess substantial bargaining strength.
   Recall that in the BF-PVR model summing a firm's origin and destination effects yields an
estimate of its log productivity. The size-weighted standard deviation across firms of the sum of
origin and destination fixed effects is roughly 0.29. For comparison, the size-weighted standard
deviation of log value added per worker is roughly 0.8. Since value added is likely a noisy measure
of productivity, and should hypothetically be adjusted for input variation, this discrepancy need
not pose a serious challenge to the model.
   More troubling is that the size-weighted variance of destination effects is approximately 13
times the size-weighted variance of origin effects. Ratios this large are difficult to rationalize in
a sequential auction model without extremely strong worker bargaining power. From Table 6
                            VJ[ ]-VJ[]
we obtain an estimate for    VJ[ +]      of 0.76. Plugging this number into (5) yields an estimated
lower bound for  of 0.88! Conducting this computation separately by gender, the corresponding
lower bound for men is 0.87 while the lower bound for women is 0.92. These lower bounds on the
bargaining strength parameter substantially exceed rent sharing estimates in the literature reviewed
by Card et al. (2018), which typically finds estimates of  below 1/2. They also exceed BF-PVR's


                                                  22
own indirect inference based estimates which average roughly 0.3.
       Equation (6) provides another check on the plausibility of this bargaining power estimate.
Rationalizing a worker bargaining share of 0.88 requires a correlation between origin and destination
firm effects of at least 0.84, well above our empirical correlation estimate of 0.25. Correspondingly
large violations of this model based correlation bound are present in both gender specific samples.
Hence, the covariance matrix of origin and destination firm effects is incapable of being rationalized
by the BF-PVR model.
       One explanation for these violations may be that our sample pools workers from the entire
Italian economy. Figure 4 plots estimates of the variability of firm origin and destination effects
among subsets of firms corresponding to selected sectors of the Italian economy.11 A first finding is
that substantial variability in firm origin and destination effects appears to be present even within
narrow sectors of the Italian economy. Unsurprisingly, temp agencies have very small origin and
destination effect variances, as workers are not meaningfully attached to these firms. However,
the restaurant and hotel sector exhibits large variability in destination effects but relatively muted
variability in origin effects. By contrast, law firms exhibit substantial variability in both origin and
destination effects. Indeed, the two sets of effects are roughly equally variable.
       Table 7 shows the corresponding lower bounds on bargaining power and the correlation between
origin and destination firm fixed effects in these sectors. The general excess variation in destination
effects across most of these sectors yields lower bounds on bargaining power that remain implausibly
high. Important exceptions are law firms, which exhibit a lower bound on  of 0.54, and the banking
and finance sector, which exhibits a lower bound of 0.61. However, law firms exhibit little correlation
between firm origin and destination effects, while the BF-PVR model requires a correlation of at
least 0.58. In the banking and finance sector the BF-PVR model requires a correlation of at least
0.57, which is only slightly above the estimated empirical correlation of 0.55. Yet in all other sectors
the empirical correlations are far below their lower bounds, implying the BF-PVR model cannot
rationalize the structure of wages in any of these industries.


8.4        Firm wage effects and productivity
The sequential auction framework predicts that origin effects will be increasing functions of productivity,
as more productive firms can offer higher wages to retain their workers. Destination wage effects,
by contrast, may be decreasing in productivity if workers are willing to take pay cuts to join
more productive firms. Figure 5 examines these predictions by plotting means of the estimated
destination and origin effects by centiles of log value added per worker. The destination effects are
normalized to have mean zero in the bottom vingtile of value added, while the origin effects use
the normalization N = 0.
  11
       The fraction of hiring wage observations falling into each sector is reported in Table A.1.


                                                        23
       Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows that the estimated destination effects are strongly increasing in value
added per worker, exhibiting a "hockey stick" pattern of the sort first documented by Card et al.
(2015). The origin effects are also increasing in value added, with a slope that appears much greater
in the top half of the value added distribution. Fitting a linear spline to this pattern with different
slopes above and below the median value added per worker confirms this impression. For inference
on these projection coefficients, we report standard errors that account for correlation between the
estimated fixed effects of different firms.12 Because both slopes are statistically distinguishable
from zero, we can conclude that the origin effects, though they exhibit muted variability relative
to destination effects, are not entirely attributable to noise.
       The bottom panel of Figure 5 plots the mean origin and destination effect in each value added
centile against the mean value of the sum of origin and destination effects, which should correspond
to a firm's log productivity in the BF-PVR model. To quantify the relative sensitivity of origin and
destination effects to productivity we fit a line to each series. Because both relationships appear
somewhat nonlinear, these lines are again fit separately to the top and bottom 50 value added bins.
Note that the resulting slopes are equivalent to those that would emerge from running two stage
least squares regressions of each type of fixed effect on the sum of fixed effects and instrumenting
with value added centiles in the relevant range.13
       Among the bottom 50 value added bins, the projection slope of average destination effects with
respect to average log productivity is 0.92. Recall from equation (4) that in the BF-PVR model the
derivative of the destination effects with respect to log productivity should provide a lower bound
on  . Hence, if we take the projection slope as a weighted average derivative estimate, we arrive
at an implausibly large lower bound for  of about 0.92. Among the top 50 value added bins, the
projection slope falls to 0.78. Recall however that the destination effects should be convex in ln p.
The finding of a lower slope at higher productivity levels suggests the destination effects are instead
concave in log productivity, a pattern the sequential auction framework cannot rationalize.14
       The origin effects are much less sensitive to productivity than the destination effects. The
projection slope of the average origin effects with respect to average productivity rises from only
0.03 among the bottom 50 bins to 0.22 in the top 50 bins. This pattern suggests the origin effects
are convex in log productivity, which contradicts the sequential auction model's prediction that
this relationship should be concave.
  12
     These standard errors were constructed according to equation 7 of Kline et al. (2020). We opt not to
implement the small sample correction to these standard errors developed by Anatolyev and Sølvsten (2020)
as the effective degrees of freedom in our dataset is very large.
  13
     Because estimating the sampling covariance between the projections corresponding to the first stage and
reduced form of this system is computationally burdensome, we refrain from reporting standard errors on
these coefficients.
  14
     Appendix B formalizes the connection between concavity/convexity of the underlying firm effects in
productivity and the patterns displayed in the bottom panel of Figure 5.



                                                     24
9        Why are origin effects so small?
A key finding of our analysis has been that destination effects are an order of magnitude more
variable across firms than origin effects, which themselves explain less than 1% of the variability
of hiring wages across job movers. The inability of the BF-PVR model to rationalize destination
effects that are so much more variable than origin effects is attributable to the assumption that
both sets of effects are a common manifestation of a single latent factor: firm productivity.
       Some sequential auction models introduce additional dimensions of firm differentiation by either
endowing firms with, or allowing them to produce, various non-wage amenities (e.g., Dey and Flinn,
2005; Taber and Vejlin, 2020; Lindenlaub and Postel-Vinay, 2016). While such amenities may
provide a plausible explanation for the relatively weak positive correlation between firm origin and
destination effects, they do not resolve the puzzle of why origin effects make such a trivial absolute
contribution to wage inequality. Amenities generate variation in origin effects among firms with
the same productivity because workers will demand higher wages to leave firms with more desirable
non-wage attributes. To rationalize nearly constant origin effects, firm productivity and amenities
would need to be strongly negatively correlated, which is contrary both to introspection and recent
empirical findings (Bonhomme and Jolivet, 2009; Lamadon et al., 2019).
       A more straightforward explanation for the relatively anemic variation in origin effects is that
many firms do not tailor their wage offers to hiring origins at all, committing instead to uniform
wage premia as in the classic wage posting framework of Burdett and Mortensen (1998). Our
finding that origin effects are most pronounced in law and finance is consistent with the predictions
of Postel-Vinay and Robin (2004) that the most productive employers should be more willing to
renegotiate wages in response to outside offers. Fitting a version of the mixture model of Flinn
et al. (2017) to Danish data, Caldwell and Harmon (2019) estimate that only 31% of manual jobs
and 51% of professional jobs engage in wage negotiation.15 This finding is in line with an array
of survey evidence indicating that most firms engage in ex-ante wage posting behavior (Hall and
Krueger, 2012; Brenzel et al., 2014), especially for lower skilled jobs (Brencic, 2012). Though a
proper analysis of the ability of mixture formulations to match the covariance structure of origin
and destination effects is beyond the scope of this paper, we suspect that rationalizing the estimates
reported in Table 6 with plausible bargaining parameters would require even greater shares of firms
engaged in wage posting than has been found in surveys.
       A complementary explanation for the muted variance of origin effects is that even firms that
do engage in negotiation have difficulty assessing the value of worker's outside options or fully
exploiting that information when it is available. Consistent with that view, J¨
                                                                              ager et al. (2020)
  15
    Partial integration of equation 34 of Flinn et al. (2017) reveals that the model admits a DWL
representation for wage levels among firms that engage in negotiation. Interestingly, the resulting origin
and destination effects may be concave or convex in productivity depending on the region of evaluation.



                                                   25
find no evidence that an Austrian reform to the generosity of unemployment insurance affected
hiring wages. Likewise, a growing experimental literature on pay transparency suggests firms face
important horizontal equity constraints that may curtail their ability to price discriminate at the
time of hiring (Card et al., 2012; Breza et al., 2018; Mas, 2017; Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2019).
   Finally, it is possible that the Italian system of employment protection leads firms to offer
workers especially large rents at the time of hiring in order to reduce the frequency of costly
separations. A referee suggests that such behavior could, in principle, contribute to our finding of
an implausibly high bargaining parameter  and a correspondingly low variance of origin effects.
Replication of our analysis in labor markets where separations are less costly would help to assess
the quantitative significance of this channel.



10      Incumbent wage growth and separations
Thus far, we have exclusively used the DWL specification to investigate the properties of hiring
wages. However, sequential auction models also provide a theory of within match wage growth
arising from the countering of outside offers. In this section, we briefly investigate how the DWL
estimates relate to incumbent wages and worker separation rates.
   Figure 6 plots job separation rates and incumbent wage growth by centiles of value added per
worker of the hiring firm. The x-axis reports the sum of the origin and destination effects by centile
of value added per worker, which in the BF-PVR model reveals the firm's productivity type. The
triangles give the three year job separation rates of workers by value added centile. As predicted by
models with efficient mobility, separation rates are strongly declining in firm productivity. While the
least productive firms have three year separation rates hovering around 80%, the most productive
firms have separation rates below 40%.
   The circles of Figure 6 give the three year wage growth of job stayers by value added centile.
In accord with the predictions of sequential auction models, wage growth tends to be higher at the
most productive firms. Interestingly, mean wage growth appears to be convex in firm productivity,
with muted returns to productivity in the bottom two thirds of the productivity distribution. There
is also a hint that wage growth stalls in the top two productivity centiles, perhaps because incentives
to search on the job weaken upon nearing the top of the job ladder.
   As always, the specter of selection bias complicates interpretation of these wage growth patterns.
Is the pace of wage growth that an average worker should expect from a firm increasing in its
productivity or are workers with unusually high wage growth opportunities simply more likely
to separate from less productive firms? While the contrast between the convexity of the wage
growth relationship and the approximate linearity of separations leads us to suspect that the most
productive firms offer elevated wage growth to all workers, convincing answers to such queries would


                                                  26
seem to require instrumental variables that shift separations but not potential wage growth. We
leave the hunt for such instruments to future research.



11         Gender differences
Sequential auction models posit that differences in employment history contribute to wage inequality
among otherwise equivalent workers. Table 1 revealed that women are less likely to be poached
than men. Does the tendency of women to be hired from worse labor market origins put them at
a quantitatively important disadvantage in negotiating their subsequent hiring wages? To answer
this question, we now study how the DWL parameters differ by gender and subsequently use those
parameters to decompose the gender gap in hiring wages into components attributable to origin
and destination effects.


11.1        Gender differences in DWL parameters
Figure 7 examines the relationship between origin and destination effects and measured productivity
in models fit separately by gender. The destination effects are normalized to zero separately by
gender in the bottom vingtile of log value added per worker, while the origin effects are normalized
so that N = 0 for each gender. Panel (a) of Figure 7 plots mean female destination effects against
mean male destination effects by centiles of firm value added. A linear fit to these means yields a
slope of 0.90, remarkably close to the slope of 0.89 reported by Card et al. (2015) in Portuguese data
and the slope of 0.85 reported by Casarico and Lattanzio (2019) using the universe of Italian social
security records. The finding of a slope less than one reflects the tendency for female destination
effects to rise less rapidly with productivity than male destination effects.16
       Panel (b) of Figure 7 plots mean female origin effects against mean male origin effects by
centiles of firm value added. A linear fit to these means yields a slope of only 0.75, suggesting
gender differences in origin effects are somewhat more pronounced than differences in destination
effects. When interpreted through the lens of the BF-PVR model, the estimated intercept of 0.02
indicates that firms must offer women somewhat higher wages to convince them to leave the least
productive employers. The linear fit suggests this gender difference fades at the most productive
employers: firms at the 95th percentile of value added are predicted to have nearly the same origin
effects for women and men.
       Also displayed in this panel are the male and female values of U , which captures the premium
for being hired from non-employment relative to being hired into one's first job. U is estimated to
be larger for women than men, which could either indicate that it is harder to poach women than
  16
    Appendix Figure A.3 reports the direct relationships of these gender specific effects with value added,
which turn out to be somewhat nonlinear.


                                                    27
men from non-employment or that female labor market entrants face a hiring disadvantage relative
to their male peers. Because the level of N is not identified, the DWL estimates cannot be used
to adjudicate between these explanations. However, the fact that the estimated U lies below our
fitted regression line reveals that the wage costs of job displacement are unambiguously larger for
women than men. The size of this gap is largest at the least productive firms where women face a
penalty roughly 2 log points greater than men.


11.2         Evolution of the gender wage gap
The finding of systematic gender differences in both origin and destination effects raises the question
of how these effects contribute to gender wage inequality. Figure 8 illustrates the evolution of the
gender gap in hiring wages for workers that enter the labor market in 2005, the first year of our
data. Because not all of these workers experience job transitions in each year, we adjust the gender
gap in hiring wages in each year for the change in each group's worker effects relative to the base
year of 2005. For reference, unadjusted mean hiring wages by gender are provided in Figure A.4
along with the mean wages of all employed workers, including those who are not new hires.
       At labor market entry, the composition adjusted gender gap in hiring wages hovers around
20 log points and is almost entirely explained by the gap in destination effects. By construction,
the gender gap in origin effects is zero in 2005 because all workers are new labor market entrants
and N has been normalized to zero for both genders. As the cohort ages into the labor market,
the gender gap in hiring wages grows, with little commensurate change in the destination effects
gap. Perhaps surprisingly, the origin effects gap grows slightly negative with experience, but the
magnitude of this gap is negligible. By 2015, the composition adjusted gender gap in hiring wages
has increased to a staggering 35 log points with essentially none of this increase explained by origin
or destination effects.
       Past work suggests the dynamics of the gender wage gap are especially pronounced among
highly skilled workers (Bertrand et al., 2010). Panel (b) of Figure 8 plots results for the subsample
of workers that were ages 25-27 when entering the labor market in 2005. Although our data do not
allow us to directly measure education, the late entry of these workers to the labor force is likely due
to educational delays. Late entry also puts these workers at prime fertility ages over the first ten
years of their careers, a factor which recent research suggests is an important mediator of gender
wage gaps (Kleven et al., 2019).17 To illustrate these life-cycle effects, we plot the composition
adjusted gaps for these workers by age at hiring. Upon entry, these workers exhibit a relatively
small composition adjusted gender gap in hiring wages of roughly 12 log points, which is again
almost entirely explained by destination effects. But as this cohort ages into the labor market, the
gender gap in hiring wages explodes, reaching 40 log points by age 35. During this period, the
  17
       In 2018, the average age of an Italian woman giving birth to her first child was 31 (Istat, 2018).


                                                        28
gap in destination effects rises to 17 log points, while the gap in origin effects remains negligible.
Hence, destination effects explain about 18% of the growth in the hiring wage gender gap for this
cohort, while origin effects explain none of the growth.
   We conclude that women tend not to face a quantitatively important disadvantage in terms
of where they are hired from. Rather, the gender gap in hiring wages is attributable in part to
differences in where they are currently employed, differences that emerge early on. In later years
the gender gap expands for reasons that likely have to do with childbearing and career interruption,
rather than job ladders.



12      Conclusion
Sequential auction models provide a coherent and influential framework for interpreting wage
dynamics in matched employer-employee data. The results of this paper demonstrate the potential
for unrestricted worker-firm fixed effects estimators of the sort pioneered by AKM to assist in
evaluating semi-parametric formulations of these models. A key finding has been that the immense
variation in destination firm effects relative to origin firm effects is difficult to rationalize with
traditional sequential auction models where firms are differentiated only by productivity. The
existence of a large subpopulation of wage posting firms is a plausible explanation for this excess
variance that is consistent with both the recent work of Caldwell and Harmon (2019) and survey
evidence from several countries (Hall and Krueger, 2012; Brencic, 2012; Brenzel et al., 2014).
   The finding that origin effects are especially pronounced among firms in law and finance suggests
that wage competition in these sectors may be better approximated by the sequential auction
framework than is true for the rest of the Italian labor market. A potentially fruitful avenue for
future research is to investigate more carefully the ability of econometric models of hiring wages to
distinguish between modes of wage competition in different markets. Also of interest is establishing
which particular firms tend to engage in sequential auction style wage setting conduct, a task
analogous to the large scale testing problems considered in Kline and Walters (2021).
   Finally, our focus on hiring wages was motivated primarily as a means of circumventing endogeneity
problems that arise in the study of within match dynamics. Surprisingly little is known about how
the parameters governing hiring wages relate to those governing the wage growth of incumbent
workers. In their original contribution, AKM (briefly) considered wage growth models allowing
for firm specific tenure profiles (see also Margolis, 1996; Arellano-Bover and Saltiel, 2020). How
such tenure profile parameters relate to origin and destination effects in hiring wages awaits further
study. Investigation of this relationship could be particularly helpful for better understanding the
role of firm heterogeneity in mediating the earnings effects of job displacement (Lachowska et al.,
2020; Schmieder et al., 2018).


                                                 29
References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High wage workers and high wage firms.
  Econometrica 67 (2), 251­333.

Achlioptas, D. (2003). Database-friendly random projections: Johnson-lindenstrauss with binary
  coins. Journal of computer and System Sciences 66 (4), 671­687.

Ahn, H. and J. L. Powell (1993). Semiparametric estimation of censored selection models with a
  nonparametric selection mechanism. Journal of Econometrics 58 (1-2), 3­29.

Akcigit, U., S. Baslandze, and F. Lotti (2018).       Connecting to power: political connections,
  innovation, and firm dynamics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Anatolyev, S. and M. Sølvsten (2020). Testing many restrictions under heteroskedasticity. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2003.07320 .

Arellano-Bover, J. and F. Saltiel (2020). Differences in on-the-job learning across firms.

Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2014). Tenure, experience, human
  capital, and wages: A tractable equilibrium search model of wage dynamics. American Economic
  Review 104 (6), 1551­96.

Bagger, J. and R. Lentz (2019). An empirical model of wage dispersion with sorting. The Review
  of Economic Studies 86 (1), 153­190.

Bank of Italy, I. (2018). Survey on industrial and service firms. Technical report.

Bertrand, M., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2010). Dynamics of the gender gap for young professionals
  in the financial and corporate sectors. American economic journal: applied economics 2 (3), 228­
  55.

Bonhomme, S. and G. Jolivet (2009). The pervasive absence of compensating differentials. Journal
  of Applied Econometrics 24 (5), 763­795.

Bonhomme, S., T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa (2019). A distributional framework for matched
  employer employee data. Econometrica 87 (3), 699­739.

Brencic, V. (2012). Wage posting: evidence from job ads. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
               economique 45 (4), 1529­1559.
  canadienne d'´

Brenzel, H., H. Gartner, and C. Schnabel (2014). Wage bargaining or wage posting? evidence from
  the employers' side. Labour Economics 29, 41­48.

                                                 30
Breza, E., S. Kaur, and Y. Shamdasani (2018). The morale effects of pay inequality. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 133 (2), 611­663.

Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998). Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment.
  International Economic Review , 257­273.

Cahuc, P., O. Charlot, and F. Malherbet (2016). Explaining the spread of temporary jobs and its
  impact on labor turnover. International Economic Review 57 (2), 533­572.

Cahuc, P., F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2006). Wage bargaining with on-the-job search:
  Theory and evidence. Econometrica 74 (2), 323­364.

Caldwell, S. and N. Harmon (2019). Outside options, bargaining, and wages: Evidence from
  coworker networks. Unpublished manuscript, Univ. Copenhagen .

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018). Firms and labor market inequality:
  Evidence and some theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1), S13­S70.

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, and P. Kline (2015). Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:
  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women.          The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131 (2), 633­686.

Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west german
  wage inequality. The Quarterly journal of economics 128 (3), 967­1015.

Card, D., A. Mas, E. Moretti, and E. Saez (2012). Inequality at work: The effect of peer salaries
  on job satisfaction. American Economic Review 102 (6), 2981­3003.

Casarico, A. and S. Lattanzio (2019). What firms do: Gender inequality in linked employer-
  employee data.

Cattaneo, M. D., M. Jansson, and W. K. Newey (2018).                 Inference in linear regression
  models with many covariates and heteroscedasticity.         Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 113 (523), 1350­1361.

Cullen, Z. B. and B. Pakzad-Hurson (2019). Equilibrium effects of pay transparency in a simple
  labor market. Technical report.

Daruich, D., S. Di Addario, and R. Saggio (2020). The effects of partial employment protection
  reforms: Evidence from italy. Technical report, Mimeo.

Devicienti, F., B. Fanfani, and A. Maida (2019). Collective bargaining and the evolution of wage
  inequality in italy. British Journal of Industrial Relations 57 (2), 377­407.

                                                 31
Dey, M. S. and C. J. Flinn (2005). An equilibrium model of health insurance provision and wage
  determination. Econometrica 73 (2), 571­627.

Flinn, C., J. Mabli, J. Mullins, and O. London (2017). Firms' choices of wage-setting protocols in
  the presence of minimum wages.

Hall, R. E. and A. B. Krueger (2012). Evidence on the incidence of wage posting, wage bargaining,
  and on-the-job search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (4), 56­67.

Honor´
     e, B. E. and J. L. Powell (1994). Pairwise difference estimators of censored and truncated
  regression models. Journal of Econometrics 64 (1-2), 241­278.

Istat (2018). Natalit`
                     a e fecondit`
                                 a della popolazione residente.

J¨
 ager, S., B. Schoefer, S. Young, and J. Zweim¨
                                              uller (2020). Wages and the value of nonemployment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4), 1905­1963.

Johnson, W. B. and J. Lindenstrauss (1984). Extensions of lipschitz mappings into a hilbert space.
  Contemporary mathematics 26 (189-206), 1.

Kleven, H., C. Landais, and J. E. Sogaard (2019). Children and gender inequality: Evidence from
  denmark. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11 (4), 181­209.

Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Sølvsten (2019). Leave-out estimation of variance components.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Sølvsten (2020). Leave-out estimation of variance components.
  Econometrica 88 (5), 1859­1898.

Kline, P. and C. Walters (2021). Reasonable doubt: Experimental detection of job-level employment
  discrimination. Econometrica 89 (2), 765­792.

Krueger, A. B. and L. H. Summers (1988). Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage structure.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 259­293.

Lachowska, M., A. Mas, and S. A. Woodbury (2020). Sources of displaced workers' long-term
  earnings losses. American Economic Review 110 (10), 3231­66.

Lamadon, T., M. Mogstad, and B. Setzler (2019). Imperfect competition, compensating differentials
  and rent sharing in the us labor market. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lindenlaub, I. and F. Postel-Vinay (2016).       Multidimensional sorting under random search.
  Manuscript, University College London .

                                                32
Macis, M. and F. Schivardi (2016). Exports and wages: Rent sharing, workforce composition, or
  returns to skills? Journal of Labor Economics 34 (4), 945­978.

Margolis, D. N. (1996). Cohort effects and returns to seniority in france. Annales d'Economie et
  de Statistique , 443­464.

Mas, A. (2017). Does transparency lead to pay compression? Journal of Political Economy 125 (5),
  1683­1721.

Papp, T. K. (2013). Frictional wage dispersion with bertrand competition: An assessment. Review
  of Economic Dynamics 16 (3), 540­552.

Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002a). The distribution of earnings in an equilibrium search
  model with state-dependent offers and counteroffers. International Economic Review 43 (4),
  989­1016.

Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002b). Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and employer
  heterogeneity. Econometrica 70 (6), 2295­2350.

Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2004). To match or not to match?: Optimal wage policy with
  endogenous worker search intensity. Review of Economic Dynamics 7 (2), 297­330.

Postel-Vinay, F. and H. Turon (2014). The impact of firing restrictions on labour market equilibrium
  in the presence of on-the-job search. The Economic Journal 124 (575), 31­61.

Schmieder, J., T. von Wachter, and J. Heining (2018). The costs of job displacement over the
  business cycle and its sources: evidence from germany. Technical report, UCLA, Mimeo.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. Von Wachter (2019). Firming up inequality.
  The Quarterly journal of economics 134 (1), 1­50.

Sorkin, I. (2018).     Ranking firms using revealed preference.         The quarterly journal of
  economics 133 (3), 1331­1393.

Taber, C. and R. Vejlin (2020). Estimation of a roy/search/compensating differential model of the
  labor market. Econometrica 88 (3), 1031­1069.




                                                33
                                        Figure 1: Hiring wage penalty for displacement from first job

                                                               Constant: -.06; Slope: 1.01; R2: .99
                                        .6



                                        .4
  Wage change among displaced workers




                                        .2



                                         0



                                        -.2



                                        -.4



                                        -.6
                                              -.6   -.4         -.2              0               .2   .4       .6
                                                              Wage change among poached workers




Note: Each point represents a pair of mean residualized log hiring wage changes between job#1 and job#2
for an origin/destination cell defined by the coworker wage quartile of the two jobs. The x-axis depicts mean
residuals for workers that quit their first job. The y-axis depicts mean residuals for workers that were displaced
from their first job. Log wage changes were residualized via an OLS regression including all main effects and
pairwise interactions of sex, calendar year, age at labor market entry, and current age. All means were computed
on the sample described in the first column of Table 1b.




                                                                       34
Figure 2: Hiring wage growth among consecutively displaced, by wage type of first job
                                                                   .5
     Wage change among workers first hired by high-wage employer




                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                     Constant: -.007; Slope: .999




                                                                   -.5
                                                                         -.5                               0                                                        .5
                                                                               Wage change among workers first hired by low-wage employer




   Note: Each point represents a pair of mean residualized log hiring wage changes between job#2 and job#3
   for an origin/destination cell defined by the coworker wage quartile of the two jobs. The x-axis reports mean
   residuals for workers displaced from both job#1 and job#2 that had a low-wage employer in their first job. The
   y-axis reports mean residuals for workers displaced from both job#1 and job#2 that had a high-wage employer
   in their first job. The wage type of the employer is based on terciles of the co-workers' wage distribution
   (low wage = first tercile, high wage = last tercile). Log wage changes were residualized via an OLS regression
   including all main effects and pairwise interactions of gender, calendar year, age at labor market entry, and
   current age. All means were computed on the sample described in the first column of Table 1b.




                                                                                                     35
                           Figure 3: Months of Non-Employment Between Jobs
                                           (a) Starting Sample

                      .8


                      .7


                      .6


                      .5
            Density




                      .4                                      Quit --- Median: 1; p25: 1; p75: 4
                                                           Displaced --- Median: 5; p25: 1; p75: 18
                      .3


                      .2


                      .1


                      0
                           0                20                                40                      60
                                            Months of Non-employment b/w Jobs

                                                    Quit          Displaced




                                         (b) Estimation Sample

                      .8


                      .7


                      .6


                      .5
            Density




                      .4                                      Quit --- Median: 1; p25: 1; p75: 3
                                                           Displaced --- Median: 5; p25: 1; p75: 17
                      .3


                      .2


                      .1


                      0
                           0                20                                40                      60
                                            Months of Non-employment b/w Jobs

                                                    Quit          Displaced




Note: This figure provides the histogram of the months of non-employment spent between jobs in our starting
sample (Panel a) and estimation sample (Panel b); see Table 1 for sample dimensions. The histogram is
computed for workers who quit (i.e., resigned from) their previous job and those who were displaced (i.e., did
not resign). Months of non-employment have been winsorized at 60 months.




                                                      36
                                                   Figure 4: Variability of origin and destination effects by sector
                                                                       Restaurants/Hotels
                                        .3
                                                       Managment              Transportation/Cleaning/Security
                                                      Consulting/Tech
Std. Destination Effects (Corrected)




                                                  Hairdressing                Education/Health
                                                  Care Centers        Other

                                        .2                          Construction
                                                                   Manufacturing

                                                                   Retail
                                                                                                 Law Firms



                                        .1                             Banking/Finance


                                                    Temp Agencies




                                        0
                                             0                                   .1                                     .2                                .3
                                                                                      Std. Origin Effects (Corrected)



                                       Note: This figure reports bias corrected standard deviations of destination and origin firm effects for selected
                                       sectors of the Italian economy (2-Digit 2007 Ateco codes). All variance components are firm-size weighted. The
                                       dashed line is the 45 degree line. The sample is comprised of firms described in Table 1b for which both an
                                       origin and destination effect are identified.




                                                                                               37
                             Figure 5: Origin and destination effects by value added
                                                   (a) Value Added per Worker
                            .6

                                                                                  Regression slope for  (above median): .016 (.0009)
                                                                                  Regression slope for  (above median): .129 (.0005)


                            .4
             Firm Effects




                            .2




                             0


                                                                                  Regression slope for  (below median): .013 (.001)
                                                                                  Regression slope for  (below median): .115 (.001)

                            -.2
                                        1            2                       3                          4                       5
                                                                Log Value Added per Worker

                                             -- Destination Firm Effects              -- Origin Firm Effects




                                                         (b) Sum of the Effects
                            .6


                                                                                  Regression slope for  (above median): .777
                                                                                  Regression slope for  (above median): .223
                            .4
             Firm Effects




                            .2




                             0
                                                                 Regression slope for  (below median): .916
                                                                  Regression slope for  (below median): .031



                            -.2
                                  -.2               0                        .2                          .4                         .6
                                                            Sum of Destination and Origin Effects

                                             -- Destination Firm Effects              -- Origin Firm Effects




Note: Panel (a) reports means of the destination effects (j ) and origin effects (j ) by firm-size weighted
centiles of log value added per worker. The sample consists of 177,193 firms for which both an origin and a
destination effect are identified and for which value added is non-missing. Origin effects have been normalized
relative to N , which has been set to zero. Destination effects have been normalized to have mean zero in the
lowest vingtile of the firm-size weighted distribution of mean value added per worker. Projection slope obtained
from regressing firm effects on value added in the microdata over relevant range of value added per worker.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are constructed using the estimator described in equation 7 of Kline
et al. (2020). Panel (b) depicts the same y-values as panel (a) but changes the x-axis to report averages of
j + j within each weighted centile of value added per worker. Projection slopes obtained by fitting mean
wages in each centile to above/below median centiles 38  of the value added per worker distribution.
                                                    Figure 6: Incumbent wage growth and separation rates by value added

                                                    .15                                                                                         1
  Log wage in third year on job - log hiring wage



                                                                                                                                                .8


                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                     Separation Rate
                                                                                                                                                .6




                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                    .05


                                                                                                                                                .2


                                                                                    Wage Growth
                                                                                    Fraction of Workers Separated over First Three Years
                                                     0                                                                                          0
                                                          -.2         0                      .2                      .4                    .6
                                                                      Productivity (Sum of Destination + Origin Effect)




Note: The x-axis reports the mean of j + j within each centile of employer value added per worker. The
circles report the mean log wage growth over the first three years of a match among job stayers for each centile
of value added per worker. The triangles give the fraction of workers hired into each value added centile who
separate from the job within three years. Sample consists of 111,380 firms for which both an origin and a
destination effect are identified and both value added and log wage growth is non-missing.




                                                                                            39
        Figure 7: Origin and destination effects by gender and value added
                                                                                        (a) Destination Effects



                                                             .3
             Destination Firm Effects, Female (Normalized)



                                                             .2




                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                           Constant:-.049.
                                                              0                                                                             Slope: .901.




                                                             -.1
                                                                    -.1             0             .1                  .2              .3                      .4
                                                                                        Destination Firm Effects, Male (Normalized)




                                                                                           (b) Origin Effects

                                                              .12


                                                             .105
             Origin Firm Effects, Female (Normalized)




                                                              .09


                                                             .075


                                                                                                                                           Constant:.023.
                                                              .06                                                                           Slope: .751.


                                                             .045


                                                              .03

                                                                          U
                                                             .015
                                                                      .015    .03       .045           .06        .075          .09        .105             .12
                                                                                           Origin Firm Effects, Male (Normalized)




Note: This figure plots means of estimated origin and destination effects for female workers against means
of estimated origin or destination effects for male workers. Sample consists of 98,730 firms for which both an
origin and destination effect are identified for each gender and for which value added is non-missing. The means
are computed within firm-size weighted centiles of average log value added per worker at the firm. The slope
reported in the figure is estimated across percentile bins. Origin effects for each gender have been normalized
relative to N , which has been set to zero. Each gender's destination effects have been normalized to have mean
zero in the lowest vingtile of the firm-size weighted distribution of mean value added per worker.


                                                                                                       40
                                        Figure 8: Gender wage gap and the DWL model
                                                        (a) Entered Labor Market in 2005

                                 .4



             Log Hiring Wage     .3



                                 .2



                                 .1



                                 0

                               -.05
                                      2005                                            2010                                2015
                                                                                  Year of Hire

                                                                         Adjusted-Hiring Wage Gender Gap
                                                                         Gap in Destination Effects -- 
                                                                         Gap in Origin Effects -- 




                                              (b) Entered Labor Market in 2005 at Age 25-27

                                 .5
                                             Adjusted-Hiring Wage Gender Gap             Gap in Destination Effects -- 
                                             Gap in Origin Effects -- 

                                 .4




                                 .3
             Log Hiring Wage




                                 .2




                                 .1




                                 0

                               -.05
                                      25                                               30                                  35
                                                                                  Age at Hiring




Note: Panel (a) reports means for individuals that entered the labor market in the year 2005, the first year of
our data. Panel (b) reports means for individuals first entering the labor market in 2005 who were age 25-27
at the moment of entry. In each panel, we plot the gap in adjusted log hiring wages between men and women
along with the corresponding gender gap in destination effects and the gap in origin effects. To account for
selection, we adjust the gender gap in hiring wages in each year for the change in each gender group's worker
effects relative to the base year of 2005. Origin, destination, and composition effects come from gender specific
models reported in Table 5.


                                                                                41
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                               Pooled                   Men                Women

Panel (a): Starting Sample
Number of Person-Job Observations                          13,029,554              7,840,247            5,189,307
Number of Individuals                                       4,895,253              2,936,275            1,958,978

Share hired from non-employment                                 0.59                   0.58                  0.60
Share poached from another firm                                 0.31                   0.33                  0.29
Share new entrants                                              0.10                   0.09                  0.11

Number of origin fixed effects                               876,395                623,478               432,317
Number of destination firm effects                          1,493,788              1,070,614              836,018

Mean Log Hiring Wages                                         4.0826                 4.2044                3.8986
Variance Log Hiring Wages                                     0.2939                 0.2427                0.3151

Panel (a): Estimation Sample
Number of Person-Job Observations                          10,100,836              5,860,789            3,730,985
Number of Individuals                                       3,194,370              1,849,723            1,224,858

Share hired from non-employment                                 0.61                   0.60                  0.63
Share poached from another firm                                 0.28                   0.29                  0.24
Share new entrants                                              0.12                   0.11                  0.13

Number of origin fixed effects                               328,377                223,156               111,606
Number of destination firm effects                           701,459                477,923               295,890

Mean Log Hiring Wages                                         4.0753                 4.1978                3.9001
Variance Log Hiring Wages                                     0.2794                 0.2215                0.3162

Note: Each starting sample consists of all person-job observations in INPS-INVIND from 2005-2015 for individuals that
held two or more jobs over this interval. Each estimation sample consists of person-job observations where the
associated statistical leverage is below one and for which we are able to identify both an origin and destination effects.
See text for details. All statistics are person-job weighted.
                                            Table 2: Goodness of Fit
                                                              Pooled               Men                Women

AKM                                                          0.7199             0.7311                0.6822
AKM (Gender-Interacted)                                      0.7349

Origin Effects                                               0.5809             0.5660                0.5452
Origin Effects (Gender-Interacted)                           0.5871

DWL                                                          0.7245             0.7370                0.6854
DWL (Gender-Interacted)                                      0.7427
Note: This table presents the goodness of fit (R2) from various models for the three estimation samples described in
Table 1. The model labeled "Origin effects" corresponds to a model with worker and origin effects and no destination
effects. "DWL (Gender-interacted)" corresponds to a dual wage ladder model where both destination and origin firm
effects are interacted with a gender indicator. "AKM (Gender-Interacted)" interacts gender with destination firm
effects while "Origin Effects (Gender-Interacted)" interacts gender with origin effects. All reported measures of the
goodness fit computed using the bias correction of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) after leaving a worker-firm match
out. See text for further details.
                        Table 3: AKM variance decomposition of hiring wages
                                                      Pooled             Men                                             Women
Std Dev of Log Hiring Wages                          0.5286            0.4706                                            0.5623

Bias-Corrected Variance Components
   Std Dev of worker effects                                                0.2887                 0.2558                0.2854
   Std Dev of firm effects                                                  0.2578                 0.2431                0.2824
   Correlation of worker, firm effects                                      0.3135                 0.2311                0.3461

Percent of Total Variance Explained by
   Worker effects                                                           29.83%                29.54%                 25.77%
   Firm effects                                                             23.78%                26.68%                 25.22%
   Covariance of worker, firm effects                                       16.70%                12.98%                 17.64%
   X' and associated covariances                                             1.69%                 3.91%                 -0.41%
   Residual                                                                 28.01%                26.89%                 31.78%
Note: This table reports the variance decomposition after fitting an AKM model to hiring wages only using the estimation sample defined in
Table 1b. Variance components corrected using the leave-out bias correction of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) via leaving a worker-firm
match out. Model includes controls for a cubic in age at hiring and year of hiring fixed effects.
                                          Table 4: Firm effect variance share by sample definition
                                                                      DWL                DWL Estimation     Sample in Column (2) Sample in Column
                                                                   Estimation          Sample restricted to with Hiring and Within- (3) adding Firm-
                                                                     Sample              Dominant Jobs          Match Wages              Stayers
                                                                         [1]                       [2]                            [3]                          [4]
Summary Statistics on Leave-out-Sample
  Mean Log Wage                                                      4.0753                    4.0852                         4.1765                       4.3115
  Std Dev of Log Wage                                                0.5286                    0.5269                         0.5443                       0.5525

  Number of Individuals                                           3,194,370                  3,004,100                      3,004,100                    6,022,869
  Number of firms                                                  701,459                    645,011                        645,011                      645,011
  Number of observations                                          10,100,836                 8,754,197                     21,609,391                   41,666,584

Contribution of Variance of Firm Effects according to AKM Model
  Std Dev of firm effects (Bias-Corrected)                           0.2578                    0.2555                         0.2399                       0.2217
  Fraction of variance explained by firm effects                     23.78%                    23.52%                         19.42%                       16.10%
Note: This table reports bias corrected AKM variance decompositions in four estimation samples. Sample in Column 1 corresponds to the pooled estimation sample described
in Table 1b and the dependent variable is hiring wages. Column 2 restricts the sample to dominant jobs in the year, that is, person-job observations that correspond to the
highest paying job of an individual in a particular year. Column 3 retains the worker-firm matches used in Column 2 but includes within-match wages along with hiring wages.
Column 4 adds to the sample of Column 3 firm-stayers, i.e. individuals that remained always during the period 2005-2015 with one of the 645,011 employers of Column 3. All
summary statistics refer to the leave-out connected sample. All reported variance components are weighted by the number of observations present in each sample and are
bias-corrected using the methodology in Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) leaving out all observations in a worker-firm match. Model includes controls for a cubic in age at
hiring and year of hiring fixed effects.
                                  Table 5: DWL variance decomposition of hiring wages among job movers
                                                                                                       Pooled                    Men                 Women

Std Dev of log hiring wages                                                                           0.5286                   0.4706                0.5623

Mean j(i,m-1) among displaced workers                                                                 0.0414                   0.0536                0.0687
Mean j(i,m-1) among poached workers                                                                   0.0508                   0.0543                0.0690
Origin effect when hired from non-employment (U)                                                      0.0163                   0.0136                0.0220

Bias-Corrected Variance Components
    Std Dev of worker effects                                                                         0.2823                   0.2479                0.2798
    Std Dev of destination firm effects                                                               0.2580                   0.2434                0.2828
    Std Dev of origin effects                                                                         0.0439                   0.0454                0.0431
    Std Dev of origin effects (among poached workers)                                                 0.0761                   0.0782                0.0798
    Correlation of worker, destination firm effects                                                   0.3157                   0.2351                0.3441
    Correlation of worker, origin effects                                                             0.1200                   0.1629                0.0757
    Correlation of destination firm, origin effects                                                   0.0316                   0.0308                0.0000

Percent of Total Variance Explained by
   Worker effects                                                                                    28.52%                   27.75%                 24.77%
   Destination firm effects                                                                          23.81%                   26.74%                 25.29%
   Origin effects                                                                                     0.69%                   0.93%                   0.59%
   Covariance of worker, destination                                                                 16.46%                   12.81%                 17.23%
   Covariance of worker, origin                                                                       1.06%                   1.66%                   0.58%
   Covariance of destination, origin                                                                  0.26%                   0.31%                   0.00%
   X' and associated covariances                                                                      1.66%                   3.51%                   0.09%
   Residual                                                                                          27.55%                   26.30%                 31.46%
Note: This table reports a DWL variance decomposition using the person-job observations described in Table 1b. The top panel reports the average of the origin effects
for individuals that were poached as well as the estimated origin effect when hired from non-employment. All origin effects are normalized relative to N, which we set
to zero, within each sample. Variance components are estimated using the bias correction of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) via leaving a worker-firm match out.
Model includes controls for a cubic in age at hiring and year of hiring fixed effects.
     Table 6: Firm-size weighted covariance structure of origin and destination effect
                                                                            Pooled               Men               Women

# of firms with identified destination and origin effect                  297,865             201,080             99,508

Bias-Corrected Variance Components
     Std of Destination Effects                                            0.2590              0.2449             0.2724
     Std of Origin Effects                                                 0.0707              0.0721             0.0510
     Correlation of destination, origin                                    0.2511              0.2491             0.3168
     Std of Destination + Origin Effects                                   0.2851              0.2720             0.2926

Lower Bound on Bargaining Power                                            0.8819              0.8703             0.9182
Lower Bound on Correlation of Destination, Origin Effects                  0.8409              0.8288             0.8824
Note: This table reports firm-level variance components. The sample is comprised of firms described in Table 1b for which we can
identify both an origin and a destination effect. Variance components are weighted by average firm-size over 2005-2015 as
recorded by official INPS records collected in the dataset Anagrafica , see text for details. Variance components corrected using
the leave-out bias correction of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) via leaving a worker-firm match out. The lower bounds on the
barganing power and correlation of destination and origin effects are based upon equations (5)-(6), see text for details.
                                             Table 7: Variability of Origin and Destination Effects by Sector
                                                          SD of Destination           SD of Origin        Correlation of Origin,           Lower Bound on               Lower Bound on
                                                               Effects                  Effects            Destination Effects            Bargaining Power                Correlation
   Retail                                                       0.1587                  0.0602                    0.2291                         0.8249                       0.7849
   Construction                                                 0.1957                  0.0636                    -0.0714                        0.9222                       0.8796
   Restaurants / Hotels                                         0.3206                  0.0705                    0.0669                         0.9415                       0.9020
   Hairdressing / Care Centers                                  0.2283                  0.0640                    0.1450                         0.8972                       0.8560
   Law Firms                                                    0.1471                  0.1357                    0.0636                         0.5378                       0.5721
   Manufacturing                                                0.1823                  0.0607                    0.2641                         0.8455                       0.8040
   Transportation                                               0.2786                  0.0852                    0.1022                         0.8921                       0.8507
   Cleaning / Security                                          0.2777                  0.0851                    0.0892                         0.8944                       0.8530
   Temp Agencies                                                0.0638                  0.0216                    0.1569                         0.8628                       0.8221
   Management / Consulting / Tech                               0.2732                  0.0770                    0.3737                         0.8568                       0.8149
   Banking/Finance                                              0.0995                  0.0701                    0.5476                         0.6111                       0.5709
   Education/Health                                             0.2401                  0.0871                    0.0170                         0.8796                       0.8399
   Other                                                        0.2284                  0.0681                    0.2879                         0.8613                       0.8196
Note: This table reports leave-out bias-corrected standard deviations of destination and origin firm effects within selected sectors of the Italian economy (2-Digit 2007 Ateco codes). All
variance components are firm-size weighted. The lower bounds on the barganing power and correlation of destination and origin firm effects are based upon equation (5)-(6), see text for
details. The sample and estimation method are identical to that of Table 6.
Appendix A                                           Additional results

                                              Figure A.1: Heteroskedasticity in the DWL Model
                                                         (a) Log Value Added per Worker


                                       .11



                                        .1
              Average Error Variance




                                       .09



                                       .08



                                       .07



                                       .06


                                              1.5          2.5                   3.5               4.5         5.5
                                                                      Log Value Added per Worker




                                                                  (b) Age and Gender


                                       .15




                                         .1
              Average Error Variance




                                       .05




                                         0



                                                                                                         Women
                                       -.05                                                              Men

                                                    20           30                 40              50         60
                                                                             Age at Hiring




                                                           2
  Note: Panel (a) displays means of   ^ defined in (8) by vingtiles of log value added per worker. Panel (b)
                    2
  reports means of ^ by age at hiring and gender.




                                                                            49
                                   Figure A.2: DWL destination effects vs AKM firm effects

                                                               Regression slope: .999
                        1.5

                       1.25

                          1

                        .75

                          .5
  Firm Effects - DWL




                        .25

                          0

                        -.25

                         -.5

                        -.75

                          -1

                       -1.25

                        -1.5
                            -1.5     -1.25   -1   -.75   -.5    -.25     0       .25    .5   .75   1   1.25   1.5
                                                                 Firm Effects - AKM




Note: Each point represents a pair of means. The x-axis reports the mean AKM firm effect within each firm-
size weighted centile of the AKM firm effects. The y-axis reports the mean in that centile of the corresponding
DWL destination effects. The reported slope comes from a micro-level regression of the destination effects on
the AKM firm effects. Both set of effects have been normalized to have mean zero in the lowest vingtile of the
firm-size weighted distribution of mean value added per worker.




                                                                  50
        Figure A.3: Origin, Destination, Firms' Characteristics and Gender
                                                        (a) Destination Effects

                           .4



                           .3



                           .2
            Firm Effects




                           .1



                            0



                           -.1
                                 2                          3                                 4                        5
                                                                 Log Value Added per Worker

                                      -- Destination Firm Effects, Women            -- Destination Firm Effects, Men




                                                            (b) Origin Effects

                            .2




                           .15
            Firm Effects




                            .1




                           .05




                             0
                                 2                           3                                4                        5
                                                                 Log Value Added per Worker

                                       -- Origin Firm Effects, Women                -- Origin Firm Effects, Men




Note: Panel (a) plots mean destination effects for men and women by firm-size weighted centiles of log value
added per worker. Panel (b) plots mean origin effects for men and women by firm-sized weighed centiles of
log value added per worker. Origin effects for each gender have been normalized relative to N , which has
been set to zero. Destination effects have been normalized to have mean zero in the lowest vingtile of the
firm-size weighted distribution of mean value added per worker for each gender. The first three centiles have
been trimmed from both panels. All estimates were computed in the subset of workers employed at firms that
have both a male and female firm effect, i.e. firms present in both the second and third column of Table 1b.


                                                                       51
                              Figure A.4: Gender Gap in Wages and Hiring Wages
                                                (a) Entered Labor Market in 2005

                        4.8
                                     Log Wage Men          Log Wage Women
                                     Log Hiring Wage Men   Log Hiring Wage Women


                        4.6




                        4.4
             Log Wage




                        4.2




                         4




                        3.8
                              2005                                  2010                        2015
                                                                    Year




                              (b) Entered Labor Market in 2005, Birth Cohorts: 1978-1980

                        4.8
                                     Log Wage Men          Log Wage Women
                                     Log Hiring Wage Men   Log Hiring Wage Women


                        4.6




                        4.4
             Log Wage




                        4.2




                         4




                        3.8
                              25                                     30                          35
                                                                    Age




Note: "Log Wage" displays log real daily wages for men and women in their primary job across year (Panel a)
or across the age profile (Panel b). "Log Hiring Wage" displays the mean log hiring wage of individuals hired in
a given year (Panel a) or hired at a particular age (Panel b). Panel (a) is computed only on the subpopulation
of individuals that entered the labor market in 2005. Panel (b) is computed only on the subpopulation of
individuals that entered the labor market in 2005 and were born between 1978-1980.




                                                               52
                                Table A1: Firm Characteristics across Samples
                                                                      Estimation Sample
                                                                                                   Universe INPS-INVIND                Universe INPS
                                                                           for DWL
Number of firms                                                           701,459                       1,870,558                     3,390,563

Summary Statistics on Firm Size
  Mean Log Firm Size                                                         2.19                            1.46                           1.00
                                                                            (1.09)                          (1.08)                         (1.02)

   Median Firm Size                                                           8.00                           3.75                           2.00

Sector Breakdown (%)
  Retail                                                                    11.28                           12.52                          13.66
  Construction                                                              7.33                             9.28                          10.25
  Restaurants / Hotels                                                      9.19                             9.93                           9.98
  Hairdressing / Care Centers                                               2.38                             2.44                           2.77
   Law Firms                                                                0.34                             0.69                           1.01
   Manufacturing                                                            14.94                           14.62                          14.24
   Transportation                                                           7.46                             6.61                           6.06
   Cleaning / Security                                                      5.74                             4.89                           4.46
   Temp Agencies                                                            2.09                             1.62                           1.42
   Management / Consulting / Tech                                           5.05                             4.93                           4.75
   Finance                                                                  3.49                             2.79                           2.46
   Education / Health                                                       6.65                             6.22                           5.99
   Other                                                                    24.05                           23.44                          22.97
Note: This table reports summary statistics for firms in three different samples over the interval 2005-2015. Column 1 reports statistics on the destination
firms that are present in the pooled estimation sample described in Table 1b. Column 2 reports statistics on the firms that we observe in the INPS-INVIND
matched employer-employee data. Column 2 reports statistics on the universe of firms observed in the Italian social security data as contained in dataset
Anagrafica described in the text. Sectors correspond to 2-Digit ATECO (2007) codes and corresponding shares are firm-size weighted. Firm-size is calculated
as the logarithm of mean firm size, where the mean is taken over the years in which the firm is active.
             Table A2: Probability of nominal wage cut by transition and contract type
                        Hiring wage current job < Hiring wage current job < Hiring wage current job <
                          Hiring wage prev job        avg wage prev job         last wage prev job
Permanent Contracts
Displacement                      0.31                      0.37                      0.38

Quit                                       0.23                             0.29                             0.31

Temporary Contracts
Displacement                               0.43                             0.49                             0.48

Quit                                       0.32                             0.39                             0.40
Note: The sample corresponds to all jobs that started between the years 2005-2015 and that lasted for at least twelve
months. Column 1 reports the share of cases where the hiring wage of the destination job is lower than the hiring wage of
the origin job. Column 2 reports the share of cases where the hiring wage of the destination job is lower than the average
wage of the origin job. Column 3 reports the share of cases where the hiring wage of the destination job is lower than the
wage of the origin job, calculated 12 months prior to separation. All statistics are calculated separately by type of transition
(quit vs displacement) and contract (temporary vs permanent).
           Table A3: Variance Decomposition in Poaching Wages - AKM Model
                                                                              Pooled                   Men                 Women
Estimation Sample
Number of Job-Year Observations                                          10,067,164               5,839,976             3,714,261
Number of Individuals                                                     3,173,400               1,838,010             1,215,720
Number of firms                                                            696,815                 474,529               292,883
Mean Log Hiring Wage                                                        4.1361                  4.2811                3.9285
Std Dev of Log Hiring Wages                                                 0.5240                  0.4611                0.5635

Variance Decomposition AKM Model - Uncorrected
Std Dev of worker effects                                                    0.3336                 0.2952                 0.3463
Std Dev of firm effects                                                      0.2736                 0.2591                 0.3034
Correlation of Worker, Firm Effects                                          0.2213                 0.1505                 0.2156

Variance Decomposition AKM Model - Corrected
Std Dev of worker effects                                                    0.2886                 0.2557                 0.2853
Std Dev of firm effects                                                      0.2578                 0.2431                 0.2824
Correlation of Worker, Firm Effects                                          0.3136                 0.2316                 0.3469
Std Dev of Firm Effects (Leaving Worker Out)                                 0.2561                 0.2417                 0.2798

Percent of Total Variance Explained by - Corrected
   Worker effects                                                            30.33%                 30.75%                25.65%
   Firm effects                                                              24.20%                 27.79%                25.12%
   Covariance of worker, firm effects                                        16.99%                 13.54%                17.61%
   X' and associated covariances                                              0.46%                 1.03%                 -0.16%
   Residual                                                                  28.01%                 26.89%                31.78%
Note: This table reports the variance decomposition based upon an AKM model applied to hiring wages only. The first panel reports
summary statistics of the sample used in the analysis, i.e. the leave-worker-out connected set defined in Kline-Saggio-Sølvsten (2020 - KSS).
The "uncorrected" panel reports variance components that are unadjusted for limited mobiliy biases. The "corrected" panel reports variance
components corrected using the methodology in Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) via leaving a worker-firm match out. We also report the
KSS-adjusted variance of firm effects when leaving the entire history of a worker out. See text for details.
                 Table A4: Variance Decomposition (Uncorrected Estimates)
                                                                    Pooled                Men              Women

Std Dev of log poaching wages                                      0.5286               0.4706             0.5623

Variance Components
   Std Dev of worker effects                                        0.3316             0.2925             0.3464
   Std Dev of destination firm effects                              0.2759             0.2614             0.3066
   Std Dev of origin effects                                        0.0782             0.0773             0.0866
   Correlation of worker, destination firm effects                  0.2087             0.1375             0.1981
   Correlation of worker, origin effects                           -0.0091             0.0046             -0.0455
   Correlation of destination firm, origin effects                 -0.0027             -0.0030            -0.0252
   R2                                                               0.8393             0.8533             0.8210
   Adjusted R2                                                      0.7238             0.7402             0.6818

Percent of Total Variance Explained by
   Worker effects                                                  39.35%               38.63%            37.95%
   Destination firm effects                                        27.24%               30.86%            29.74%
   Origin effects                                                   2.19%                2.70%             2.37%
   Covariance of worker, destination                               13.67%                9.50%            13.31%
   Covariance of worker, origin                                    -0.17%                0.09%            -0.86%
   Covariance of destination, origin                               -0.04%               -0.06%            -0.42%
   X' and associated covariances                                    1.70%                3.61%             0.01%
   Residual                                                        16.07%               14.68%            17.90%
Note: This table reports variance decompositions based upon the DWL model in the same sample as described in Table 5 of
the main text. Variance components are not bias corrected.
Appendix B                 Shape constraints
Here, we establish the shape constraints on  (·) and (·) referenced in the main text and give a
condition on the relationship between value added and p that ensures that these shape constraints
are transferred to the conditional means reported in Figure 5, panel (b).

Lemma B.1. Suppose that p is continuously distributed on an interval contained in the positive
half-line that is bounded and bounded away from zero. Then,

      I (z | )    (1 -  )2 F ¯ (z )        2                            2 I (z | )       (1 -  )2 zf (z )
               =-          ¯ (z )  -(1 -  ) /, 0 ,                                   =                     0
       ln z        1 +  F                                               (ln z )2          1 +  F  ¯ (z ) 2

where f is the density of p. Therefore, I (p| ) is non-increasing and convex in ln p, (p) is increasing
and concave in ln p, and  (p) is convex in ln p and increasing in ln p whenever   1/2.
                                                                                         
Proof. For z > 0, a change of variables yields I (z | ) = (1 -  )2  ln z G¯ (x)/ 1 +  G
                                                                                      ¯ (x) dx
where G¯ (x) = F
               ¯ (exp(x)) = P(ln p  x) is the survival function of ln p. The Lemma follows by
differentiation.

Lemma B.2. Suppose that p is continuously distributed on an interval contained in the positive
half-line that is bounded and bounded away from zero. Then,

                                          1 V[ (p)] - V[(p)]
                                            +                .                                                 (B.1)
                                          2   2V[ (p) + (p)]

Furthermore, if   1/2, then

                                         -1
                          V[(p)]                   1      1            V[ (p)] - C[ (p), (p)]
                   1+                                +        2   +                                            (B.2)
                        V[ (p) + (p)]              4      4              2V[ (p) + (p)]

which implies that

                                          V[ (p)]                 3         V[(p)]
                     ( (p), (p))                         1-                                                    (B.3)
                                        V[ (p) + (p)]             10      V[ (p) + (p)]

Proof. If two functions f (p) and g (p) are both increasing in ln p with f (p)/ ln p  Cf and
g (p)/ ln p  Cg , then C[f (p), g (p)]  0, Cf Cg V[ln p] . Since I (p |  ) is decreasing in ln p, we
therefore have that

     V[ (p)] - V[(p)] = (2 - 1)V[ (p) + (p)] + 2C[I (p |  ), ln p]  (2 - 1)V[ (p) + (p)]

and rearranging yields the lower bound in (B.1). As the derivative of I (p |  ) with respect to ln p

                                                  57
is also bounded from below by -(1 -  )2 / , it additionally follows that

      V[(p)] = (1 -  )2 V[ (p) + (p)] + C[I (p |  ), I (p |  ) - 2(1 -  ) ln p]
                                (1 -  )4       2(1 -  )3                      (1 -  )2
                   (1 -  )2 +              +                V[ (p) + (p)] =              V[ (p) + (p)]
                                  2                                             2

and rearranging yields the upper bound in (B.2). When   1/2, then 4I (p |  ) + 2(4 - 1) ln p is
increasing in ln p so that

     V[ (p)] - C[ (p), (p)] = (2 2 -  )V[ (p) + (p)] + C[I (p |  ), 4I (p |  ) + 2(4 - 1) ln p]
                                 (2 2 -  )V[ (p) + (p)]

and rearranging yields the lower bound in (B.2).
   Inserting the upper bound in (B.2) into the increasing function 2 2 -  we obtain that

                                                           V[ (p)] + 2C[ (p), (p)]
                     V[ (p)] - C[ (p), (p)]                                              3
                                                     1+       V[(p)]/V[ (p) + (p)]

and rearranging leads to the lower bound

                                                                                     3
                                        V[ (p)] 1 + V[(p)]/V[ (p) + (p)] - 1
                  ( (p), (p))                                               3.
                                        V[(p)]
                                               2 + 1 + V[(p)]/V[ (p) + (p)]

The reported lower bound in (B.3) is smaller than the preceding one, as [(1 + x)3 - 1]/[2 + (1 +
x)3 ] - x + 3x2 /10  0 for x  [0, 1].

Lemma B.3. Suppose that p is continuously distributed on an interval contained in the positive
half-line that is bounded and bounded away from zero. If ln p = m(V ) + U where U is independent
of V and m(v ) = E[ln p | V = v ], then E[(p) | V = v ] is increasing and concave in m(v ) while
E[ (p) | V = v ] is concave in m(v ) and increasing in m(v ) if   1/2.

   For V being log value added, Figure 5, panel (b), plots non-parametric estimates of E[(p) | V =
v ] and E[ (p) | V = v ] against m(v ).

Proof. Independence between U and V implies that ln p conditional on V = v is continuously




                                                      58
distributed with density fU (· - m(v )). Therefore,

          E[(p) | V = v ] =     (exp(x))fln p | V (x | v ) dx =   (exp(x))fU (x - m(v )) dx

                          =     (exp(m(v ) + u))fU (u) du.

Differentiation under the integral sign reveals that the derivatives of E[(p) | V = v ] with respect to
m(v ) is a weighted average of the corresponding derivatives of (p) with respect to ln p. Therefore,
the monotonicity and convexity of (p) with respect to ln p implies monotonicity and convexity of
E[(p) | V = v ] with respect to m(v ). The argument is analogous for  (p).



Appendix C                Identification of DWL model parameters
The use of pairwise differences has long been considered an intuitive and transparent way to
establish identification and construct estimators in econometrics (Ahn and Powell, 1993; Honor´
                                                                                              e and
Powell, 1994). Although we ultimately estimate the DWL model via OLS, the following discussions
illustrates how the basis for identification of the DWL model involves pairwise differences and a
generalization thereof to directed walks on a directed network.
   To illustrate the type of worker mobility that allows us to identify the DWL model, we will
suppress the time-varying regressors Xim and focus on a setting where each worker has two observed
hiring wages and a known origin state for their first hiring wage. In this setting, the unique way
to partial out the individual effects i is to consider a model of first differences

                            yi = j (i,2) - j (i,1) + h(i,2) - h(i,1) +i                            (C.1)
                                        =Fi                =Hi 


where, for any variable w, wi = wi2 - wi1 . In this model, it is immediately clear that levels of
the origin and destination firm effects are not identified. However, for identification of variances
and covariances it suffices that first differences of the form s - t and s - t are identified, so we
will focus on such differences. Moreover, as our argument is symmetric for  and , we will only
discuss identification of s - t for two arbitrary firms s and t that both hired a worker during the
sampling frame.
   The difference in firm effects s - t is identified if and only if there exist a known vector of
weights v = (v1 , . . . , vn )  Rn such that the weighted sum     n
                                                                  i=1 vi yi   has a (conditional) mean of
s - t for any value of (, ). To understand when such a vector exists, it is useful to represent
worker mobility as two directed networks where the firms are vertices and the workers' moves
correspond to edges. There are two networks in play because the model in (C.1) includes two


                                                   59
moves for each worker: the mobility described by Hi takes place on an "origin" network, while
the mobility described by Fi takes place on a "destination" network.
   An example of such networks is visualized in Figure C.1. Here, there are five workers, three
firms, and not yet in the labor force (N ) as an origin state. The edges describing the first two
workers' mobility are highlighted in red. In panel (a), which depicts the origin network, we see
that these two workers have the same labor market experience in their first observed jobs as they
both enter the labor market and are initially hired by firm #1. However, the destination network
in panel (b) show that their subsequent employers differ, as the first (second) worker is hired by
the second (third) firm. The shared experience of these workers on the origin network allows us
to difference out the origin effects and establish identification of the destination effects difference
among their second employers, i.e.,

                  E[y1 - y2 | W ] = 2 - 1 - (3 - 1 ) + 1 - N - (1 - N )
                                          Destination difference        Origin difference

                                      = 2 - 3 .

This example illustrates how pairwise differences among workers who are hired into the labor force
(or out of unemployment) by the same firm play a crucial role in identification of the DWL model.
However, it is not only pairwise differences that contribute to identification of the model. The sum
y3 + y4 + y5 can similarly be shown to yield identification of 2 - 1 by noting that

      E[y3 + y4 + y5 | W ] = 3 - 2 + 2 - 3 + 2 - 1 + 2 - 1 + 3 - 2 + 1 - 3
                                          Destination difference                  Origin difference

                                = 2 - 1 .

   The common features of the two weighted sums y1 - y2 and y3 + y4 + y5 used to
establish identification in the previous example are that they correspond to mobility that forms a
closed walk on the origin network and an open walk on the destination network. Walks are common
objects in the study of networks, but for completeness we give a brief description and a definition.
A walk is a sequence of connected edges. When a walk starts and ends at the same place it is said
to be closed and otherwise it is open. An open walk is said to be a walk between its endpoints.
A collection of walks refers to multiple disjoint walks. A directed walk records the direction along
which it traverses an edge.

Definition 1. Let v = (v1 , . . . , vn ) . We say that, (i) v is a collection of directed closed walks on
                         n
the origin network if    i=1 vi Li   is equal to zero, and (ii) v is a collection of directed closed walks
                                                                                                      n
and a single directed open walk between firm k and  on the destination network if                     i=1 vi Fi   is
                                                                    J
equal to es - et or et - es where e is the 'th basis vector in R .

                                                     60
                                Figure C.1: Identification in DWL Model
                         (a) Origin network                            (b) Destination network
                                y4                                                 y3
                3                                 2                 3              y4                 2

                                    y3                                                 y5
                   y5                                                  y2                       y1
                                          y1
                                 1                    N                              1
                                          y2
      Note: Visualization of a network induced by data on five workers and three firms. The red edges correspond to
      the transitions of the first two workers. Those transitions form a closed walk on the origin network while they
      form an open walk from the third firm to the second firm on the destination network. The black edges similarly
      form a closed walk on the origin network and a open walk from the first to the second firm on the destination
      network. These observations imply the identification of destination effects.


   The previous example did not need to consider collections of disjoint walks to establish identification.
However, we end this section by noting that this is the right concept for establishing identification
in general.

Theorem C.1. The difference s - t is identified if and only if there exist a vector v which is
(i) a collection of directed closed walks on the origin network and (ii) a collection of directed closed
walks and a single directed open walk between firm s and t on the destination network

   The preceding theorem discussed necessary and sufficient conditions for identification of firm
effects differences. Kline et al. (2020) prove that estimating variance components without bias
requires identification of the firm effect differences also hold when any single observation is dropped.
However, in many datasets, including the one used in this paper, these identification conditions
require that one "prunes" the data to find a subset of the data where identification holds. Appendix
D.1 describes how we find this subset in practice.



Appendix D                     Implementation
D.1      Estimation sample
Estimation of the DWL model is conducted on a sample satisfying two conditions: (i) both the
origin and the destination effect associated with a particular person-job observation is identified,
and (ii) the statistical leverage, P , of each person-job observation is less than unity. The latter
                                                            1
                                                           61
requirement is equivalent to imposing (i) when any one person-job observation is dropped and is
necessary for existence of unbiased estimators of variance components (Kline et al., 2020, Lemma
1).
      In small samples or settings with few regressors, the unidentified origin and destination effects
can be characterized through Gaussian elimination and the statistical leverages can be calculated
exactly. Thus, in small samples, one can easily prune away observations where the unidentified
effects enter the conditional mean function Z  and obtain a sample where Szz is invertible.
Afterwards, one can then drop observations with P = 1 to also obtain a sample where Szz - Z Z
is invertible for any . However, in large samples with many regressors such as ours, Gaussian
elimination and exact computation of the statistical leverages becomes computationally prohibitive.
Therefore, we use the following iterative procedure to prune the sample.
      In order to obtain a sample where P     < 1 for each        {1, . . . , L}, we first note that P   =1
implies that y
             ^ = y where y
                         ^ =Z^ is the OLS prediction. We therefore remove all observations
with y
     ^ = y in a first step. In practice, we estimate the model using MATLAB's preconditioned
conjugate gradient routine pcg, obtain the fitted values y
                                                         ^ , and drop any observation with perfect
fit, which we define as |y
                         ^ - y | < 1/1000. Due to the slight numerical imprecision of pcg, we repeat
this step until no observations are dropped.
      We next prune the sample so that all person-job observations are associated with a pair of
separately identified origin and destination effects. Rather than searching for collections of open
and closed walks as described in Appendix C, we utilize another description of identification related
to invertibility of Szz . In our regression model of interest,

                                   y =Z + ,          for   = 1, . . . , L,

                                                                  -1             L
we have that  is identified if and only if the OLS estimator ^ = Szz              =1 Z   y is equal to  for
any value of  when all the error terms,  , are zero. To utilize this observation, we randomly draw
 sim with i.i.d. standard normal entries. Then we compute the OLS estimate ^ using pcg applied
to the artificial data

                                              y = Z  sim .

For any origin and destination effect where the corresponding entry of |^ -  sim | is greater than
1/100, we drop the person-job observations where these effects enter the conditional mean function
Z .
      This second step can possibly introduce new observations with statistical leverages of one, so we
repeat the first step of the algorithm one more time and arrive at the estimation sample summarized
in Table 1, Panel (b).


                                                   62
D.2        Computing the variance components
As detailed in Section 4, correcting for biases in the variance components requires knowledge of B
and the statistical leverage P . Both of these quantities are functions of available data. Specifically,
we have that

                           -1                  -1   -1
                    P = Z Szz Z,        B = Z Szz ASzz Z,           for   = 1, . . . , L.

However, exact computation of (P , B ) is prohibitive in our context which involves tens of millions
of observations and around 4 millions parameters. We therefore rely on the routine described in
Kline et al. (2020) for computation. This methodology simplifies computation considerably by
only requiring the solution of p systems (as opposed to k required by an exact solution) of k
linear equations, where k is the total numbers of parameters associated with the DWL model.
Specifically, using a variant of the random projection method of Achlioptas (2003) based on the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss Approximation (JLA), one can approximate (P , B ) using the columns of
WJLA in the system

                                         Szz WJLA    = (RP Z ) ,
                                         k ×k k ×p       k ×p


where Z = (Z1 , . . . , ZL ) and RP is a p × L matrix composed of mutually independent Rademacher
random variables that are independent of the data, i.e., their entries take the values 1 and -1 with
probability 1/2. As shown by Kline et al. (2020), the JLA algorithm reduces computation time
dramatically when p is small relative to L while delivering very accurate estimates of the leave-out
corrected variance component. The following algorithm describes in detail how to compute the JLA
approximation of P       and B   for a given quadratic form matrix A. In what follows, we assume
that the matrix A is positive semi-definite and can be written as A = A1 A1 .18
       The solution to the linear system outlined in Line 6 of Algorithm 1 is performed via MATLAB's
preconditioned conjugate gradient routine pcg and we used an incomplete Cholesky factorization
of Szz as the preconditioner with threshold dropping tolerance of 0.01.



Appendix E                  Data
Our data come from the INPS-INVIND file which provides social security based earnings records
on job spells for all private-sector workers who were employed at some point by a firm sampled
by the Bank of Italy's INVIND survey. Since 2002, the INVIND survey has been representative of
  18
    It is straightforward to extend the algorithm below to account for covariance components, such as the
covariance in the origin and destination effects, see the computational appendix of Kline et al. (2020).



                                                   63
Algorithm 1 Johnson-Lindenstrauss Approximation in the DWL Model
 1:   function JLA(Z ,A1 )
 2:      Generate RB , RP  Rp×L , where (RB , RP ) are composed of mutually independent
      Rademacher entries.
 3:      Compute (RP Z ) , (RB A1 )  Rk×p
 4:      for  = 1, . . . , p do
 5:         Let r,0 , r,1 ,  Rk be the -th columns of (RP Z ) , (RB A1 ) .
 6:         Let w,l  Rk be the solution to Szz w = r,l for l = 0, 1.
 7:      end for
 8:      Construct Wl = (w1,l , . . . , wp,l )  Rk×p for l = 0, 1.
 9:      Construct P^ = 1 W0 Z 2 , B       ^ = 1 W1 Z 2 for = 1, . . . , L.
                             p                   p
10:              ^
         Return {P , B } ^
11:   end function


firms with 20 or more employees in the manufacturing and service sector, see Bank of Italy (2018)
for more details. Our job-level spell data is balanced, meaning that we have complete information
on a worker's career even when this individual is not employed in a firm covered by the INVIND
survey.
      Each job-year spell in the INPS-INVIND lists a unique identifier of the employer and the
employee, the start date, the end date, the number of days worked that year, and the total wage
compensation received by the employee in that year. There is also information on which months
during the year the employee was employed. The earnings records are top coded at 500,000 euros.
We deflate earnings using the 2010 CPI. From 2005 and onwards, we have information on the reason
why a particular job ended. Specifically, we have information on whether a worker has resigned
from her job ("Dimissioni ").
      We consider data from the years 2005­2015. For our analysis, we include only spells where the
worker is between 18 and 64 years of age. We omit spells with erroneous numbers of days worked
or earnings. We also drop spells where the worker earned less than 2 euros per day. Finally, we
dropped individuals that held more than 10 jobs per year or that entered the labor market before
age 14 or after age 55.
      After imposing these restrictions, we then use the monthly level employment information in
INPS-INVIND to derive a person-job panel that contains information on a given job at the moment
of hiring such as the hiring wage, age of the employee at hiring, reasons for separation from previous
job, etc. Summary statistics for the resulting sample are given in Table 1, Panel (a).
      Finally, our measure on value added comes from firms income statements collected by CERVED
as described in Section 5. We winsorized information on value added at 5% and 95% in each year
and then calculate for each firm its average log value added per worker over the years for which



                                                 64
the firm's information is available in CERVED.




                                                 65
