                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE IMPACT OF A PRIVATE SUPPLEMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH CARE:
                     THE MEXICO DIABETES EXPERIMENT

                                         Ari Bronsoler
                                        Jonathan Gruber
                                         Enrique Seira

                                      Working Paper 28913
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28913


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We are grateful to Eduardo Rivera for outstanding research assistance and to Dante Salazar for
impressive field coordination. We also want to thank Diego del Pilar for his contributions as well
as Jishnu Das, participants in the Harris Public Policy and Economics Workshop and the
development and public finance lunches at MIT for their insightful comments and suggestions.
Lastly, we are very grateful to Clinicas del Azucar for being an amazing partner and Eli Lilly and
Company for supporting this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ari Bronsoler, Jonathan Gruber, and Enrique Seira. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of a Private Supplement to Public Health Care: The Mexico Diabetes Experiment
Ari Bronsoler, Jonathan Gruber, and Enrique Seira
NBER Working Paper No. 28913
June 2021
JEL No. H11,H51,I11

                                           ABSTRACT

There are ongoing debates around the world over the value of private supplements to public
health insurance systems. We investigate this issue in the context of one of the world's deadliest
diseases, diabetes, and one of the countries with the worst diabetes problems in the world,
Mexico. We implement a novel deniers randomization approach to cost-effectively provide a
causal estimate of enrollment in private supplement to the free public health system. Our final
sample of more than 1000 diabetics randomized into a large price subsidy for enrollment in the
private plan is well balanced. We estimate enormous impacts of the private supplement, with
HbA1c blood sugar levels falling by a full point (relative to a control mean of 8.5%), and to
increase the share of those treated who are under control by 69%. We show that this effect arises
through both improved treatment compliance and health behaviors, and that diabetes
complications fall even in the short run. The net costs of this intervention are at most one-third of
the gross costs due to offsetting public sector savings, and the health benefits are many multiples
of gross costs. But the returns to private care do not appear to reflect more productive delivery of
care per visit, which is comparable in a separate quasi-experimental analysis of public insurance;
rather, effects arise through more attachment to medical care in the private alternative.

Ari Bronsoler                                     Enrique Seira
60 Wadsworth Street, Apt 14b                      Centro de Investigación Económica
Cambridge, MA 02142                               ITAM
aribro@mit.edu                                    Ave. Santa Teresa # 930
                                                  Mexico
Jonathan Gruber                                   enrique.seira@gmail.com
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
1        Introduction

Most countries of the world feature universal or near universal public provision of either health

insurance, or direct health care, to residents. And in all of these countries, this public provision

is to some extent supplemented by private options, such as private insurance products or private

health care providers. A common feature of all nations with such mixed public-private systems

is dissatisfaction with the current mix. Regardless of the relative size of the private alternative,

advocates and opponents of privatization argue for a larger or smaller public sector role.

        A classic example is the debate in the U.S. over allowing Veterans to access private providers

outside of the Veterans' Affairs system, as well as debates in the U.K. over tendering of private

contracts for their National Health System (see the discussion in Frakes et al. (2021)). This debate

extends to the developing world as well. For example, a plan by the economist running Mexico's

largest social insurance institution to test privatized medical services was strongly opposed by the

unionized public sector doctors and ultimately shut down.1

        In this paper, we investigate this set of issues in the context of one of the most important public

health issues facing developing countries: diabetes. After decades of being primarily concerned

with undernutrition around the world, policy makers are shifting their focus to this new problem

that arises from both improper eating and overconsumption. There were 4.2 million deaths due to

diabetes complications in 2019. Worldwide prevalence rates have risen from 4.7% in 1980 to 9.3%

in 2019 and the increase has been most rapid for developing nations; the rate of diabetes is now

higher in low-income nations than in high-income nations (Saeedi et al., 2019).

        We focus on Mexico, one of the nations hardest hit by the growth in diabetes. Diabetes preva-

lence has risen from 6.7% in 1994 to 11% in 2018, and, signaling poor control, the country has

almost twice the mean diabetic hospital admission rate among the OECD countries. Indeed, di-

abetes is the second most common cause of death in Mexico and is among the top five causes

of disability. Alongside these poor outcomes, Mexico spends enormous amounts combating this

illness: The estimated costs of addressing diabetes and its complications are 2.25% of GDP, and

diabetes spending represents 10% of the entire budget of the Ministry of Health. (OECD, 2019;

Barraza-Lloréns et al., 2015; INEGI, 2019b; INSP, 2018).
    1
        See almomento.mx (2015)



                                                       1
    The primary approach taken by Mexico to address the health consequences of diabetes is

through its public health systems, the largest of which covers 70.3 million formal sector work-

ers and their families in the nation and serves 4.7 million diabetics per year (IMSS, 2020, 2018a).

Yet there is widespread dissatisfaction with this care; 22% of those who used the public sector

would not return for future care if given a choice and under a quarter rate the service as very good

(INSP, 2018). As the result of large waiting times, a nascent private sector has emerged to provide

complementary primary care.2 The share of private medical offices rose from 5% in 1990 to over

30% in 2020. In 2018, nearly 20% of diabetics reported getting treatment at private institutions

(INSP, 2018; SSP, 2021).

    Given the enormous human and fiscal costs of this disease for Mexico, understanding the im-

plications of these private alternatives for the costs and consequences of diabetes in the nation is

paramount. Yet evaluating the impact of private alternatives faces a number of challenges. Use

of private alternatives is endogenous, and randomized trials are very difficult due to recruitment

challenges and the enormous sample needed to obtain sufficient first stage power. As a result,

neither in Mexico nor in other middle and lower-income countries, do we have well-identified

estimates of the impact of private treatment for disease.

    In this paper, we implement a novel deniers randomization approach to cost-effectively provide

a causal estimate of enrollment in private diabetes care. We run this experiment in partnership

with a private provider of comprehensive diabetes care in Mexico, Clinicas de Azucar (CdA). CdA

runs a chain of clinics that provide a wide range of services to diabetics, ranging from blood sugar

measurement to medical interventions to nutritional counseling. This service is fairly expensive,

at a cost of 7000 Pesos ($350 USD) per year, or 5% of median Mexican family yearly income, at the

time of our experiment.3

    Our initial sample is individuals who undergo a free initial comprehensive diabetes evaluation

at CdA, which we randomize into treatment and control groups and survey at baseline. After their

evaluation, these individuals are offered the opportunity to enroll in CdA at full-price, and 60%

do so. Among those who decline, an additional opportunity to enroll at 40% of the baseline price
    2
      IMSS has an average of 1 hour of 15 minutes in waiting times while private sector has only a 20 minutes wait (INSP,
2018).
    3
      Estimation based on monthly earnings from the 5th and 6th decile in the distribution in INEGI (2018). The cost of
CdA would represent 5.4% of income for the 5th decile and 4.5% for the sixth decile. The cost of CdA has risen recently
to 8000 Pesos.


                                                           2
is presented to treatments but not controls. Among those offered this discount, 49% end up using

the CdA service, compared to 21% enrollment for the control group that does not get this offer (but

may receive subsequent marketing from CdA). This provides a powerful first stage to investigate

the impact of CdA treatment in a cost-effective way.

   Our follow up surveys and biometric measurement were scheduled for May, 2020, making us

one of the many randomized trials adversely impacted by COVID-19. But due to aggressive use of

PPE and other protocols, our follow up was delayed by only 4 weeks. Our follow up rate of data

collection of 45% was below expectations, but provided a sufficiently large sample to powerfully

investigate the impact of the CdA treatment; moreover, the sample appears balanced along all

measurable dimensions and we see no evidence of differential attrition.

   Using this approach, we find a striking positive effect of the CdA intervention: the implied

effect of participation is to lower blood sugar levels (measured by glycated hemoglobin or HbA1c)

by a full point (relative to a control mean of 8.5%), and to increase the share of those treated who

are under control by 69%. This is a huge impact, which according to the widely cited UKPDS study,

could reduce microvascular diabetes complications by 35%. Moreover, this impact is at the upper

end of estimated effect sizes from other diabetes interventions reviewed in a recent meta-analysis

(Pimouguet et al., 2011a).

   We show that this effect arises through a number of changes to behavior, including greater

compliance with recommended medications and substitution for less effective and more invasive

treatments; some change in behavior such as exercise and diet, and importantly more frequent

visits to medical providers. We find that diabetic complications fall, even in the short run. We also

find significant heterogeneity, with those who have worst baseline blood sugar control seeing the

largest benefit.

   To consider further the welfare implications of our results, we then extend them in two ways.

First, we explore the cost effectiveness of the CdA intervention. The net costs of this intervention

are much lower than the gross costs because of savings to the public health system. Some of these

savings arise from reduced use of public primary care. But the larger source of savings is the direct

positive fiscal externality from improved private care in terms of reduced (publicly paid) hospital

spending. Adding these components, we estimate that the net costs of this private supplement is

only 1/3 of its gross costs. At the same time, our estimated health benefits are on the order of 3-6


                                                 3
times the gross costs of the private program.

   Second, we assess whether these returns to private care reflect a more productive delivery of

care per visit or simply more quantity of care that is delivered equally effectively. We use data from

the major public sector insurer (IMSS), along with variation coming from the distance to public

clinics, to quasi-experimentally estimate the marginal returns per visit to IMSS diabetes care. We

find that, after controlling for differential observable selection into private sector care, the returns

to public and private care per visit are in fact comparable. This suggests that the returns from CdA

reflect the ability of the private vendor to encourage more care. We confirm this conclusion by

showing that our treatment effects are in fact highest where public clinics are most crowded.

   Taken together, our findings suggest that private delivery of diabetes care had major benefits

in Mexico. It led to improved health and significant offsets to public sector hospital expenditures,

and at standard values of improved health was highly cost effective. But the source of the im-

provements was not necessarily better technology for diabetes care, but rather encouraging more

care. This suggests multiple paths forward for governments seeking to improve their diabetes care,

ranging from outsourcing care, to improving the attractiveness of the public option. Our paper also

introduces a new cost-effective approach to randomization in evaluating private alternatives for

public services delivery.

   Our findings contribute to the long-standing discussion on public vs private healthcare provi-

sion. In a systematic review of the literature, Basu et al. (2012) document that the private sector

is usually not more efficient, accountable, or medically effective than the public sector but offers

better waiting times and hospitality towards patients. Das et al. (2012) and Das et al. (2016) doc-

ument through standardized patient comparisons in India that both the public and private sector

offer similar (low) quality services, with public sector physicians being more prepared but private

sector practitioners compensating with more effort per appointment. In the U.S. context, two re-

cent studies evaluate the role of private options relative to health care for the nation's military and

veterans, with mixed outcomes; Frakes et al. (2021) find that children of military personnel born in

the private sector have higher costs but better outcomes than those born on military bases, while

Chan et al. (2020) find that those receiving emergency care at Veterans Administration hospitals see

lower costs and better outcomes. We contribute to this literature by showing that there is a large

health benefit of adding a (subsidized) private option, even for those with free public healthcare,


                                                   4
and even if the private option is not necessarily of higher quality per unit of delivery. This is espe-

cially true in a context where public healthcare is overstretched. Second, we run one of the largest

double-blind diabetes field experiments to date, and show that standard diabetes care with simple

and cheap technology can have an enormous impact on reaching normal sugar levels.4 Finally, we

show that large fiscal externalities pay many-fold for the subsidy we implemented, contributing to

the literature on fiscal externalities from health interventions (see Chandra et al. (2010) for a review

of this literature).

        Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on diabetes in general and in

Mexican context, on the Mexican public health care system, and on the role of private alternatives

such as CdA. Section 3 describes CdA and the design of the Mexico Diabetes Experiment. Section

4 presents our basic results on outcomes, mechanisms, and heterogeneity. Section 5 estimates the

spillovers onto the public sector and the total social value of the improved care. Section 6 then

explores the relative efficacy of public and private sector care. Section 7 concludes.



2       Diabetes and the Mexican Health Care Context

2.1      Diabetes Consequences and Measurement

Over the past 25 years, one of the fastest growing public health problems around the world has

been diabetes. Diabetes is a progressive and often-fatal disease with no known cure. It can attack

every organ in the body, resulting in higher risk of heart failure, stroke and poor circulation, which

can lead to amputation of extremities, kidney failure, retinopathy and death. Those with Type I di-

abetes don't produce insulin, which turns glucose (sugar) into energy; those with Type II diabetes

don't respond to insulin appropriately and don't make sufficient amounts of insulin. Worldwide,

more than 450 million people are estimated to have diabetes.

        While diabetes cannot currently be cured, it can be brought under control by following diet

and exercise recommendations, closely monitoring blood sugar levels, and adjusting prescriptions

accordingly.5 Unlike several other chronic illnesses such as AIDS or Hepatitis C, diabetes can be
    4
      Meta reviews of different kinds of interventions can be found in Ismail et al. (2004); Umpierre et al. (2011); Ajala
et al. (2013); Pimouguet et al. (2011b). Notable exceptions to small sample size studies are those focused on trying to
understand the correct level of HbA1c for diabetics, like the UKPDS 35 study (King et al., 2001)
    5
      Saeedi et al. (2019) and IDF (2019).



                                                            5
easily and cheaply managed with relatively inexpensive medicine; Metformin, which is the most

common pill used to control early-stage diabetes, costs under 2 dollars/month.6

      The gold standard for measuring diabetes status is glycated hemoglobin. A hemoglobin A1c

(HbA1c) test measures the amount of blood sugar (glucose) attached to hemoglobin, the part of red

blood cells that carries oxygen from lungs to the rest of the body. An HbA1c test shows what the

average amount of glucose attached to hemoglobin has been over the past three months; a three

month average is used because that's typically how long a red blood cell lives. Individuals are

diagnosed as diabetic with an HbA1c level of over 6.5% and diabetic patients are recommended to

keep their levels below 7% (NIDDK, 2018). A more accessible and easier to use instrument to mon-

itor blood sugar is the glucometer, which captures the blood sugar levels at any one point in time.

While this measure has significantly more variance than HbA1c, it does not require lab processing

and patients can use it in the privacy of their own home. Normal levels for this measurement are

under 100 mm/hg and a patient will be diagnosed if she gets two fasting measurements over 125

(WHO, 2021).


2.2     The Mexican Health Care System

Health care in Mexico is provided primarily by several public sector institutions. The largest is

Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS), the single payer insurance plan for formal sector

workers in the country. This program covers formal workers and their families as well as students

but also offers a voluntary enrollment option which makes up under 1% of beneficiaries. Every

private employer that hires a new employee is required to enroll him/her to IMSS. This service

is paid for in 3 parts: On average, the government contributes 5.3% of employees base wages,

employers contribute 16.5% and employees another 2.5%.7 IMSS runs its own 1522 primary care

clinics, 248 acute care hospitals, and 61 specialty hospitals (IMSS, 2018b). Smaller but similar public

options for particular sectors such as government workers (ISSSTE), the navy (SEMAR), the army

(SEDENA), and for workers of the state-owned oil company (PEMEX).

      In 2003, Mexico introduced a new program, Seguro Popular, to extend health care coverage to

informal workers. This program recently changed its name to the wellness institute (INSABI) and
  6
      Clinic (2020).
  7
      Law of Social Security.



                                                  6
currently covers 60 million people, although everyone is eligible to enroll (SSP, 2018). While this

service expansion benefits workers in the informal sector, survey evidence shows that Mexicans

prefer other options.8 Today, 83% of the population reports being affiliated to one of these systems,

with 45% at formal sector systems, 38% at INSABI, and 0.6% holding private insurance. Total

health care spending in Mexico is 5.6% of GDP (INEGI, 2017, 2019a).

        Despite the availability of free public health care, diabetes remains a major problem in Mexico.

The public health care system in Mexico has responded with a number of policy efforts, including

a program to encourage annual checkups, large scale programs to encourage active lifestyles, and

a new tax in 2014 on sugary drinks and high-caloric foods.9 Despite these efforts, obesity rates

have not receded in Mexico, and diabetes diagnosis rates have remained at 11% of the population

since 2012 (INSP, 2018, 2012; Ángel Rivera Dommarco et al., 2018). Diabetes patients who do not

have the disease under control face much higher risks of hospitalization and disability. Mexico has

twice the rate of hospitalizations per diabetic rate than the OECD average, and diabetes was the

second highest cause of death in the country in 2019 (OECD, 2019; Ojeda, 2019).

        While public health care is free, widespread dissatisfaction with the quality and waiting times

of the public sector has caused the rapid growth of private health care systems in Mexico. This

private care is primarily focused at the primary level; the share of private medical offices went

from 5% in 1990 to over 30% in 2020. (SSP, 2021; INSP, 2018). In 2018, 18.2% of diabetics reported

getting treatment on private institutions. Patients affiliated to either the formal sector or INSABI

programs can get their medications for free in the pharmacies of their clinics, but often choose to

pay a small amount to reduce wait times by going to private pharmacies instead.10



3       The Mexico Diabetes Experiment

One of the private providers of disease care management is Clinicas de Azucar ("sugar clinics").

This chain of clinics was founded in the state of Monterrey by U.S. educated health care en-

trepreneur Javier Lozano. The first clinic was established in 2011, and the chain has grown to
    8
     Based on data from the health and nutrition survey in 2018 that asks about satisfaction with a service. Data shows
that the following percentage of patients believe the service is very good: 40% from private, 26% for IMSS and ISSTE
and 20% for SP
   9
     Aguilar et al. (2021), and Colchero et al. (2017).
  10
     Health Federal Law.



                                                          7
17 clinics in 5 states.

       The Sugar Clinics are a chain of specialized, diabetes clinics that provide affordable and com-

prehensive care. Each patient pays fixed-cost membership fees allowing him/her to have unlim-

ited access to diagnostics, labs and consultations for one year. One of the main selling points of

the clinics is that a patient can receive a full diabetes check-up with nutritionist assessments, and

recommendations for diet, exercise and medication in under 90 minutes, avoiding several visits

and long wait-times in the public sector. The approach used by CdA parallels a disease manage-

ment program generally applied internationally for chronic-obstructive pulmonary disease, cer-

tain types of cancer, and diabetes; a similar approach is used by Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston

and Apollo Sugar Clinics in India.11 We therefore view our project as evaluating more generally

the provision of privatized diabetes care. Although we cannot say with certainty whether the re-

sults from CdA extrapolate to other private providers, our findings on mechanisms in Section V

suggest that the effects may be quite general.

       Non-causal estimates of the impact of CdA are very promising. Estimates from CdA indicate

that enrollees see their HbA1c levels fall by 2 points relative to baseline, and such an effect appears

to be lasting. Based on these promising findings, we partnered with CdA to design an experi-

mental intervention to assess the causal impact of their program, with funding from Eli Lilly and

Company. We preregistered in the AEA registry.12

       The past literature suggests two natural ways to set up such an experimental intervention. One

would be to find and pay individuals to receive a free evaluation at CdA and to then potentially

sign up for the service. This would have been extremely hard and expensive as it would have

required us to test a large sample of individuals to assess whether they are diabetic, and then

incentivize them to go to CdA clinics.

       The other was to offer individuals who arrived at CdA for a free-screening a bonus for enroll-

ment, which would target those on the margin of using the service. But this approach faced the

problem that 60% of those who are offered the service are always takers. This limits the size of our

potential first stage size; moreover, it would also imply that we would be giving a bonus to the

60% of patients that would have bought anyway. After running power calculations, we quickly
  11
       IQEHC (2007)
  12
       https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3589




                                                    8
realized that we could not afford to pay for this strategy and that we could only launch such an

intervention if we managed to remove some always takers from the sample.

    We therefore introduce a new approach of deniers randomization. Our experiment proceeds in

several steps, as illustrated in Figure 1. When patients enter CdA clinics, we asked them if they

would be willing to fill out a survey while waiting for the intake process to begin. After their free

full check-up, individuals met with a physician who discussed their diagnosis and suggested a

potential care package at CDA. We removed people who were not diagnosed with diabetes. After

that, individuals met with a sales force associate for potential enrollment under normal conditions

(full price). If they decided to buy, they were removed from our experiment.

    Our experiment began when potential enrollees indicated that they were not willing to buy.

At that point, the sales force would ask if they were willing to be lotteried into an additional

discount from our study, with a 50-50 chance of getting a 60% discount to CdA. If interested, the

sales associate then (and, critically, not before) would consult the treatment/control status on their

screen. If the individual showed up as being in the treatment group, the sales associate was then

authorized to offer them a 60% discount. We used the consulted status to define our sample.13

    We were particularly concerned that the sales force might not wait until after the enrollee de-

clined to offer them the discount lottery, interfering with our randomization. We pursued three

strategies to address this concern. First, we offered higher commissions to the sales force for

full price than for discounted sales in order to properly align incentives. Second, we carefully

instructed the agents on the importance of first ensuring a lack of interest in the full-price mem-

bership before offering the discount. Third, we had bi-weekly meetings with the entire sales force

where we reviewed the process and reinforced which patients should be offered the discount.

Moreover, we would present some hypothetical cases and ask the staff what they should do to

ensure they understood the process.14

    We recruited individuals over the period from June 2019 to February 2020, Figure 2 summarizes

our recruitment. We approached 7,882 individuals who showed up at CdA offices for their free

evaluation, who we randomly divided into a treatment group of 3,967 and a control group of
  13
     We chose the 60% discount based on a pilot run with CdA which showed that such a discount yielded a 48% take
up rate
  14
     Our initial approach was to offer the discount via phone call 10 days after the initial visit, but take-up was under
20%, and rose only marginally when we waited only one day




                                                           9
3,915. All of these individuals were asked to fill out a baseline survey while waiting to receive

the complementary checkup. The survey contained basic demographic questions, whether each

patient was previously diagnosed with diabetes and a set of questions comparing the sugar clinics

to the public system. 94% of both the Treatment and Control arms completed at least some of the

baseline survey.15 Moreover, we can see that among patients who filled out the survey, the sales

force screened out 67% of the individuals according to the procedure described above and only

consulted treatment/control status for the remaining 33%.

    The last row of Figure 2 shows, the final balance of our sample along a number of dimensions

is excellent. We ended up with 1226 individuals in the treatment arm, and 1184 individuals in the

control arm. They are very well balanced in terms of baseline HbA1c, weight and age. Importantly,

there is a significant difference in the odds of using the services provided by CdA. Among the

controls, 21% eventually enrolled in CdA, probably because of additional efforts made by CDA's

marketing.16 Use was 28 points higher, at 49%, among the treatment group.

    The advantage of our deniers randomization approach is an enormous gain in efficiency in

the experiment. The cost for our actual experiment is an order of magnitude smaller than what

it would have been if we would have randomly offered an incentive to every patient that walked

in. The fact that 60% of patients are always takers would have made our first stage substantially

weaker and we would have required a much larger sample, which would in turn imply more

spending on discounts and many more follow-up surveys. Since our follow-up was performed

at patients' homes to prevent differential attrition, running extra surveys would be prohibitively

expensive. We estimate that our budget was one-tenth what would have been required if we had

included the always takers in our randomization.17

    In order to capture the same local average treatment effect (LATE) as traditional approaches,

the deniers randomization requires that at the consultation stage we do not screen out would-be

compliers and that the process of being denied does not impact enrollment decisions. To minimize
   15
      Overall, we have an 87% of surveys with complete demographic information which we use on our main specifica-
tions, and our results do not change when restricting the sample to full surveys
   16
      Following typical CdA practice, never takers would be called several times during the next two weeks to encourage
enrollment. These subsequent contacts would also offer additional small (10-20%) discounts over the full price.
   17
      For this exercise we run power calculations for different average treatment effects with an 80% power and a first-
stage power of 28% for our deniers randomization approach, compared to 9% for the discount to all those who enter
CdA (assuming same set of compliers but 3 times the sample as 67% are screened out). Then we estimate expenses of
follow-up and incentives.



                                                          10
any bias along these lines, we continued to provide a financial incentive for staff to enroll those

who turned down the initial offer (although, as noted above, the incentive was lower than for

full pay enrollment), and we continually emphasized to staff the importance of ensuring that all

patients receive this lottery opportunity. In our setting, it is unlikely that the timing of the offer

affects enrollment decisions as patients ultimately get the offer immediately after saying they do

not want to pay full-price. Of course, any randomization that occurs once individuals express

interest in CdA does not capture the effect for the typical diabetic in Mexico, and we discuss issues

of external validity below.

   After an eight month enrollment period that ended on February 2020, our plan was to begin a

follow-up starting in May 2020 but the COVID-19 pandemic interfered with the plans, as Mexico

entered into lockdown from March 23rd to June 1 (Político, 2020). This raised two potential prob-

lems for our trial. The first is that individuals would stop interacting with CdA. In fact, in-person

visits to CdA fell by 66% in April, but had returned to 95% of baseline by July. In the interven-

ing time, CdA relied on telephone consultations with patients. These were likely at best partial

substitutes for in person visits as the clinics were not able to utilize more advanced videoconfer-

encing technology nor virtualize the required laboratory tests nor physical checkups, leading to a

potential weakening of our effects.

   The interference with data collection was more profound. The fact that the country was locked

down meant a potentially catastrophic delay to our follow-up. Moreover, it was likely that some of

our patients would no longer want to receive a surveyor at home to get their blood sugar tested and

answer our follow-up survey. Ultimately, after incorporating a set of additional safety measures

and personal protective equipment, we were able to follow up with 44% of the sample. Notably, as

shown in Table 1, there was no differential attrition between treatment and control. In particular,

we regress follow-up response on treatment status, and we find no correlation regardless of the

richness of included controls.

   The resulting sample is shown in Table 2; we show the means for control and treatment, as

well as the difference, with standard errors in parentheses. The mean age of the control group is

52.4 years, and 32% are male; the lower male share may reflect the willingness of men to buy at

full price, while wives may want to consult with spouses. 56% live in zipcodes that make above

15,000 USD a year, and 37% have at least high school. The mean level of HbA1c is 9.35, well


                                                 11
above the control level of 7, and 76% of our sample is out of control. Mean BMI is 31, which is

outside the recommended range of [18.5-25] and means that the average person who shows up to

CDA is obese. Roughly 80% have access to public health systems. 67% of them had already been

diagnosed with diabetes. The self-reported level of trust in CdA is higher than that alternative

providers.

      Critically, we find no significant differences between treatment and controls , confirming the

validity of our randomization and the lack of attrition bias. The difference in HbA1c is an insignifi-

cant 0.15 points, which is only 1.6% of the mean and roughly one-eighth of our estimated treatment

effect; the difference in the share out of control is an insignificant 0.03%, which is below 10% of the

control mean and roughly one-seventh of our estimated treatment effect. The sample is also very

well balanced on demographics and type of insurance coverage.



4     The Causal Impacts of CdA

4.1     Effect on Blood Sugar

We implement our evaluation of the experiment through a straightforward regression framework.

We initially estimate OLS models of the effect of HbA1c of the form:



                               Yi,j,t = 0 + 1 Ui + j + t + i +      i,j,t                           (1)

      Where Yi,j,t is HbA1c values for individual i who enrolled in clinic j on month t, Ui is an

indicator for using CdA services, j and t capture clinic and month of enrollment fixed effects and

i includes controls for baseline HbA1c, BMI, gender, age, schooling and income. These controls

are missing for about 100 patients, lowering our regression sample size to 939; results are almost

identical if we exclude the 5 variables and use the somewhat larger sample. Standard errors are

robust. We then use the standard two stage least squares approach of instrumenting CdA usage

by being in the treatment group to estimate the local average treatment effect of using CdA on our

sample based on the same specification.

      Our main results are shown in Table 3. Column 1 shows the OLS estimate of using the Cda

services on blood sugar, which indicates that CdA lowers blood sugar by -0.98 points, off a base of


                                                  12
8.54 points. This is much lower than the 2-point estimate that CdA finds in following its enrollees.

An important part of the difference is improvement among those who do not use CdA but may

go elsewhere for care ­ in fact, we see that our control population improves 0.9 points relative

to baseline. Another part of the difference could be through selection of those who stay in the

program, and therefore continue to be measured by CdA's internal metrics, and those who leave,

who are also included in our evaluation.

       Additionally, our evaluation does not incorporate the value of the initial evaluation done by

CdA. Our estimate compares treatments and controls conditional on the initial evaluation. But if

the initial evaluation itself has value in terms of helping potential enrollees to understand how to

manage their diabetes, it could lead to some decline relative to their level of blood sugar at entry to

the clinic.18 As a result, our experimental effect is a lower bound on the total impact of interacting

with CdA.

       The rest of the table shows the coefficients on the control variables. By far the most impor-

tant control variable is baseline HBA1c, with each point in baseline HbA1c associated with a 0.5

percentage point level of HbA1c ex-post. The other significant relationship is with income, where

being in the lowest income group is associated with HbA1c that is 0.57 points higher. Interestingly,

we find little impact of BMI conditional on baseline blood sugar. The other coefficients are also

insignificant.

       Column 2 shows the corresponding IV estimate, where we instrument by the treatment indi-

cator. We find an effect that is comparable, but about 10% bigger at -1.1 points. Another way to

illustrate the effects of the intervention is to look at the share of individuals who have their blood

sugar under control, defined as a level of HbA1c below 7. Columns 3 and 4 present these results.

For this outcome, our IV estimate shows that 22% of individuals are brought under control by the

intervention, which is more than two thirds of the baseline rate of control in our sample.

       These are very large effects. For example, a set of recent meta-analysis shows that, on aver-

age psychological interventions reduce HbA1c by 0.32, physical activity interventions by 0.67-0.89,

self-monitoring of blood-sugar by 0.39, dietary approaches between 0.12 and 0.47 and disease man-

agement programs similar to the one we are working with show reductions in HbA1c between 0.38
  18
     Note that this is not a particular limitation of our deniers randomization approach ­ any approach which con-
ditioned on individuals arriving at CdA and being evaluated would suffer from this problem. To avoid this would
require randomizing whether individuals attend CdA at all.


                                                       13
and 0.45 points, less than half of what we find.19 A widely cited study notes that a reduction of the

magnitude we find in Table 3 is sufficient to reduce complications by 35% and reduce mortality by

4% (King et al., 2001; Arnold and Wang, 2014). Moreover, increasing the fraction of patients with

HbA1c under control of control by 69% makes an enormous difference for life expectancy; each

year a patient spends with diabetes out of control is estimated to reduce life expectancy by 100

days (Heald et al., 2020).


4.2      Mechanisms

Our survey results allow us to explore a variety of mechanisms through which CdA may have had

its effects. The results of this analysis are shown in Table 4, using the IV version of equation 1. All

dependent variables come from the responses to the follow up survey; the number of observations

varies.

       We find that CdA enrollment leads to a very large increase in the odds of receiving medical

care. Total physician visits increase by 2.6, which is 40% of the control mean. Column 2 shows the

number of visits that involve specific check-ups on potential complications from diabetes, and we

find that these almost double relative to baseline. The number of visits to diabetes specialists rises

by almost 50%. Clearly, an important mechanism for our HbA1c results is that patients are getting

a higher quantity of care.

       We also find evidence for the key mechanism of drug compliance. In the follow up survey

we ask individuals if they are likely to stop medication if they "feel good". The right answer

to this question is clearly no: diabetes cannot be cured, and ongoing medication remains very

inexpensive compared to the underlying health risks. Yet 25% of enrollees in the control group

answer yes, indicating inappropriate use of medication. We find that the estimated effect of CdA

is a reduction of this response by 22%. Thus, by this measure of proper disease management, CdA

causes an 88% improvement with respect to the mean.

       Corresponding to this finding, we find a dramatic shift in how individuals intervene to manage

their blood sugar. We see a significant rise in the use of cost effective (typically generic) blood

sugar-reducing medication, with use rising by 25% from a baseline of 73%. Correspondingly, we

see a 15% decline in the use of insulin, or 100% of baseline. This is an important finding for the
  19
       Ismail et al. (2004), Umpierre et al. (2011) Ajala et al. (2013) and Pimouguet et al. (2011b)


                                                                14
efficiency of diabetes management, since insulin is more costly than sugar-reducing medication

and is used at later stages of disease progression.

      As noted earlier, CdA provides a full suite of interventions, including nutritional and exercise

advice. Behaviors such as eating and exercise are notoriously difficult to influence (Jager, 2003).

Yet we find suggestive evidence that, in the short term at least, CdA influenced these behaviors

positively. Our follow up survey includes a dichotomous variable for whether individuals report

dieting or engaging in exercise. We find that the odds of both exercise and diet rise by 14%, and

that there is a marginally significant increase in the odds of either diet or exercise by 26%, from a

mean of 73%. We also find insignificant declines in the number of sodas and cigarettes consumed

per week.


4.3     Heterogeneity

We explored a wide variety of dimensions along which we might find heterogeneous impacts. To

model heterogeneity, we estimate the following model:


                        Yi,j,t = 0 + 1 Ti + 2 Hi + +3 Ti  Hi + j + i +        i,j,t                  (2)


      Where Yi,j,t is HbA1c values for individual i who enrolled in clinic j on month t, Ti is an

indicator for being part of the treatment group, Hi is a dummy for whether the patient has a value

higher than the median of the heterogeneity variable and j captures clinic fixed effects. The

coefficient of interest for this analysis is 3 . The results are shown in Table 5.

      While our estimates are somewhat imprecise, we find no significant heterogeneity across age,

sex, BMI or schooling. We do find that there is significant heterogeneity by baseline level of HbA1c.

Sicker individuals at baseline improve more than their healthier counterparts. To further under-

stand how our effects are distributed we apply Athey and Wager (2019)'s method for conditional

average treatment effects. Briefly, the method trains a causal forest which enables the estimation

of the average treatment effect for each patient in the experiment . To start, a forest is trained using

random subsamples of the data; next the algorithm gathers a weighted list of the sample's neigh-

bors based on what leaf nodes of the tree it falls in; finally, the treatment effect is calculated using

the outcomes and treatment status of the neighbor examples.


                                                   15
         To use these estimates to assess the impact of our deniers randomization approach versus an

approach that would include always takers in randomization, we show the CATE for both our

enrollees and the set of always takers we screened out in the first step of the experiment's protocol.

Figure 3 compares the CATE of both distributions. Here we can see that the effect of CDA is slightly

bigger for most always takers than that of our complier sample as the right tail density for always

takers is smaller. This is consistent with higher enrollment rates among those with higher returns

to CdA treatment



5        Fiscal Externalities on the Public Sector

In many public systems such as Mexico's, privatized care is provided at lower levels of care, but the

costs of higher levels of care are primarily borne by the public sector. In Mexico, there is relatively

little private hospital care, even among those who use private sources for their primary care. Only

24% of beds are represented by them. From our sample, 74% of individuals who utilized a hospital

report a public option as their main health provider. As a result, improved primary care through

private diabetes clinics may impart a significant fiscal externality on the public sector.

         Indeed, the hospital costs of diabetes to the Mexican public insurance system are enormous.

Total costs amount to 2.25% of GDP, with 1.1% being direct medical costs and 87% of this total

is due to complications. These costs primary arise from a series of complications associated with

diabetes such as diabetic retinopathy, diabetic foot and diabetes kidney disease.20 Bringing blood

sugar levels under control significantly reduces the risk of such complications ­ leading to reduced

hospital costs (Barraza-Lloréns et al., 2015). The fact that Mexico has twice the OECD average

diabetic hospitalization rate highlights that there is much to gain from improving early-stage care.

         We investigate this in two ways. First, we directly estimate the effect of CdA on self-reported

diabetic complications. This is challenging since we only have a short follow up time for our
    20
    Diabetic retinopathy: is a diabetes complication that affects eyes. It's caused by damage to the blood vessels of the
light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye (retina). At first, diabetic retinopathy may cause no symptoms or only mild
vision problems. Eventually, it can cause blindness. Diabetic foot: Diabetes can damage your nerves or blood vessels.
Nerve damage from diabetes can cause you to lose feeling in your feet. You may not feel a cut, a blister or a sore.
Foot injuries such as these can cause ulcers and infections. Serious cases may even lead to amputation. Kidney disease:
Diabetes can damage the blood vessels in your kidneys. When the blood vessels are damaged, they don't work as well.
When your kidneys are damaged, they can't filter blood like they should, which can cause wastes to build up in your
body.




                                                           16
CdA enrollees, so that we will meaningfully understate the long-term impacts on complications.

Second, we use a simulation model based on our estimated reduction in blood sugar, combined

with the best estimates of the marginal impacts of reduced blood sugar on future complications.

    Column 1 of Table 6 shows our estimated treatment effects for complications, which are defined

as the sum of the early symptoms a person might experience. Despite the short follow up, we find a

significant reduction in complications, with enrollment associated with a decline of complications

of -0.25 off a base of 1.4.

    To put this result in context, we compute the estimated decline in complications that we would

expect over time based on our blood sugar reductions. According to the widely cited UKPDS

study, a point reduction in HbA1c could lower the likelihood of complications by 35%- significantly

higher than the 18% we find experimentally, which is unsurprising given our short term follow up.

    We next turn to estimating the fiscal externality, in six steps, recognizing the important hetero-

geneity in impacts by baseline blood sugar levels. First, we classify our sample into HbA1c base-

line value bins, using the smaller nearest integer. Second, for those in the control group, in each
                                                        f ollowup
bin we averaged their HbA1c observed at follow up (HbA1CC j
                                                                  ). Third, to go from HbA1c

levels to health complications, we use the complications incidence tables by level of HbA1c from

the UKPDS 35 study (King et al., 2001).21 This gives us the estimated complications for the con-

trol group by bin. Fourth, we apply an analogous method for the treatment group. We start from

their baseline level and add in the conditional local average treatment effect (CLAT E ) of the re-

spective bin, where the estimate is done as above but separately for each bin. That is for each bin
                               f ollowup        f ollowup
j we calculate the number HbA1CT j
                                         = HbA1CC j
                                                          + CLAT Ej , and map these to health

complications. Fifth, we define averted hospitalizations as the difference expected hospitalizations

between treatment and control group for each bin. Finally, to estimate the savings to the system

from reduced hospitalizations, we multiply what each complication costs by the averted hospi-

talizations using the cost data from Barraza-Lloréns et al. (2015) for 2013 in Mexico updated for

inflation.

    Figure 4 showcases our results. The vertical bars represent the savings in pesos (left Y-axis)
  21
     For each group, we interpolate linearly between the 2 HbA1c integer numbers that the incidence tables in the paper
report. Since dynamics of the effect of higher blood sugar for each complication vary, we estimate incidence for each
main complication separately. We focus on neuropathy, ulcers, amputations, ophthalmic complications, diabetic coma,
nephropathy, stroke, and heart attack.




                                                          17
estimated per patient year at each level of baseline HbA1c. These generally rise with HbA1c levels

both because (a) the rate of complications is higher for those with higher blood sugar and (b)

our CLATE estimates show larger effects of our intervention for those with higher blood sugar at

baseline. The blue curve shows the distribution of HbA1c at baseline in our sample (measured in

the right Y-axis), and the horizontal line shows the annual subscription price of CdA. Our results

show that at high levels of blood sugar, the program essentially pays for itself in reduced hospital

spending; overall, we estimate that reduced hospital expenditures amount to 55% of the cost of

CdA.

   Of course, these calculations are not precise. On the one hand, we assume that the marginal

reductions in blood sugar from our intervention have the same impact as the average reduction in

blood sugar used by UKPDS 35. On the other hand, we only consider the direct fiscal externality

from hospitalizations averted and do not consider the savings from care substitution (with the

CdA visits displacing public visits). To address the latter, we directly measure care substitution in

the last two columns of Table 6. The second column measures visits to a public insurance provider.

This falls by 0.11 visits, or about one fifth of the control group mean at baseline, but the estimate

is insignificant. One problem with this measure, however, is that COVID-19 may have had the

impact of reducing all medical care use, for both treatments and controls, mitigating any estimated

displacement effect. The next column uses a measure which may be more reliable, whether the

respondent considers the public health system to be their main health care provider. While this

variable has essentially the same mean, our estimated effect is nearly twice as large, and amounts

to 40% of baseline mean.

   At baseline, our control group has 5 visits on average to their public provider in the year before

joining CdA. The direct cost to IMSS of each visit is 800 pesos. In addition, IMSS data shows that

the total cost of maintaining care for an under control diabetic is $9000 pesos per year. So a 20%

reduction in visits would save $800-$1800 pesos per year; if we use the larger estimate from the

third column of Table 6, we would have savings of $1600-$3600 pesos per year.

   Recall that for our sample the cost of CdA treatment for one year was $7000 pesos. Using

our estimate of offsetting hospital spending on complications, as well as our lowest estimate of

offsetting primary care expenditures, roughly 65% of the costs of CdA are offset by reduced public

sector costs; at the upper bound, the offset is 105%. In either case, the net cost of this incremental


                                                 18
care through CdA is much less than the gross costs.

         Even using the gross costs, however, our estimates suggest that this treatment is highly cost ef-

fective. In Table 3, we show that patients enrolled in CdA are 22% more likely to be in control than

those who do not enroll. The medical literature estimates that every year that a diabetic patient

spends out of control reduces life expectancy by 100 days.22 Typical estimates of the value of a

life-year in international contexts is in the $50,000-$100,000 USD range, which would suggest that

this intervention is worth $3000-$6000 USD per person, many multiples of gross or net program

costs, which are around $350 USD a year.23

         While estimating the value of life in this particular population is beyond our scope, it is worth

noting that even this estimate excludes the valuation of the large reduction in morbidity ­ which

does not only save the public sector costs but improves quality of life.



6        Why Does the Private Sector Improve Outcomes?

The striking finding that enrolling in CdA dramatically improves health outcomes for diabetics

that already have access to free public care raises the key question of why the private sector is

doing a better job than the public sector addressing the medical needs of diabetics. One potential

explanation is that our finding is driven by heterogeneity in the type of public insurance. While

there is technically universal public coverage in Mexico, the care delivered by the formal sector

social insurance programs is typically perceived to be much higher quality than that delivered

by the residual public welfare program, Seguro Popular. As a result, if our findings are driven

by those individuals in our sample who are not formally employed and have to rely on Seguro

Popular, this may reflect the lower quality of care in that public program. However, we find no

evidence that the impact of CdA is driven by informal workers ­ if anything, the opposite appears

to be true.24

         If even the higher quality public programs do not perform as well as private care, the difference
    22
      Heald et al. (2020)
    23
      Lee et al. (2009) argues that the value per year of quality life is $129,00 but $50,000-$100,00 has been de facto in-
ternational standard. For the calculation we multiply the effect on likelihood of control, times 100/365 days, times
$50,000-$100,000.
   24
      A regression of HbA1c on treatment interacted with having informal insurance shows a positive but insignificant
interaction ­ suggesting that our results are not driven by larger impacts among those informally insured (see last
column Table 5).



                                                            19
must be explained by either quality or quantity differences between the two platforms. On the one

hand, it could be the case that CDA is providing a higher quality of service per interaction. On

the other hand, perhaps CdA is doing more to attract diabetics to interact with care, improving

outcomes through increased quantity of medical interactions. To separate these hypotheses, we

supplement our analysis with a quasi-experimental estimate of the marginal return to public care.

       In particular, we incorporate data from the IMSS program, the largest formal sector health care

system in Mexico, between 2010 and 2015. We worked with IMSS to collect administrative data for

every primary care visit and the place of residence for all enrollees; this is a novel data set which

has not been previously exploited for economics research. The data combines several large admin-

istrative datasets. First, annual testing data. All IMSS enrollees are supposed to have a check-up

that includes blood sugar once per year as part of the PrevenIMSS program and we have adminis-

trative data for all checkups recorded in that period.25 Second, we have administrative data from

every primary care visit that includes ICD-10 codification. Third, we have exact location data for

families' homes. Fourth, we have an infrastructure dataset that includes geocoded locations for

the primary care clinics providing care through IMSS. In order to estimate the marginal return to

care, we create a sample of all patients who have been treated for diabetes at IMSS and who had at

least one PrevenIMSS checkup, leaving us with a sizeable sample of 440,000 diabetics. Moreover,

160 thousand have a second Prevenimss appointment one year later, which allows us to track their

blood sugar dynamics.

       We use these data to estimate the marginal returns to additional IMSS care versus care from

CdA. To assess the marginal returns to IMSS, we use variation in the distance of individuals from

their IMSS clinic. Individuals in IMSS are assigned to a local clinic based on fixed geographic des-

ignations, and as a result, the distance from homes to an IMSS clinics varies substantially. Figure 5

shows the distribution of distances from individual homes to IMSS clinics.

       We restrict our analysis sample further to patients with two measures of blood sugar from

PrevenIMSS, one year apart. We can use these measurements to assess whether more care during

the intervening year induces improved outcomes ­ instrumenting the amount of care received

with distance from an IMSS clinic.

       In particular, we will estimate models of the following form:
  25
       IMSS (2013)


                                                   20
                             Yi,j,t = 0 + 1 Nt,i + 2 Yt-1,i + j + t + i +               t,i,j                         (3)

    Where the dependent variable Yi,j,t is the level of blood sugar for individual i who got his

checkups at clinic j at time t, Nt,i is the number of visits to IMSS clinics in the 12 months after the

first blood sugar measurements, j captures clinic fixed effects, t captures month fixed effects and

i are demographic control variables (gender, age and age-squared). We instrument the number

of visits with the distance from residence to the assigned IMSS clinic.

    This quasi-experimental approach faces two key identification concerns. The first is that dis-

tance is correlated with underlying health. We address this by controlling for baseline blood sugar

at time t-1, so that we are assessing the impact of visits on the improvement in blood sugar. Of

course, this does not solve the underlying identification problem if those who live near IMSS clinics

are on differential underlying health trajectories than are those who live far away. But the inclusion

of clinic fixed effects control for any neighborhood factors that might drive such trends.

    The second concern is that the measurement itself may be correlated with distance ­ e.g. those

who live farther away may be differentially likely to get their blood sugar measured. This is a

particular concern given that only 160,000 out of 440,000 patients have a second yearly check-up.

We can address this directly by assessing whether the odds of blood sugar measurement is itself

correlated with distance.

    The results of our analysis are shown in Table 7. The first column shows the first stage esti-

mate of the impact of distance on the number of IMSS visits. The coefficient is highly significant,

indicating that each 30 kilometers of distance results in .1 fewer visits. The second column tests

for selection in having a blood measurement. In fact, we see no evidence of a correlation between

likelihood of second check-up and distance.

    We then turn to causal estimates of the impact of visits on blood sugar. Since PREVENIMSS

captures capillary blood sugar measurements rather than HbA1c, we utilize that metric instead

for our analysis. To compare to our earlier findings, our experimental results are equivalent to a

reduction from 226 to 197.26
   26
      We utilize a conversion from Nathan et al. (2008) that estimates that each point reduced in HbA1c is equivalent to a
28.7 reduction in capillary blood sugar. This conversion fares well when applied to our experimental sample since we
find a reduction of 29 units in capillary blood sugar and a 1.1 point reduction in HbA1c.




                                                           21
   We begin by estimating equation 3 for our CdA intervention. That is, we regress blood sugar

levels on number of CdA visits, controlling for baseline blood sugar. We instrument number of

visits with our treatment indicator, so that we are essentially measuring the total treatment effect

as a function of number of visits. In this specification we are assuming linear impacts of eacha

dditional CdA visit. The third column of Table 7 shows that each CdA visit reduces blood sugar

by 8 points

   The fourth column estimates equation 3, instrumenting by distance to an IMSS clinic, to es-

timates the estimated return on each marginal visit at IMSS. We find that each additional visit

provides a benefit of 5 points. While significant, this is less than two-thirds as large as the estimate

for CdA (although the differences between CdA and IMSS are not statistically significant). This

suggests that part of the reason for a larger effect for CdA is more effectiveness per visit (although

the difference is small); moreover, as noted earlier, we potentially understate the impact of CdA

because this treatment-control comparison excludes any impacts of the initial evaluation.

   But this result does not account for potential selection on treatment effectiveness. In fact, those

who sign up for CdA have considerably higher blood sugar than the typical person in IMSS, while

the average baseline blood sugar in Cda is 225, at IMSS it is 135. And we showed earlier that

the effect of CdA is larger for those with higher blood sugar ­ the same may be true for IMSS.

To assess this, we re-estimate the regression for IMSS from column 4, but reweighting the sample

by baseline blood sugar to make them more comparable. The final column of Table 7 shows that

doing so dramatically increases the estimated IMSS treatment effect, which more than doubles.

Indeed, this estimate is higher than the comparable CdA estimate, although not significantly so.

Thus, these results do not indicate that CdA's impacts arise through a better "technology," at least

in terms of the returns per visit.

   The other reason for CdAs effectiveness would be that treatment individuals use more total

care and are more willing to attend appointments at CdA. In fact, a host of evidence suggests

that this is the case. Most importantly, Table 4 showed directly that the treatment group has more

visits to doctors. Table 2 also finds a much higher level of trust in CdA than their alternative care

provider, suggesting a higher willingness to engage with the provider. The changes in trust across

time strengthen this. In Table 8 we explore whether the CdA trust advantage grows as a result of

treatment. The first column regresses the difference in the self-reported trust between CdA versus


                                                  22
the alternative at follow up against our instrumented "Using CdA" indicator, controlling for the

baseline difference. The second column carries out the same exercise for a different variable, which

measures whether enrollees trust the diagnoses that comes from CdA as opposed to their current

health provider.      27   Both variables have a mean difference above 2 points on a ten point scale. And

IV regressions of this gap in beliefs on being a CdA user shows that the gap increases significantly

with use of CdA. These results highlight that patients are more engaged with the service once they

use it ­ which may lead them to get care more often.

       Moreover, the experience at CdA appears to be higher quality along one critical dimension:

waiting time. Our follow up survey asked treatments and controls about their waiting time for

care. Column 3 of Table 8 shows our IV estimates for waiting time, and the impacts are striking: a

reduction of 30 minutes in waiting time, or more than half of the baseline mean. Note also that this

is an estimate per visit. While CDA offers a one-stop-shop model of care, the public sector usually

requires the patient to visit several times because of slow lab-processing times and low availability

of testing.

       To further explore whether making care more accessible is the key mechanism, we focus on

the subsample of our treatment and control groups that is enrolled in IMSS, and we consider the

heterogeneity of our treatment effect by the level of IMSS clinic "saturation", a direct measure of

how hard it is to access care at IMSS. If indeed the key mechanism is through more access to care

rather than better care, one would expect our effect to be bigger among the IMSS users who have

to utilize a more saturated clinic.28

       Using data on visits from the period 2006-2016 for 31 clinics in the region, we match each

patient to the closest IMSS clinic to their home and exploit administrative data to define clinic

saturation. We begin by dividing the number of patients seen at the clinic by the number of medical

office in that clinic. We take as a benchmark the 15 minutes per visit recommended by IMSS

guidelines. We then label a clinic as "saturated" if they have on average at least 85% (3.4 visits) of

the maximum 4 visits per hour they can handle at maximum capacity per year. We then rerun our
  27
       The questions are: Do you think that if you follow the recommendations of CdA, you will improve your health substantially?,
Do you think that if you follow the recommendations of IMSS, you will improve your health substantially? and Do you think that
if you follow the recommendations of Seguro Popular, you will improve your health substantially?.
    28
       This comparison assumes that the more saturated clinics don't themselves deliver very different quality of care that
less saturated clinics. If the care delivered at more saturated clinics is lower than at less saturated clinics, then part of
the response we see here may be through differences in quality and not quantity. Of course, if saturation arises because
there is more use of the highest quality clinics, the bias would go in the opposite direction.


                                                               23
outcomes regressions, interacting our treatment dummy with a dummy for the closest clinic being

saturated; we redo the exercise for non-IMSS users as a placebo, matching non-IMSS users to the

nearest IMSS clinic.

    In the first column of Table 9, we show that our treatment effect is larger for IMSS users when

the clinics are more saturated, consistent with the notion that it is those who face the largest barri-

ers to IMSS care who benefit most from CdA. Moreover, in the second column we show that such a

relationship does not exist for the patients who are not enrolleed at IMSS; in fact the point estimate

goes in the opposite direction. We see this evidence as supporting the hypothesis that the im-

provements due to CdA arise through more care, rather than higher quality care ­ so that improv-

ing access to care would go a long way in terms of better health control for chronic-degenerative

diseases.



7   Conclusion

Ongoing debates over private versus public delivery of health care are central throughout the

world. Yet these arguments often take place on grounds of political philosophy and not empirical

evidence. This is unsurprising, as it is challenging to design studies that compare private versus

public options for enrollees in an empirically compelling framework.

    This paper introduced such a framework, relying on a novel deniers randomization framework

to run a trial of the private provision of diabetes care to a publicly insured population in Mexico.

Our findings are striking: supplementary private care causes a highly significant and large reduc-

tion in the blood sugar levels of diabetics, increasing blood sugar control by more than two-thirds.

We estimate that this occurred through improved use of medication, more frequent medical treat-

ment, and more diet and exercise. This sizeable reduction in blood sugar was associated even

within the first year with reduced diabetes complications. These large health effects suggest that

this supplemental private service was highly cost effective. We estimate that two-thirds or more of

the cost of the private program are offset by reduced public primary and (especially) hospital care,

and that the estimated health benefits are many multiples of either gross or net costs.

    Interestingly, our results also suggest that the strong performance of this private sector alter-

native was not because of dramatic improvement in care modality, but rather through stronger


                                                  24
attachment of patients to the private alternative due to shorter wait times and other advantages

over public clinics. This suggests that much of the gains from privatization in this context could

actually be captured by the public sector itself by improving access to care for its enrollees. An

open and important question for future work is whether the public sector could best improve care

by contracting out to the private sector or by expanding its own resources.

   Our approach does have some limitations. We argue that our deniers randomization approach

is an innovative means of cost-effectively evaluating an alternative like CdA, and show that based

on our estimated heterogeneity in treatment effects, the estimates are likely to apply to always tak-

ers; but our heterogeneity estimates are noisy and more work is needed to confirm this approach.

We also examine a particular program, CdA, and outcomes may not extend to other alternatives

that are designed differently. Moreover, our conclusion that the gains from privatization are sim-

ply in increased care, and not in substantial changes to the technology of care, may reflect the

particular case of diabetes, where there is a standard and cost-effective course of treatment. For

other diseases with less standardized and/or more expensive treatment modalities, private deliv-

ery may or may not offer gains in the quality as well as the quantity of care.

   Despite these caveats, however, our study provides a framework for estimating the effects

of privatization on medical care. We focus here on diabetes, one of the world's deadliest chronic

conditions, in Mexico, one of the countries where this problem is largest. The lessons from diabetes

in Mexico could be usefully tested and applied to other diseases and other nations around the

world.




                                                 25
Tables

                     Table 1: Attrition

                                    Answered follow up
                                    (1)    (2)      (3)
         Treatment               0.03      0.03     0.01
                                (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)


         Branch FE                  No     Yes      Yes
         Enrollment Month Fe        No     Yes      Yes
         Basic Controls             No     No       Yes
         Observations            2,410    2,410    2,042
         R-squared               0.001     0.01     0.11
         Mean dep. var.           0.43     0.43     0.43

          Notes: This table presents the results from
          running a regression on a dummy of answer-
          ing follow-up on the treatment group dummy.
          The first column reports the regression with-
          out any controls, the second column controls
          for branch fixed effects and enrollment month
          fixed effects and the third column also in-
          cludes Basic Controls: age, gender, HbA1c,
          BMI, Schooling and Income. Robust standard
          errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
          *** p < 0.01.




                               26
                             Table 2: Balance Table for Those Measured at Follow Up

                                                                                      Control            Treatment       Difference
                                 Variable                                        N     Mean/SE       N      Mean/SE         C-T
Panel A: Demographics
Age                                                                             509      52.39       558      53.06        -0.67
                                                                                         (0.50)               (0.52)       (0.73)
Male                                                                            509       0.32       558       0.35        -0.03
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
% High income                                                                   509       0.56       558       0.56        -0.01
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
% High School or more                                                           457       0.37       485       0.39        -0.02
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
Panel B: Health and Health services
HbA1c                                                                           508       9.35       556       9.51        -0.15
                                                                                         (0.11)               (0.11)       (0.16)
BMI                                                                             509      31.07       557      30.83         0.24
                                                                                         (0.27)               (0.25)       (0.37)
Has IMSS, ISSSTE or Seguro Popular                                              509       0.78       558       0.79        -0.01
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
Percentage that use IMSS, ISSSTE or Seguro Popular                              509       0.74       558       0.74         0.00
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
HbA1c out of control (HbA1c>10)                                                 508       0.38       556       0.41        -0.03
                                                                                         (0.02)               (0.02)       (0.03)
Panel C: Beliefs
Trust to improve following CDA recomendations (0-10)                            432       9.43       467       9.54        -0.12
                                                                                         (0.07)               (0.06)       (0.09)
Trust to improve following current health provider recomendations (0-10)        414       7.89       460       7.93        -0.03
                                                                                         (0.13)               (0.13)       (0.18)
Trust in CDA diagnosis (0-10)                                                   444       9.33       469       9.37        -0.04
                                                                                         (0.07)               (0.07)       (0.09)
Trust in current health provider diagnosis (0-10)                               411       7.93       450       7.88         0.05
                                                                                         (0.13)               (0.13)       (0.18)

 Notes: This table presents the balance among the patients who did answer our follow-up. (1) % High income: Is an indicator
 variable equal to 1 if the person lived in zip codes that the AMAI classifies as above middle income. This variable is an
 administrative variable and is based on the place of residency of each potential client at CdA. (2) Has IMSS, ISSSTE or Seguro
 Popular: Is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the person declared to be affiliated to a public service to the medical staff at CdA.
 (3) Percentage that use IMSS, ISSSTE or Seguro Popular: Is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the person declared to go for medical
 attention to the public services in our baseline survey. (4) Trust to improve following CDA recommendations (0-10): Is variable
 that measures the trust in improving with CdA. (5) Trust to improve following current health provider recommendations (0-10): Is
 a variable that measures the trust in improving with their current health provider. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *
 p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                27
                           Table 3: Effect on HbA1c

                                                Under Control- OLS     Under Control
                     HbA1c OLS       HbA1C         I(HbA1C<7)           I(HbA1C<7)
                          (1)          (2)              (3)                  (4)
Use Cda                 -0.98***     -1.12***         0.15***               0.22**
                         (0.13)       (0.41)           (0.03)               (0.09)
HbA1c Bl                0.50***      0.50***
                         (0.03)       (0.03)
I(HbA1c<7) Bl                                         0.51***              0.52***
                                                       (0.04)               (0.04)
BMI                      -0.02        -0.02             0.00                 0.00
                         (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.00)               (0.00)
Age                      -0.00        -0.00             0.00                 -0.00
                         (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.00)               (0.00)
Gender                   -0.17        -0.17             0.04                 0.03
                         (0.14)       (0.14)           (0.03)               (0.03)
Elementary School         0.28         0.30             0.06                 0.05
                         (0.42)       (0.43)           (0.09)               (0.09)
Secondary School          0.43         0.44             0.04                 0.03
                         (0.42)       (0.43)           (0.09)               (0.09)
High School               0.05         0.06             0.05                  0.04
                         (0.44)       (0.45)           (0.09)               (0.09)
Tecnica o Normal          0.22         0.23             0.10                  0.09
                         (0.44)       (0.44)           (0.09)               (0.09)
University                -0.08        -0.06            0.14                  0.12
                         (0.47)       (0.48)           (0.10)               (0.10)
Income C+                  0.26         0.25            -0.04                -0.04
                         (0.31)       (0.31)           (0.12)               (0.12)
Income C                   0.24         0.23            -0.06                -0.05
                         (0.29)       (0.29)           (0.11)               (0.12)
Income D+                0.57*        0.56*             -0.15                -0.14
                         (0.31)       (0.31)           (0.12)               (0.12)
Income D or Lower          0.41         0.40            -0.09                -0.08
                         (0.32)       (0.32)           (0.12)               (0.12)


Observations             939           939              939                  939
R-squared                0.36          0.35             0.26                 0.22
F                                     93.26                                 93.33
First coeff                           0.301                                 0.300
Mean dep. var            8.538        8.538            0.322                0.322

 Notes: This table shows the results of estimating equation 1. The first column cap-
 tures the OLS regression on the effect of using CdA on HbA1c, the second column
 captures the local average treatment effect (LATE) on HbA1c from our randomization,
 the third column captures the OLS regression on a dummy that captures if an individ-
 ual has controlled his diabetes (HbA1c<7) and the fourth column captures the LATE
 from our experiment in terms of controlled diabetes.. In all regressions we are con-
 trolling for branch and month fixed effects as well as basic demographics control (age,
 sex, BMI, baseline HbA1c or controlled diabetes at baseline, schooling and income).
 Our schooling controls are self-reported from our baseline survey and the income con-
 trols are from administrative data from CdA; this administrative data use the loca-
 tions of houses and the Asociación Mexicana de Agencias de Investigación y Opinión
 Pública A.C. classification: A/B upper class, C+ upper middle class, C middle class,
 D+ medium-low class and D lower class. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *
 p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                         28
                                                                                Table 4: Mechanism

                                    Visits to    # Special                      Stop med       Takes     Takes
                                    Doctor      Check ups     # Specialists   if feels good     Pills   Insulin    I(Exercise)   I(Diet)   Diet+Exercise     # Cigaretts    # Sodas
                                       (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)             (10)         (11)
     Use Cda (instrumented)           2.59**      1.32***         0.64**         -0.22**      0.25***    -0.15**       0.14        0.14         0.26*           -0.72        -0.06
                                      (1.06)       (0.38)         (0.27)          (0.09)       (0.09)     (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.10)        (0.15)          (0.80)       (0.14)


     Branch FE                         Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
     Months since enrollment FE        Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
     Controls Basic                    Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
     Observations                      878          817            940             815          913        913         940         940           940             774          857
     R-squared                        0.04         0.03           0.10            0.05         0.09       0.14        0.05        0.06          0.07             0.45         0.15
     F                                98.82        83.46          96.13           91.35        99.83      99.84       96.10       97.31         97.12           78.83        104.7
     First coeff                      0.321        0.307          0.306           0.323        0.315      0.316       0.306       0.308         0.308           0.307        0.332
     Mean dep. var                    6.502        1.408          1.383           0.249        0.727      0.134       0.289       0.436         0.725           0.911        0.841

      Notes: This table presents the results for regressions of the form of equation 1 on different self-reported behaviors. For all of these specifications we are reporting the local
      average treatment effect (LATE) that we causally estimated from our experiment using instrumental variables. In all regressions we are controlling for branch and month
      fixed effects as well as basic demographics control (age, sex, BMI, baseline HbA1c, schooling and income). (1) Visits to Doctor: Is a variable that captures how many visits




29
      to the doctor related with diabetes the person had the last year. (2) # Special Check Ups: Is a variable that sum the check ups that the person received during the last year
      related with diabetes, i.e eyes, kidney, foot and blood check ups. (3) # Specialists: Is a variable that captures the number of specialist, related with diabetes, who attended
      the person in a regular visit to their health provider. (4) Waiting Time: Is a variable that captures the waiting time whenever the persons attend to his health provider to
      have an appointment related with diabetes, we winzorized at 5% the upper tail to omit implausible waiting times. (5) Stop Medication if feels good: Is an indicator variable
      equal to 1 if the person declared that he suspended his medication whenever he start to felling good. (6) Takes Pills and Takes Insulin: Both are indicator variables equal to
      1 if the person declared that he took pills and/or insulin respectively as a part of his treatment, also we control for their baseline measure. (7) I(Diet) and I(Exercise): Both
      are indicator variables equal to 1 if the person declared that he did exercise and was involved in a diet as an effort to take care of his health. (8) Diet+Exercise: is a variable
      that sums the variables I(Diet) and I(Exercise). (9) # Cigarrets and #Sodas: are variables that captures the number of cigarettes and sodas consumed in a regular day by the
      person, also we control for their baseline measure. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                Table 5: Heterogeneity Effect
Dep Var HbA1c follow up

                              Age       Male     Income     Schooling    HbA1c       BMI     Informal
                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)
Treatment                    -0.51**   -0.40**    -0.29*       -0.36*      -0.16     -0.21    -0.40**
                              (0.21)    (0.17)    (0.15)       (0.19)      (0.12)   (0.20)     (0.16)
Regressor                   -0.66***    -0.00     -0.50*      -0.57**     2.26***    -0.34      0.08
                              (0.20)    (0.22)    (0.29)       (0.22)      (0.19)   (0.21)     (0.23)
Treatment X regressor          0.45      0.27      -0.10        0.20      -0.42*    -0.20       0.31
                              (0.27)    (0.30)    (0.36)       (0.30)      (0.25)   (0.28)     (0.32)


Branch FE                      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Controls                       No        No        No          No          No        No         No
Observations                  1,067     1,067     1,067        942        1,064     1,066      1,067
R-squared                     0.03      0.02      0.02         0.03       0.21      0.03        0.02

 Notes: This table presents the heterogeneity results from the effect of getting CDA treatment on
 health, estimated from including in equation 2 an interaction with the regressor listed at the top
 of each column. For each of these, we report the treatment coefficient, the baseline effect on the
 explored dimension and the interaction between the 2. In all regressions we are controlling for
 branch fixed effects. For the variables age, HbA1c and BMI we split by the median. For the variables
 income and schooling we split for those considered middle or upper class and those with high
 school or higher education respectively. Informal: is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the person
 declared to be affiliated to the Seguro Popular or to not have social insurance to the medical staff at
 CdA. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 30
   Table 6: Averted complications and Health Provider
                      Substitution

                            Total          Use of           Public
                           Diabetes        Public         Service as
                         Complications     Service    Principal Provider
                               (1)            (2)              (3)
Use Cda                      -0.25*         -0.11            -0.25**
                             (0.13)         (0.10)            (0.10)


Branch FE                      Yes           Yes              Yes
Enrollment Month Fe            Yes           Yes              Yes
Basic Controls                 Yes           Yes              Yes
Observations                   939            940             909
R-squared                     0.05           0.09             0.14
F                             93.31          96.06           95.34
First coeff                   0.301          0.306           0.310
Mean dep. var                 1.383          0.611           0.640

 Notes: This table presents the results from the effect of getting CDA
 treatment on complications, the effect of using CDA on utilizing the
 public sector and the effect of CDA on saying that the public sector is
 your main provider. We are controlling for branch and month fixed
 effects as well as basic demographics control (age, sex, BMI, baseline
 HbA1c, schooling and income). (1) Total diabetes complications: Is a vari-
 able that sum the short run complications related to diabetes experi-
 enced by the person, i.e eyes, feet and hand tingling, we also control
 by the total complications at baseline. (2) Use of Public Service: Is an
 indicator variable equal to one if the person declared to attended to
 IMSS, Seguro Popular or ISSSTE in the previous year for any medical
 reason, we also control for the baseline value of this variable. (3) Public
 Service as Main Provider: Is an indicator variable equal to one if the per-
 son declared a public service (IMSS, Seguro Popular, ISSSTE) as their
 principal health provider, we control for their health affiliation at base-
 line. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
 p < 0.01.




                                     31
                           Table 7: Comparison IMSS vs Cda Effect

                                          IMSS                  CdA                      IMSS
                            Number of        I(12 months      Capillary      Capillary      Capillary
                           medical visits     follow up)      Glucose        Glucose        Glucose
                                 (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
Distance (km)                -0.0030***           0.0001
                              (0.0005)           (0.0000)
Number of medical visits                                       -8.39**         -5.07*        -12.69**
                                                                (4.07)         (2.69)         (6.43)


Observations                  160,035            439,287       1,067          160,035       137,308
R-squared                      0.11               0.05          0.17            -0.06         -0.28
F                                                              60.31            35.29         12.96
First coeff                                                    1.284           -0.003        -0.002
Instrument                                                    Discount        Distance    Distance (W)

 Notes: All columns except (3) estimated in IMSS data. First column shows regression of number of
 visits at IMSS on distance from the clinic. Second column shows regression of dummy for having a
 follow up blood sugar measurement on distance. Third column shows IV regression in CdA data where
 we regress capillary glucose on number of visits, instrumented by treatment indicator. Fourth column
 shows an IV regression of capillary glucose on number of IMSS visits, instrumented by distance. Fifth
 column repeats this exercise but reweighting the sample so that the baseline distribution for capillary
 blood sugar matches that of CDA. All specifications have branch and month fixed effects and basic
 controls (age, age squared, initial capilarity glucose and gender). All specifications have branch and
 month fixed effects and basic controls (age, age squared, initial capilarity glucose and gender). Robust
 standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    32
      Table 8: Effect on Trust and Waiting Time

                          Dif Trust       Dif Trust in   Waiting
                        in Improving      Diagnosis       time
                             (1)               (2)         (2)
Use Cda                     1.92***          1.48**      -30.33***
                             (0.59)          (0.59)        (9.02)


Branch FE                     Yes             Yes           Yes
Enrollment Month Fe           Yes             Yes           Yes
Basic Controls                Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations                  682             676           739
R-squared                    0.02             0.02         -0.05
F                            82.97           92.88         82.49
First coeff                  0.330           0.348         0.325
Mean dep. var                2.107           2.292         43.46

 Notes: This table presents the results from the effect of getting
 CDA treatment on trust and waiting time. The first column
 captures the local average treatment effect (LATE) on the dif-
 ference in the self-reported trust that the patient will improve
 their health through CdA, as opposed to through their health
 provider at baseline (the difference in the rows shown in Ta-
 ble 2), we also control by the baseline measure of the variable
 which is define as the difference from the baseline survey on
 the same questions. The second column carries out the same
 exercise for patients' trust in diagnoses that come from CdA as
 opposed to their health provider at baseline, we also control by
 the baseline measure of the variable which is define as the differ-
 ence from the baseline survey on the same questions. The third
 column reports our results on waiting time. On our follow-up
 survey we asked how long do patients usually wait at the doc-
 tor they usually go to get diabetes care and estimated the dif-
 ference based on our experiment, instrumenting going to CdA
 rather than to other providers by being in the treatment group.
 We winzorized at 5% the upper tail to omit implausible wait-
 ing times. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
 p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                               33
  Table 9: Effect on HbA1c by saturation for IMSS
                      enrollees

                              HbA1c                HbA1c
                           IMSS Members       non-IMSS-members
                                 (1)                   (2)
Treatment                        0.22                -0.17
                                (0.37)               (0.54)
High saturated clinic          0.88***               -0.15
                                (0.31)               (0.47)
Treat x High sat. Clinic       -0.85**                0.05
                                (0.41)               (0.60)


Branch FE                        Yes                  Yes
IMSS only                        Yes                  No
Observations                    515                   292
R-squared                       0.28                  0.30

 Notes: This table presents the heterogeneity results on the effect
 of CDA on HbA1c by saturation of IMSS clinics in Nuevo León.
 We define a clinic as saturated if they have at least an 85% flow of
 maximum capacity on average. That is, if they have at least 3.4
 patients per hour per office open on average over a full year. The
 first column reports the heterogeneity estimates for IMSS popu-
 lation while the second column reports the same estimates for
 patients that do not report getting access to IMSS, which serves
 as a placebo. We control by HbA1c and branch fixed effects. We
 focus only in Nuevo León because Coahuila has very few IMSS
 clinics in Torreón and Saltillo, so we could not exploit the clin-
 ics heterogeneity there. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *
 p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                               34
Figures

                                                  Figure 1: Recruitment Process




Notes: This figure represents the process through which a patient was included in our experiment. The patient would first go through
the regular free-screening that CDA ususally offers and continue as a potential candidate unless she refused to fill out a survey. Then,
if the patient was diagnosed as diabetic, the salesforce would try to sell a membership at full-price to that person. If the patient bough
at full price, the person would leave the experiment, since we would know that person is an always taker. If the person was not
interested in buying a full-price membership, then the salesforce would offer the chance to win a 60% discount from our study. This is
the first point in which we would modify the regular flow of patients within CdA. If the person said they were not interested at that
price either, then we would know that such a patient was a never taker. However, if the person said she was interested, then a button
on the computer would reveal the treatment status to the salesforce and they would be able to offer the 60% discount if the patient
was in the treatment group.




                                                                   35
                                               Figure 2: Recruitment Summary




Notes: This figure summarizes our 8 month recruitment results. We can see that there were nearly 8,000 diabetes patients that inquired
about CDA, that our randomization was don evenly among treatment and control groups and that 94% of the patients were willing to
answer our baseline survey. Moreover, we can see that through our deniers randomization design we were able to screen out 67% of
the sample as always takers or never takers, which significantly increased our power for this experiment.




                                                                 36
                                       Figure 3: CATE: Compliers vs. Always Takers




Notes: This figure compares the distribution of the conditional average treatment effect we estimate based on Athey and Wager (2019)
for our sample and how such an effect looks if we extrapolate to the rest of patients that showed interest in CdA. We can see both
distributions look quite similar. Note that here we only utilize the reduced form estimates from being assigned to control or treatment
and not the IV since we cannot know the endogenous choice that a regular patient would have made on whether or not to take up
the offer by CdA. All the persons out of the experiment where assigned a zero en the treatment variable. We include as covariables:
gender, HbA1c, BMI, age, social insurance and the clinic where the appointment took place. We omit the education variable because
of missing values.




                                                                  37
              Figure 4: Savings from Hospitalizations Averted per Patient/Year (comparing T vs C)




Notes: This figure shows the savings we would observe from averted hospitalizations based on the reductions in HbA1c we causally
estimate along with what the medical literature estimates and public spending data from the government. Specifically, we follow six
steps. n six steps, recognizing the important heterogeneity in impacts by baseline blood sugar levels. First, we classify our sample into
HbA1c baseline value bins, using the smaller nearest integer. Second, for those in the control group, in each bin we averaged their
                                         f ollowup
HbA1c observed at follow up (HbA1CC        j
                                                   ). Third, to go from HbA1c levels to health complications, we use the complications
incidence tables by level of HbA1c from the widely cited UKPDS 35 study (King et al., 2001). This gives us the estimated complications
for the control group by bin. Fourth, we apply an analogous method for the treatment group. We start from their baseline level and
add in the conditional local average treatment effect (CLATE) of the respective bin, where the estimate is done as above but separately
                                                                        f ollowup         baseline
for each bin. That is for each bin j we calculate the number HbA1CT      j
                                                                                  = HbA1CT j
                                                                                                   + CLAT Ej , and map these to health
complications. Fifth, we define averted hospitalizations as the difference expected hospitalizations between treatment and control
group for each bin. Finally, to estimate the savings to the system from reduced hospitalizations, we multiply what each complication
costs by the averted hospitalizations using the cost data from Barraza-Lloréns et al. (2015) for 2013 in Mexico updated for inflation..
Overall, we see that on average 55% of the costs would be recuperated by averted hospitalizations and that CdA is a potential savings
mechanism for the government for most complicated patients. It is important to note that this figure is not considering substitution
away from public sector services nor externalities from emptier clinics.




                                                                   38
                                          Figure 5: Distance to Clinic Distribution




Notes: This figure shows the distribution in distance form home to the clinic for the IMSS patients we utilize in our regressions. We
winzorized the distances higher than 100 km.




                                                                 39
References
A GUILAR , A., E. G UTIERREZ , AND E. S EIRA (2021): "The Effectiveness of Sin Food Taxes: Evidence from Mexico,"
  Forthcoming Journal of Health Economics. [7]
A JALA , O., P. E NGLISH , AND J. P INKNEY (2013): "Systematic review and meta-analysis of different dietary approaches
   to the management of type 2 diabetes," The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 97. [5, 14]
ALMOMENTO . MX (2015): "¿Inicia privatización del IMSS?" Last accessed 9 March 2021, http://fmdiabetes.org/
  inicia-privatizacion-del-imss/. [1]
A RNOLD , L. W. AND Z. WANG (2014): "The HbA1c and all-cause mortality relationship in patients with type 2 diabetes
  is J-shaped: a meta-analysis of observational studies," Society for Biomedical Diabetes Research, 11. [14]
ATHEY, S. AND S. WAGER (2019): "Estimating Treatment Effects with Causal Forests: An Application," arXiv: Methodol-
  ogy. [15, 37]
B ARRAZA -L LORÉNS , M., V. J. G. B ARRÓN , C. H. V IVEROS , F. J. P. G UZMÁN , AND E. C RABLE (2015): Carga Económica
   de la Diabetes Mellitus en México, 2013, Fundación Mexicana para la Salud, A.C. [1, 16, 17, 38]
B ASU , S., J. A NDREWS , S. K ISHORE , PANJABI , AND D. S TUCKLER (2012): "Comparative Performance of Private and
   Public Healthcare Systems in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review," PLOS MEDICINE, 6. [4]
C HAN , D., D. C ARD , AND L. TAYLOR (2020): "Is There a VA Advantage? Evidence from Dually Eligible Veterans,"
  Stanford University mimeo. [4]
C HANDRA , A., J. G RUBER , AND R. M C K NIGHT (2010): "Patient cost-sharing and hospitalization offsets in the elderly,"
  American Economic Review, 100. [5]
C LINIC , M. (2020):   "Type 2 diabetes," Last accessed 9 March 2021, https://www.mayoclinic.org/
   diseases-conditions/type-2-diabetes/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20351199#:~:text=Metformin%
   20(Fortamet%2C%20Glumetza%2C%20others,body%20uses%20insulin%20more%20effectively. [6]
C OLCHERO , M. A., J. A. R IVERA , B. M. P OPKIN , AND S. W EN (2017): "Sustained consumer response: evidence from
  two-years after implementing the sugar sweetened beverage tax in Mexico," Health Affairs, 36. [7]
D AS , J., A. H OLLA , V. D AS , M. M OHANAN , D. TABAK , AND B. C HAN (2012): "In Urban And Rural India, A Standard-
  ized Patient Study Showed Low Levels Of Provider Training And Huge Quality Gaps," Health Affairs, 31. [4]
D AS , J., A. H OLLA , A. M OHPAL , AND K. M URALIDHARAN (2016): "Quality and Accountability in Health Care Delivery:
  Audit-Study Evidence from Primary Care in India," American Economic Review, 106. [4]
F RAKES , M., J. G RUBER , AND T. J USTICZ (2021): "Public and Private Options in Practice: The Military Health System,"
   National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w28256. [1, 4]
H EALD , A. H., M. S TEDMAN , M. D AVIES , M. L IVINGSTON , R. A LSHAMES , M. L UNT, G. R AYMAN , AND R. G ADSBY
  (2020): "Estimating life years lost to diabetes: outcomes from analysis of National Diabetes Audit and Office of Na-
  tional Statistics data," Cardiovascular Endocrinology Metabolism, 9. [14, 19]
IDF (2019): IDF Diabetes Atlas 9th Edition, International Diabetes Federation. [5]
IMSS (2013):    "Modelo de prevención en diabetes mellitus (PREVENIMSS)," 5ta Conferencia Cien-
  tífica  Anual    sobre   Síndrome     Metabólico,    https://www.slideshare.net/sindromemetabolico/
  modelo-de-prevencin-en-diabetes-mellitus-prevenimss. [20]
------ (2018a): "IMSS atiende cada año a 2.7 millones de personas con diabetes," Last accessed 9 March 2021,
  http://www.imss.gob.mx/prensa/archivo/201815/035#:~:text=Cada%20a%C3%B1o%20en%20las%20Unidades,
  social%20para%20modificar%20estilos%20de. [2]
------ (2018b): "Informe al Ejecutivo Federal y al Congreso de la Unión 2017-2018," . [6]
------ (2020): "Informe al Ejecutivo Federal y al Congreso de la Unión sobre la Situación Financiera y los Riestos del
  Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social 2019-2020," . [2]
INEGI (2017): "Encuesta Nacional de Empleo y Seguridad Social: Principales Resultados," Last accessed 10 March 2021,
  https://www.inegi.org.mx/contenidos/programas/eness/2017/doc/presentacion_eness_2017.pdf. [7]
------ (2018): "Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares," . [2]
------ (2019a): "Cuenta satélite del Sector Salud de México, 2019," Last accessed 10 March 2021, https://www.inegi.
  org.mx/temas/saludsat/. [7]
------ (2019b): "¿De qué mueren los mexicanos?" Last accessed 9 March 2021, http://cuentame.inegi.org.mx/
  poblacion/defunciones.aspx?tema=P. [1]
INSP (2012): "Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición 2016," . [7]
------ (2018): "Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición 2018," . [1, 2, 7]

                                                            40
IQEHC (2007): "What are disease management programs (DMP's)?" Last accessed 10 March 2021, https:
  //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279412/#:~:text=Disease%20management%20programs%20(DMPs)%20are,
  called%20%E2%80%9Cstructured%20treatment%20programs.%E2%80%9D. [8]
I SMAIL , K., K. W INKLEY, AND S. R ABE -H ESKETH (2004): "Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised con-
   trolled trials of psychological interventions to improve glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes," The Lancet,
   363. [5, 14]
J AGER , W. (2003): Breaking `bad habits': a dynamical perspective on habit formation and change, University of Groningen. [15]
K ING , P., I. P EACOCK , AND R. D ONNELLY (2001): "The UK prospective diabetes study (UKPDS): clinical and therapeutic
   implications for type 2 diabetes," British Pharmacological Society Journals. [5, 14, 17, 38]
L EE , C., G. C HERTOW, AND S. Z ENIOS (2009): "n Empiric Estimate of the Value of Life: Updating the Renal Dialysis
   Cost-Effectiveness Standard," American Economic Review, 12. [19]
N ATHAN , D., J. K UENEN , R. B ORG , H. Z HENG , D. S CHOENFELD , R. J. H EINE , AND A.-D. A. G. S. G ROUP (2008):
  "Translating the A1C assay into estimated average glucose values," American Diabetes Association. [21]
NIDDK (2018): "The A1C Test & Diabetes," Last accessed 9 March 202, https://www.niddk.nih.gov/
 health-information/diagnostic-tests/a1c-test#:~:text=The%20A1C%20test%20measures%20the,level%
 20is%20below%205.7%20percent.https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/hemoglobin-a1c-hba1c-test/#:~:
 text=A%20hemoglobin%20A1c%20(HbA1c)%20test%20measures%20the%20amount%20of%20blood,the%20rest%20of%
 20your%20body. [6]
OECD (2019): "Diabetes Care," Last accessed 10 March 2021, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/402e2e10-en/
 index.html?itemId=/content/component/402e2e10-en. [1, 7]
O JEDA , R. (2019): "Diabetes en México: así se comporta la segunda causa de muerte en el país," Last accessed 10 March
   2021, https://www.milenio.com/ciencia-y-salud/diabetes-en-mexico-2020-estadisticas-y-porcentaje. [7]
P IMOUGUET, C., M. L. G OFF , R. T HIÉBAUT, J. F. D ARTIGUES , AND C. H ELMER (2011a): "Effectiveness of disease-
   management programs for improving diabetes care: a meta-analysis," CMAJ-JAMC, 183. [3]
------ (2011b): "Systematic review and meta-analysis of different dietary approaches to the management of type 2
  diabetes," CMAJ, 183. [5, 14]
P OLÍTICO , A. (2020):   "México termina la Jornada de Sana Distancia en riesgo extremo, según el
   semáforo de Salud,"     Last accessed 10 March 2021,       https://www.animalpolitico.com/2020/05/
   semaforo-retorno-apertura-nueva-normalidad-empresas-clases-educacion/. [11]
S AEEDI , P., I. P ETERSOHN , P. S ALPEA , B. M ALANDA , AND S. K ARURANGA (2019): "Global and regional diabetes preva-
   lence estimates for 2019 and projections for 2030 and 2045: Results from the International Diabetes Federation Diabetes
   Atlas, 9th edition," Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 157. [1, 5]
SSP    (2018):    "Afiliación   histórica    del Sistema    de   Protección  Social  en   Salud,"   Last
  accessed      10         March          2021,       https://www.gob.mx/salud/seguropopular/documentos/
  afiliacion-historica-del-sistema-de-proteccion-social-en-salud#:~:text=A%20diciembre%20de%202018%
  2C%2053,la%20poblaci%C3%B3n%20total%20del%20pa%C3%ADs. [7]
------ (2021): "Catálogo de Clave Única de Establecimientos de Salud," Last accessed 10 March 2021, http://www.dgis.
  salud.gob.mx/contenidos/intercambio/clues_gobmx.html. [2, 7]
U MPIERRE , D., P. A. B. R IBEIRO , C. K. K RAMER , C. B. L EITÃO , A. T. N. Z UCATTI , M. J. A ZEVEDO , J. L. G ROSS , J. P.
  R IBEIRO , AND B. D. S CHAAN (2011): "Physical activity advice only or structured exercise training and association
  with HbA1c levels in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis," JAMA, 305. [5, 14]
WHO (2021): "Mean fasting blood glucose," Last accessed 9 March 2021, https://www.who.int/data/gho/
 indicator-metadata-registry/imr-details/2380#:~:text=The%20expected%20values%20for%20normal,and%
 20monitoring%20glycemia%20are%20recommended. [6]
Á NGEL R IVERA D OMMARCO , J., A. C OLCHERO , M. L. F UENTES , T. G. DE C OSÍO M ARTÍNEZ , C. A. A. S ALINAS , G. H.
  L ICONA , AND S. B ARQUERA (2018): La Obesidad en Mexico Estado de la política públicay recomendacionespara su prevención
  y control, INSP. [7]




                                                              41
