                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE FAMILY AS A SOCIAL INSTITUTION

                                         Natalie Bau
                                       Raquel Fernández

                                      Working Paper 28918
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28918


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank David Henning and Maria Sauval for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Natalie Bau and Raquel Fernández. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Family as a Social Institution
Natalie Bau and Raquel Fernández
NBER Working Paper No. 28918
June 2021
JEL No. I0,J11,J12,J13,J14,J16,O11,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

This handbook chapter focuses on important interactions between the family and culture. We
discuss the wide range of global variation in family institutions, variation which is in part
sustained by cultural differences, and important recent changes in family structures. The chapter
discusses why different family institutions arise, when they persist, and what forces may lead
them to change. Furthermore, it examines changes in key family outcomes, such as the rise of
female labor force participation, the decline in marriage, and the increase in divorce. These
changes have been accompanied by and interact with cultural change. Finally, we show how
cultural institutions related to the family, such as son preference, co-residence traditions,
polygyny, and marriage payments, affect decision-making within the family and interact with
policy. We conclude that studying the family in a vacuum, without accounting for the role of
culture, may lead to misleading conclusions regarding the effects of policies, macroeconomic
shocks, or technological change.


Natalie Bau
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nbau@ucla.edu

Raquel Fernández
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu
              T HE FAMILY AS A S OCIAL I NSTITUTION
                             Natalie Bau*                             andez 
                                                           Raquel Fern´



                                                   Abstract


           This handbook chapter focuses on important interactions between the family and culture.
       We discuss the wide range of global variation in family institutions, variation which is in
       part sustained by cultural differences, and important recent changes in family structures. The
       chapter discusses why different family institutions arise, when they persist, and what forces
       may lead them to change. Furthermore, it examines changes in key family outcomes, such as
       the rise of female labor force participation, the decline in marriage, and the increase in divorce.
       These changes have been accompanied by and interact with cultural change. Finally, we show
       how cultural institutions related to the family, such as son preference, co-residence traditions,
       polygyny, and marriage payments, affect decision-making within the family and interact with
       policy. We conclude that studying the family in a vacuum, without accounting for the role of
       culture, may lead to misleading conclusions regarding the effects of policies, macroeconomic
       shocks, or technological change.


1     Introduction
The family is presumably the oldest human institution. It is also the institution with the greatest
amount of intersection and interaction between the private and social spheres. The family is central
economically not only because it has historically been a locus of production and distribution, but
also because it is the main transmitter of the social beliefs upon which all institutions depend.
Thus, the study of the family is inextricably linked to the study of culture not only because of the
former's central role in transmitting, and hence perpetuating, social beliefs but also because these
beliefs then shape decision-making within the family. Although mainstream economics had largely
ignored both the role of the family and the role of culture in determining key economic outcomes,
this has changed over time. The acknowledgment that it is important to incorporate the family into
economic analysis in order to understand micro and macro phenomena ranging from fertility rates
to cyclical unemployment preceded by several decades a parallel acknowledgment regarding the
role of culture. The importance of social beliefs in explaining economic outcomes as diverse as the
    * UCLA,  NBER, and CEPR. Contact: nbau@ucla.edu
     NYU,   NBER, and CEPR. Contact: raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu


                                                       1
rise of women's labor force participation, human capital decisions, or the misallocation of inputs
is a rapidly growing research area starting with the work of Fern´       andez and Fogli (2009), Antecol
(2000), Giuliano (2007), and Hsieh et al. (2019).    1

   In this handbook chapter, we describe how culture and the family interact in four important
ways. First, we document that a wide variety of family institutions exist around the world and have
existed throughout history. These family institutions in turn have important implications for both
the transmission of beliefs and an array of economic outcomes. As we show, across geographic
areas and ethnic groups, there is significant variation in how social unions, such as marriage, are
practiced and in co-residence practices between children and parents. The organization of the
family unit has also changed substantially over time within geographic areas. The frequency of
marriage, the ease and frequency of divorce, and even the sexes that can marry each other have
changed radically over time. Both persistence and changes in these organizations are, at least in
part, determined by culture and affect its transmission. However, despite the importance of this
variation in family institutions, its specific drivers are still not fully-understood and remain a fertile
area for research that integrates insights from anthropology, history, and sociology (Fern´        andez,
2018). To provide insights into why different cultural institutions (including family institutions)
arise and hence, why they change, we also describe two related frameworks from the anthropologi-
cal and economics literature. Broadly, anthropologists have hypothesized that different institutions
may arise through "learning and rational calculation" and cultural natural selection in response to
the different environments in which individuals live (Boyd and Richerson, 1988), while economists
have considered the role of informal institutions in solving incomplete contracts or missing markets
problems (Greif, 1993).
   Second, the family is a key unit for the intergenerational transmission of social beliefs. This
transmission leads outcomes to persist over time, even in cases where the environment that gave
rise to particular traditions or attitudes is no longer the same. As a result, parental attitudes and be-
liefs affect a diverse array of children's outcomes. This can be seen in the divergence of outcomes
between individuals in the same economic and institutional environment from different cultural
origins (and hence with different beliefs) which may persist across multiple generations. In this
chapter, we describe a selection of the empirical and theoretical literature on intergenerational per-
sistence, focusing on several examples that are particularly relevant for family economics. We first
discuss the persistent effects of culture on female labor force participation and fertility, decisions
that have dramatic consequences for both the status of women and the economy. Second, we dis-
cuss the cultural transmission of test score gender gaps, motivated by the fact that gender gaps in
human capital between siblings are also deeply related to outcomes within the family. Finally, we
   1 See   Fern´
               andez (2011) for a review of the early literature in this field.




                                                              2
discuss the persistent effects of family structures and co-residence patterns.2
   Third, the organization of the family is itself a key determinant of economic decision-making
in both high and low-income countries. This is because family organization shapes household
members' bargaining power and incentives. The fact that the family's organizational structure has
an important role for decision-making has long been understood by anthropologists (for example,
see Goody (1975)), yet until recently, the effects of variation in family and kinship-related cultural
practices have been largely neglected in economics. In this chapter, we describe an illustrative
selection of examples from the growing economics literature on the effects of the cultural traditions
that determine family organization, noting that many of the cultural traditions discussed ­ such
as dowry, patrilocality, and polygyny ­ are widely-practiced among populations of more than a
billion people. In particular, we document how marriage traditions, co-residence patterns, and son
preference affect a variety of outcomes, including human capital investment, fertility patterns, and
intimate partner violence.
   Fourth, while the family transmits culture, leading practices and attitudes to persist, culture is
not immutable. Indeed, culture can even change dramatically within relatively short periods, as
has clearly been the case for the social acceptability of same-sex relationships (see Fern´
                                                                                          andez et al.
(2021)) or the speed of assimilation of immigrants as embodied by the names they choose to give
their children (see Abramitzky et al. (2016)). As the environment changes and individuals interact
with the environment, their beliefs and incentives also change, changing the practices and attitudes
that parents transmit to their children. Changes in the environment can be due (among others)
to policy changes, the availability of new technologies or opportunities, or other shocks, such as
changes in sex-ratios. They can also be due to changes in information or aspirations when exposed
to new models of what makes for a "good" life. To illustrate the importance of cultural change
for families, we document several key cases where culture changed in ways that directly affected
the status of women (female labor force participation) within the family or family organization
(co-residence patterns and same-sex couples).
   The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the variation in family
institutions over time and space and discusses potential frameworks for explaining this variation.
Section 3 discusses key examples of how beliefs and attitudes are transmitted intergenerationally
through the family, affecting modern behavior, and Section 4 documents the direct effect of dif-
ferent family institutions on economic outcomes. Section 5 discusses how cultural change affects
family organization and the status of different family members. Finally, Section 6 summarizes key
lessons and links them to areas for future research.
   2 The  literature on persistence ­ where intergenerational transmission through the family is often an important
mechanism ­ is large and features outcomes as diverse as trust, risk aversion (see Dohmen et al. (2012) on trust and
risk aversion), and rule-breaking (Lowes et al., 2017).



                                                         3
2      Family Organization
In this section, we document variation both in family institutions over space and time and discuss
why this variation may occur.

2.1         Variation Across Space
While modern Westerners are most familiar with nuclear families with monogamous parents, these
family institutions are not representative of the rich global variation in traditional family organiza-
tions. These institutions govern what form social unions such as marriage take, how these unions
are legitimized, the division of labor within relationships, who inherits, sexual freedom for women,
who supports parents in old age and much more. To illustrate just some of this variation, we draw
on the Ancestral Characteristics database assembled by Giuliano and Nunn (2018) to show how
different traditional family institutions vary geographically.3
The Ethnographic Atlas and Ancestral Characteristics Datasets. The Ethnographic Atlas
(Murdock, 1967) is a database ­ assembled by anthropologists ­ of 1,265 ethnic groups' pre-
industrial cultural practices. Several papers have made use of this data to study questions in po-
litical economy, economic history, and the economics of culture.4 Giuliano and Nunn (2018) use
these data to construct the Ancestral Characteristics database, which reports the ancestral cultural
characteristics of current population groups within countries by combining the Ethnographic Atlas
with maps of the current distribution of 7,500 language groups from the Ethnologue (Gordon Jr,
2009). To arrive at country-level measures of different traits, the authors mapped each language
polygon from the Ethnologue (Gordon Jr, 2009) to a single ethnic group from the Ethnographic At-
las. They then calculated the weighted average of each cultural trait in a country by averaging over
its current language polygons, weighting each language polygon by Landscan population data.5
    Thus, the Ethnographic Atlas and the Ancestral Characteristics datasets provide researchers
with different (but closely related) tools for studying and documenting variation in family insti-
tutions. The Ethnographic Atlas provides an ethnicity-level source of data that can be matched
to other data sources at the language or ethnicity-level and can be used to study how individu-
als coming from cultures with different traditions behave, even within the same geographic area.
The Ancestral Characteristics database provides country-level measures of the share of the cur-
rent population in a country with a given ancestral trait, calculated using a particular aggregation
method.
    3 Forsimplicity, we use the version of the Ancestral Characteristics database that only exploits ethnographic infor-
mation from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967). Giuliano and Nunn (2018) have also produced more compre-
hensive versions of the database that integrate additional ethnographic sources.
   4 See Giuliano and Nunn (2018) for a review.
   5 The Landscan data is provided by the Oak Ridge National Labratory and can be found at https://landscan.

ornl.gov.


                                                           4
   We note that while the Ethographic Atlas has been widely used across disciplines to study the
effects of cultural and historical institutions on modern behaviors, it also suffers from some limita-
tions, several of which are also discussed by Giuliano and Nunn (2018). First, the Atlas's coverage
of Europe is relatively limited. This is because, at the time of the Atlas was compiled, the study
of Europeans' pre-industrial cultural traits was seen as a task for historians rather than anthropol-
ogists. Consequently, the Ethnographic Atlas ­ an anthropological database ­ contains relatively
few European groups. Second, while the Atlas aims to ascertain different societies' pre-industrial
characteristics, the period of observation for different groups varies from the 1600s to later than
1950. Finally, most observations in the Atlas are based on the observations of one or several re-
searchers, almost entirely males of European descent. This in turn could introduce both noisiness
and biases to the data, including of course, what variables were considered relevant (Bahrami-Rad
et al., 2020).
Cross-Country Variation in Cultural Traits. Figure 1 displays cross-country variation in four
non-mutually exclusive measures of family institutions using the Ancestral Characteristics data.
Figure 1a shows the global variation in traditional patrilocality (in which sons continue to live
with their parents after marriage and provide them with old age support), plotting the share of
the population whose post-marriage residence tradition is reported as "wife to husband's group."6
Figure 1b shows the variation in bride price traditions (grooms make payments to the parents of
the bride at the time of marriage), plotting the share for whom the marriage payment tradition is
"bride price or wealth, to bride's family."7 Figure 1c shows variation in traditional polygyny, and
Figure 1d reports variation in the nuclear family as the predominant, traditional family type. For
polygyny, we use the share that practice "independent nuclear, polygyny," "preferentially sororal,
same dwelling," "preferentially sororal, separate dwellings," "non-sororal, separate dwellings,"
or "non-sororal, same dwelling."8 For nuclear family traditions, we use the share for whom the
variable takes either the value "independent nuclear family, monogamous" or "independent nuclear
family, polygyny."9
   As the figures show, there is substantial variation in all four traditional practices across countries,
both within and across continents. Traditional polygyny and bride price are particularly common
in Sub-Saharan Africa, whereas patrilocality is a common ancestral trait in much of Asia, as well
as parts of Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa. The nuclear family is a predominant ancestral family
type in North America but not in much of Africa or Southern Asia.
   While the Ethnographic Atlas is designed to measure historical rather than current practices, it
   6 We  define patrilocality using the v11 variable in the Ethnographic Atlas.
   7 We  measure bride price using question v6.
   8 To measure polygyny, we use question v9. Some groups are recorded as practicing "independent polyandrous

families." However, this is relatively rare and only observed at all in 6 countries.
   9 We use question v8.




                                                     5
has also been shown to be predictive of a variety of current practices around the world (Bahrami-
Rad et al., 2020). To provide additional evidence that this global variation in traditional family
institutions still directly affects family structures for a sizable portion of the global population, we
consider the case of polygyny since, unlike some other family institutions, polygyny is particularly
observable in modern survey data. We draw on 35 Sub-Saharan African Demographic and Health
Surveys collected from 23 countries since 2010.10 Consistent with the earlier findings of Tertilt
(2005), polygyny remains widely practiced even in surveys from the last ten years. Across all
respondents, 24% of women are in polygynous marriages,11 and the share of marriages that are
polygynous ranges from 6% (Burundi) to 49% (Guinea). Thus, while declines in the practice of
polygyny have occurred in modern times (Fenske, 2015), it remains widely practiced in large parts
of Sub-Saharan Africa, a region with a population of 1.1 billion inhabitants.
   Although large-scale, cross-country data is less readily available for other traditional family
institutions, there is still evidence that they remain important for substantial parts of the global
population. For example, Chiplunkar and Weaver (2019) find that the share of the population
practicing dowry (marriage payments from the bride's family to the groom's side or to the couple)
in India ­ a country of 1.4 billion people ­ has increased since the 1930s, with roughly 90% of
modern marriages now featuring dowry payments. Ashraf et al. (2020) find that approximately
80% of a sample of urban women report practicing bride price in Zambia and that bride price
payments are similarly widespread in data from Indonesia.
   Thus, much of the rich variation in historical family institutions seen in these figures is still
present today. In cases where these cultural traditions are still practiced, they are likely to directly
affect household decision-making. Section 4 documents several important examples from the lit-
erature showing how global variation in family institutions affects decision-making. Additionally,
variation in traditional family structures may also still affect behavior in places where traditional
practices are no longer followed because these practices still have persistent effects on attitudes
and behavior. Section 3 illustrates this point by documenting examples of how historical family
institutions affect modern attitudes and behavior even when the institutions themselves have not
persisted, as is the case with historic family structures in Europe.
Why do Traditional Family Institutions Vary? Many of the forces that give rise to the variation
in traditional family institutions ­ which in part drives geographic variation in family institutions
today ­ are not entirely understood. Indeed, understanding these forces remains an interesting
question for future research. Anthropology and economics do provide us, nonetheless, with two
related and complementary frameworks that may aid us in understanding why different institutions
arise.
  10 Together,  these surveys include roughly 500,000 respondents.
  11 19%   are in marriages with 2 wives, and 4% are in marriages with three wives.


                                                          6
      Figure 1: Cross-Country Variation in Cultural Practices




                                                      Legend
                                                      Patrilocality
                                                            0% - 2.18%
                                                            2.19% - 82.81%
                                                            82.82% - 99.93%
                                                            99.94% - 100%
0   1,250   2,500   5,000 Miles                             100%




                                  (a) Patrilocality




                                                             Legend
                                                             Bride Price
                                                                   0%
                                                                   0.1% - 11.3%
                                                                   11.4% - 87.6%
                                                                   87.7% - 99.9%
0   1,250   2,500   5,000 Miles                                    100%




                                  (b) Bride Price




                                         7
                                                                                Legend
                                                                                Polygamy
                                                                                      0%
                                                                                      0.01% - 25.56%
                                                                                      25.27% - 99.92%
                                                                                      99.93% - 100%
                                                                                      100%
                    0   1,250   2,500   5,000 Miles




                                                         (c) Polygyny




                                                                               Legend
                                                                               Nuclear Families
                                                                                    0%
                                                                                    0.01% - 1.36%
                                                                                    1.37% - 33.73%
                                                                                    33.74% - 95.58%
                                                                                    95.59% - 100%
                    0   1,250   2,500   5,000 Miles




                                                      (d) Nuclear Families

Source: Ancestral Characteristics Database (Giuliano and Nunn, 2018). Countries where information is missing for
more than 10% of the population are colored white.




                                                               8
   The field of cultural evolution in anthropology views the rise and evolution of cultural institu-
tions as an evolutionary processes (Boyd and Richerson, 1988). Thus, different family institutions
may appear because they are a better response to particular environmental features, including agro-
climatic conditions/the type of agricultural and subsistence practices employed by a society and
the technologies available to that society. Institutions may change as these or other environmental
features change. In this vein, in an influential book, originally published in 1970, Boserup (2007)
suggests that pre-industrial agricultural technology that favors strength (e.g. the plough) led to
male dominance in agriculture and a stronger division of gender roles. Alesina et al. (2013), which
we discuss in greater detail in Section 3, provide evidence in favor of this hypothesis. In contrast,
in areas that relied on labor-intensive, small-tools agriculture, women played a greater role in agri-
culture. Boserup (2007) suggests that this in turn leads polygyny and bride price to arise, as female
labor was a valuable input into agricultural activity. Consistent with this hypothesis, Jacoby (1995)
provides evidence that the demand for wives is greater in parts of C^    ote d'Ivoire where women's
agricultural productivity is higher.
   Another explanation for polygyny that is also consistent with cultural evolution and which points
to why men "buy" women and not vice versa, comes from the "threshold" model in biology.
This model suggests that polygyny will naturally arise under two assumptions: (1) males (but
not females) can increase their offspring by acquiring more mates, and (2) there is heterogeneity in
the quality of males/their resources but not in the quality of females (Orians, 1969). For humans,
quality variation in females could be considered relatively small in contexts where they do not own
property (and hence there are no wealth differences among them) and human capital differences
are unimportant. This model results in males with more resources practicing polygyny. Consistent
with this idea, economists have argued both empirically and theoretically that men with more
resources will have more wives, and more unequal societies will be more polygynist (Becker and
Becker, 2009; Grossbard, 1976, 1993). Gould et al. (2008) build on this model to provide further
insights into when polygyny will be practiced and when it will decline. The authors develop a
model showing that more economically developed societies will tend toward monogamy over time.
They argue that this transition occurs when human capital becomes a more important driver of male
income/resources. In more developed societies, human capital is a relatively more important driver
of incomes, and high human capital men have higher incomes/resources. This leads female human
capital to be more valuable on the marriage market (e.g. because it is complementary with male
human capital in producing high quality children). This in turn drives up the effective price of high
human capital wives, leading higher human capital men to match with one high human capital
wife instead of multiple lower human capital wives. Thus, as a result of the changing economic
environment, polygyny falls out of practice.
   In addition to the work on polygyny described above, Becker (2018) provides another example


                                                  9
of how different environmental features can give rise to different family-related traditions. She
shows that historical pastoralism leads to more restrictions on women's sexuality, including female
genital cutting, since pastoralism led males to be absent from their families for extended periods,
exacerbating paternal uncertainty.
   A second, complementary view to the idea that cultural institutions arise and change due to evo-
lutionary processes is that different cultural institutions ­ including family institutions ­ can help
resolve incomplete contracting problem or social insurance problems that traditionally could not be
resolved by formal institutions (e.g. Greif (1993)). Botticini and Siow (2003) argue that dowries
evolved as a way to leave early bequests to daughters, since sons, who remained working with
parents, would be disincentivized from making productive investments (e.g. on the family farm)
if their output would later be taxed as part of a daughter's inheritance. Similarly, co-residence
norms where sons or daughters live with parents and care for them in their old age may provide
parents with a source of old age support in the absence of pension plans or other formal savings
mechanisms (Ebenstein, 2014), while also potentially helping to resolve incomplete contracting
problems in human capital investment between parents and children (Bau, forthcoming; Bau et al.,
2020). Focusing on how family institutions can help provide insurance, Rosenzweig and Stark
(1989) show that exogamy (where daughters leave the local area upon marriage) facilitates infor-
mal insurance networks between agrarian households in India who are exposed to very different
shocks across space.
   The literature described above suggests that these two frameworks can provide insights into
why different family institutions occur in different places. Similarly, these frameworks may also
provide us with insights into why family institutions change over time, as institutions could respond
to either changes in the environment or formal contracting space. Nonetheless, we emphasize
that more work is needed to fully understand why different family institutions occur and why
these institutions change. Such an agenda may in turn lead to the development of new theoretical
frameworks.

2.2    Variation Over Time
In addition to the variation in family form in the anthropological data discussed above, there has
also been a dramatic evolution in the the formation and stability of the family. Figures 2 and
3 below show the evolution of the proportion of divorced individuals in the census between the
ages 30-55 and the proportion that is never married among those of age 40-55 by country. The
evolution of these proportions is graphed from 1960 (or the earliest year data is available) to the
latest year data is available for a number of countries selected on the basis of data availability from
the Minnesota Population Center (2020). The set of potential countries was further narrowed to
include all countries in the OECD for which data on marital status was available for most censuses


                                                  10
between 1960 and 2010. We augment this set of countries with Brazil and Uruguay, which both
have good coverage for this question and provide a potentially interesting contrast.
   As can be seen in Figure 2, divorce (here shown as the share of currently divorced individuals
among the sum of all currently married individuals plus those divorced, age 30-55) has increased
markedly in all countries. More recently, some countries (e.g., the US and Ireland) have seen some
modest decreases in this rate, whereas others (e.g. Hungary) have seen large increases. A partial
explanation for the increase in divorce is undoubtedly due to the liberalizing of divorce laws in the
mid seventies and eighties, making it easier and less expensive to obtain a divorce. Other factors
increasing divorce include the greater ability of women to support themselves and their children
and the growing acceptability of divorce. Accompanying the growth of divorce is a changing social
view of the morality and general acceptability of this way of dealing with marital unhappiness. For
example, in the US in 1954, Gallup found that only 53% said they "believe" in divorce. In 2001,
Gallup first asked about the morality of divorce, and 59% thought it was moral. By 2015, this
figure topped 70%.12 These factors tend to reinforce one another: a higher probability of divorce
makes working and greater labor market experience more important for women but it also may
lead divorce to become easier for both partners.13 Increases in divorce also contribute to its greater
social respectability, which then again further encourages divorce.
   As shown in Figure 3, a growing proportion of individuals aged 40-55 have never married. The
pattern for most countries is U-shaped, starting relatively higher in the sixties and then increasing
in the nineties to reach even higher rates by the latest years available after 2010. An exception
to this pattern is Uruguay, which has seen a mostly decreasing rate throughout the entire time
period. Some part of the increase in the percentage of non-married individuals is due to the growing
acceptability of cohabitation, as well as changing gender norms and how they affect the desirability
of marriage. Important research questions here concern the relative stability of cohabitation versus
marriage, the socio-economic divide in the US by education in who marries and who cohabitates,
and the intergenerational consequences of these outcomes.14 In Section 5, we discuss the cultural
changes that have driven some of these changes in family institutions over time.




  12 See  https://news.gallup.com/poll/213677/divorce-rate-dips-moral-acceptability-hits-new-high.aspx.
  13 See  Fern´andez and Wong (2017) for an analysis of how the change in law from mutual consent to unilateral
divorce in the US affected labor force participation, assortative matching, the probability and timing of marriage and
divorce, all in a quantitative life-cycle model with incomplete capital and insurance markets.
   14 See Lundberg et al. (2016) for a review of possible explanations for these facts in the US context.



                                                         11
               Figure 2: Percent Currently Divorced of Ever-Married Group, Age 30-55


                                    25


                                    20
                       Percentage
                                    15


                                    10


                                     5


                                     0
                                         1960              1980                      2000             2020
                                                                          Year

                                                Austria    Brazil          Canada       Chile   France
                                                Greece     Ireland         Mexico       USA     Uruguay
                                                Colombia   Poland          Hungary




Source: National census data housed at IPUMS (Minnesota Population Center, 2020). This figure shows the number
divorced in the census year, age 30-55, expressed as a fraction of all individuals currently married or divorced in that
age group.



                                           Figure 3: Percent Never Married, Age 40-55

                                    25



                                    20
                       Percentage




                                    15



                                    10



                                     5
                                         1960              1980                      2000             2020
                                                                          Year

                                                Austria    Brazil          Canada       Chile   France
                                                Greece     Ireland         Mexico       USA     Uruguay
                                                Colombia   Poland          Hungary




Source: National census data housed at IPUMS (Minnesota Population Center, 2020). This figure shows the number
never married in the census year, age 40-55, expressed as a fraction of all individuals in that age group.



                                                                     12
3      The Family as a Transmitter of Culture
Culture is socially learned. Cultural beliefs are transmitted by society writ large: by families, by
the social group(s) to which an individual belongs (voluntarily or otherwise), and by observation
of what others do and say in a variety of arenas. These beliefs are maintained not only by trans-
mission and learning but also by the punishment of those who transgress cultural prescriptions.
This is not to say that these beliefs are static or equally held by all. On the contrary, the dominant
culture in a society is constantly contested, and the strength with which beliefs are held varies
across individuals and over time. As we discuss in Section 5, the dominant social culture evolves
endogenously as well.15
   In this handbook chapter, we are interested in the interaction between the family and culture,
both because of the importance of the family as the primary transmitter of cultural beliefs and be-
cause these beliefs fundamentally affect outcomes. The role of the family in transmitting beliefs
has been modeled in a variety of ways, mostly by incorporating economic incentives into evolution-
ary models that endogenize the degree of effort that a family expends on inculcating their children
with their own beliefs/traits (see Bisin and Verdier (2001) for the main model in this vein). Parents
may transmit practices or beliefs to maximize their own utility and/or their child's welfare. Par-
ents may be imperfectly altruistic and, as they have their own culturally-determined preferences,
may choose to inculcate their children with beliefs that do not maximize their children's ex-ante
welfare. Moreover, whether parents choose to deviate from prevalent practices may depend both
on the costs of transgressing and whether substitute practices are available for which the social
sanctions of deviating from the prevalent practice are not too great (Gulesci et al., 2021).16 Parents
may also be limited in choosing to transmit values different from what they hold themselves, as it
is difficult to preach what one does not practice (e.g., a mother in a sexist household in which the
mother does all the housework may have a hard time conveying a message of empowerment to her
daughters or one of gender equality to her sons).
   Children, of course, are not merely passive absorbers of culture. They are influenced by their
peers in school and in their social neighborhood, as well as by the popular media, in addition to
their parents. As emphasized by Akerlof and Kranton (2000), identity (which itself can be affected
by culture) can to some extent be chosen by the individual and may be multidimensional.17 This
    15 What determines the original cultural beliefs? See Francois et al. (2018) for a very interesting study of how
evolutionary group selection may select pro-social cultural features, as evidenced by greater trust among individuals
in sectors/firms with greater competition.
   16 In the case of female genital circumcision (FGC), Gulesci et al. (2021) suggest that the introduction of a less

damaging version of FGC could have served as a stepping stone for the decline of FGC in Somalia. Parents in the first
generation could undertake the less damaging FGC practice without transgressing too much, and once this practice
became dominant, parents could again individually stop practicing FGC altogether without deviating too much from
the new prevalent norm.
   17 On the latter, see Carvalho and Pradelski (2021).




                                                         13
can sometimes lead to intergenerational conflict within the family. For example, as shown in
Dahl et al. (2021), a reform that granted immigrant children born in Germany as of January 1,
2000 automatic citizenship actually decreased the welfare of Muslim girls born a few months
after the reform relative to those born a few months before the reform. The former reported less
satisfaction and were actually less integrated into German society, effects not found for Muslim
boys. The authors interpret these results as resulting from family conflict in which conservative
parents reacted to their girls' increased opportunities to assimilate by increasing the constraints on
them to prevent assimilation.
   Thus, the transmission of beliefs from parents to children, as well as the endogenous invest-
ments made by parents to prevent changes in attitudes or beliefs, can lead to cultural persistence.
The role of cultural beliefs for determining important economic outcomes, such as human capital
investment, female labor force participation, or fertility, is easiest to grasp ­ and to isolate em-
pirically ­ when similar individuals faced with similar economic and institutional environments
choose different actions based on these beliefs. Below we discuss several empirical contributions
to this literature, which exploit this strategy, since they demonstrate the central role played by the
family in transmitting cultural beliefs.
Female Labor Force Participation & Fertility. Female labor force participation, particularly
that of married women, varies significantly across countries. How much of this variation is due to
differences in beliefs about women's role and how much is due to variation in institutions by cul-
ture and economic factors that affect women's trade-offs between participating in the formal labor
market versus the home? This is a tricky question to answer since, as argued in Fern´  andez (2008),
institutions as well as economic factors, such as gender wage differentials or the availability of day
care, are fundamentally inseparable from cultural beliefs, co-determining one another. Nonethe-
less, by studying similar women who live in the same economic and institutional environment, it
is possible to demonstrate the role played by families in transmitting cultural beliefs.
   Fern´andez and Fogli (2009) study the effect of culture on economic outcomes by examining
how it affects the work and fertility behavior of married second-generation American women using
what Fern´ andez (2008) calls the "epidemiological approach."18 The main hypothesis is that it is
possible to exploit the difference in portability between cultural beliefs and institutions to study
the influence of culture. Immigrants bring with them a series of beliefs that are likely to reflect
those of their country of ancestry. The descendants of these immigrants would be brought up with
these beliefs, which would then influence their behavior. Of course, a potential concern is that
there are other important characteristics of immigrants that may also be easily portable such as
  18 Second-generation  Americans refers to individuals who were born in the US but whose parents were born else-
where. These women are less likely to be affected by language barriers or other transitional shocks due to immigration
than first generation immigrants are. On the other hand, they are more likely have assimilated to American culture.



                                                         14
human capital or wealth. A variety of controls can be used to make individuals comparable, thus
ensuring, to the extent possible, that the effects of the cultural beliefs that determine how much
women work and their fertility can be isolated from other channels such as their own education or
the characteristics of their spouse.
   The authors use the 1970 US Census (which was the last one to ask individuals where their
parents were born) to create a sample of second-generation married Americans within a relatively
narrow age range: thirty to forty years old. They proxy for the cultural beliefs in the country of
ancestry with the female labor force participation (FLFP) and total fertility rates (TFR) in 1950, as
this is the earliest year that is available for all the countries in the sample. Note that these variables
capture, in addition to past economic and institutional conditions, the cultural beliefs commonly
held about women's role and ideal family size. Given that the women in the 1970 US sample were
born and raised in the US, only the cultural beliefs embodied in the variables should be potentially
relevant to their work and fertility behavior.
   The authors control for the standard metropolitan area in which the couples resides, as well
as a variety of individual characteristics of the woman and her spouse, including education and
household income. Although these attributes are likely to be influenced by culture as well, they
also could be correlated with initial differences across ancestry in terms of parental education,
income, and wealth. They show that the cultural proxies of FLFP for work and TFR for fertility
have positive and significant explanatory power for women's work hours and number of children,
respectively. Importantly, using a different data set, they show that these effects persist when they
account for parental education. Furthermore, using census data, they show that effects are not
due to the average human capital in the potential ethnic network measured in a variety of ways.
Lastly, by conducting a Mincerian wage regression, the authors show that the FLFP cultural proxy
is unable to explain differences in wage rates across these women, even after controlling for their
age and education, making it unlikely that differences across work hours are driven by unobserved
human capital that varies systematically by ancestry. Interestingly, using couples in which the
parents of the wife and those of the husband did not come from the same country, they show that
both influence the wife's work and the couple's fertility.
   An earlier paper by Fern´    andez et al. (2004) had hinted at the potentially important role that
culture may play in perpetuating gender roles. The authors found that men whose mothers worked
while they were growing up were more likely to end up married to women who also chose to
work. Furthermore, they exploited the difference in female labor force participation induced by
idiosyncratic variation in the mobilization rate of men across US states during World War II. In
states with higher mobilization rates more women entered the labor market. A higher proportion
of girls who were the right age to have seen their mothers go to work when young then also
increased their labor force participation several decades later in those states which had seen greater


                                                   15
mobilization. This points to an effect on either daughters or sons (or both) because they directly
witnessed their mothers working. Alternatively, employers may have changed their beliefs about
the suitability of women in the workplace as a result of this experience.
   More direct evidence of the family's role in transmitting values comes from Farr´        e and Vella
(2013). Using a sample of mother­child pairs from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY) 1979, they show that gender attitudes are highly correlated between mothers and daugh-
ters. Furthermore, the mother's gender attitudes affects the daughter's labor supply and, as in
Fern´ andez et al. (2004), the labor supply of their sons' wives.
   Another paper examining the determinants of female labor force participation by Alesina et al.
(2013) explores the hypothesis put forward by Boserup (2007) that differences in cultural attitudes
towards gender roles originate in whether an ethnic group traditionally practiced plough versus
hoe agriculture. The main difference between the two forms of agriculture is that men have an
advantage in plough agriculture as it requires upper body strength and bursts of power to control
the animal pulling the plough. Hoe agriculture on the other hand is labor intensive and uses hand-
held tools. The hypothesis is that plough agriculture gave rise to a division of labor where men
worked in the fields and women specialized in work inside the home in contrast to the hoe, which
then gave rise to cultural norms about the appropriate gender division of labor. That said, it would
be interesting to know whether men in hoe-oriented agriculture worked more within the home.
The authors use pre-industrial ethnographic data from the Ethnographic Atlas that reports whether
a society used the plough. The authors examine the long-term impact of plough versus hoe use by
linking the information from the Ethnographic Atlas with the geographic distribution of languages
from the Ethnologue. The final variable is the fraction of the population living in a country whose
ancestors traditionally practiced plough agriculture. Although there are large and important gaps
in the data (e.g., Latin America) as well as very little differentiation in several regions (e.g., within
Europe or within sub-Saharan Africa), the authors show that countries with a higher-association
with plough use had lower female labor force participation as measured in 2000. Of course, as
cautioned earlier, it is not possible to use this strategy alone to differentiate between the effect of
culture and institutions. To do so, the authors turn to the epidemiological approach and, following
Fern´ andez and Fogli (2009), show that the labor force participation of second generation women
(i.e., whose parents were born elsewhere but who themselves were born in the country of residence)
in the US or in Europe is lower if their parents came from a country that had ancestral plough use.
Test Score Gender Gap in Math. A growing literature suggests that culture is also an important
driver of persistent gender gaps in math scores and that family can play a role in perpetuating these
gaps by transmitting culture across generations. In an influential descriptive paper, Guiso et al.
(2008) establish that the World Economic Forum's (WEF) Gender Gap Index is highly correlated
with cross-country variation in gender gaps in the international PISA exams. Fryer and Levitt

                                                   16
(2010) replicate this result using data from the international TIMSS exams, although they find that
it is not robust to the inclusion of several Middle Eastern countries (such as Bahrain and Iran) with
highly biased WEF gender gap measures and very small gender gaps in math. Focusing on gender
gaps at the top of the distribution in math performance in the NAEP, Pope and Sydnor (2010) also
find that gender gaps are highly variant across states within the United States.19 Pointing to the
potential importance of social beliefs, they find that state-level average answers to a General Social
Survey question about whether "women are better suited to the home" explain 40% of the variation
in these top-of-the-distribution gender gaps in math.
    Building on this descriptive work, several papers apply the epidemiological approach from
Fern´ andez (2011) described above to determine if culture ­ rather than other features of a country
­ has persistent effects on the gender gap in math scores. Using the PISA test, Nollenberger et
al. (2016) show that females within the same host country whose parents immigrated from coun-
tries with worse WEF gender gap scores perform differentially worse in math. Rodr´       iguez-Planas
and Nollenberger (2018) further show that females whose parents immigrated from countries with
worse WEF gender gap scores have a lower self-reported preference for math, shedding some light
on a potential mechanism underlying the math test score gap.
    The evidence on the test score gender gap from the epidemiological approach is consistent with
parents perpetuating gender gaps in math by transmitting cultural preferences or beliefs to children.
A recent paper by Dossi et al. (2021) further highlights the specific role of the family in cultural
transmission using data from public schools in Florida. The authors find that girls' performance
in math on the NLSY is correlated with son preference as evidenced by families whose fertility
is larger when their first born is a girl rather than a boy.20 As in Farr´e and Vella (2013), they use
the NLSY to show that biased gender role attitudes are correlated with girls' lower performance in
math but do not affect the performance of boys.
Persistent Effects of Family Structure. Persistence across generations extends to family struc-
ture and living arrangements and also appears to be influenced by culture. As described above,
Bahrami-Rad et al. (2020) provide initial evidence that this is the case around the world by show-
ing that traditional family structure variation in anthropological data from the Ethnographic Atlas
is predictive of modern family arrangements. Consistent with the findings of Bahrami-Rad et al.
(2020), Bau (forthcoming) also provides evidence that data on matrilocality (daughters co-reside
with parents after marriage) and patrilocality from the Ethnographic Atlas is predictive of living
arrangements within Indonesia and Ghana, using data from censuses and the Indonesia Family
Life Survey. Building on these preliminary associations, in line with the epidemiological ap-
  19 Intriguingly, states with smaller gender gaps in math also have smaller gender gaps on verbal tests, on which girls

typically outperform boys.
  20 Dahl and Moretti (2008) show that, in the US overall, there is son preference as evidenced by the greater fertility,

on average, in families with a female firstborn child.

                                                          17
proach, Bau further shows that ethnicity-level traditions of matrilocality and patrilocality from the
Ethnographic Atlas are similarly predictive of the practices of individuals who no longer live in
their linguistic homelands, helping to isolate the intergenerationally transmitted effect of culture.
Further pointing to the importance of the intergenerationally-transmitted, cultural component of
family structure, Bau also shows that even within traditionally matrilocal groups in Indonesia,
women who grew up in households that practiced matrilocality are much more likely to practice
matrilocality themselves as adults.
   Other historical family arrangements may still have persistent effects on behavior today, even
if the family institutions themselves no longer persist. Todd (1983) classifies European families
as having either egalitarian (all children inherit equally) or non-egalitarian inheritance norms and
being either authoritarian (children are subject to parents' authority even after marriage) or liberal.
The combination of these two traits gives rise to four family types: (1) absolute nuclear family (in-
dependent living arrangements and lack of strict inheritance rules), (2) egalitarian nuclear family
(independent living arrangements and egalitarian inheritance), (3) stem family (cohabitation and
non-egalitarian inheritance), and (4) communitarian family (cohabitation and equal inheritance)
(Alesina and Giuliano, 2014). Using country-level information on family type and building on a
specification from Galasso and Profeta (2018), Alesina and Giuliano (2014) show that these histor-
ical classifications relate to responses in the World Values Survey, with individuals from countries
with communitarian and authoritarian families reporting higher measures of duty toward their par-
ents. Intriguingly, Galasso and Profeta (2018) argue that these historical family types also affect
which pension institutions countries adopt. In egalitarian societies, more children are responsible
for supporting parents, leading to the adoption of more generous pension plans. Evidence from
cross-country regressions is consistent with this argument. Additionally, Bertocchi and Bozzano
(2015) use data from Italy, where there is within-country variation in traditional family types, to
investigate the effect of these family types on gender gaps in education. In historical data from
1861-1901, they find that the female-male enrollment ratio is higher in areas where nuclear fami-
lies and egalitarian inheritance are the traditional norms. By the contemporary period, the nuclear
family tradition is no longer predictive of female enrollment, but the association with egalitarian
inheritance is more persistent.

4    How Does Culture Affect Family Decision-Making?
While one strand of the literature focuses on cultural transmission ­ and the role of the family
in reinforcing persistence ­ another strand takes cultural practices as given and examines how
they affect decision-making and bargaining power within families. We describe several important
examples from this literature below. We further note that for many of the practices we discuss,
the effects of a practice often cannot be considered in isolation from other practices or aspects


                                                  18
of the institutional setting that are often bundled with it, such as the underlying cost of divorce.
As documented in Section 2, many of the cultural traditions we discuss are widespread and affect
substantial fractions of the global population.
Marriage Payments. Payments at the time of marriage are common throughout the world and
can typically be classified as dowry or bride price (Anderson, 2007). Bride price payments are
widespread in Sub-Saharan Africa, while dowry is still widely practiced in South Asia, and par-
ticularly in India. Dowry payments are payments from the family of the bride to the family of
the groom at the time of marriage, while bride price payments are payments from the groom to
the parents of the bride. Historically, dowry payments served as a bequest to the bride (Goody et
al., 1973; Botticini and Siow, 2003), but in modern India, dowry appears to function at least par-
tially as a groom price, with the groom and his parents claiming a substantial portion of the dowry
(Bloch and Rao, 2002). For both dowry and bride price, payments can be large and consequently
play an important role in family decision-making. For example, Bloch and Rao (2002) document
that dowry payments are on the order of six times annual earnings.
   Ashraf et al. (2020) study the effect of bride price payments on parents' human capital invest-
ments in daughters. The authors hypothesize that bride price allows parents to capture the marriage
market returns to education, incentivizing them to educate their daughters. Indeed, they show that
greater female education is associated with higher bride price payments. Moreover, when the au-
thors compare ethnic groups that traditionally practiced bride price to those who did not, they find
that daughters from the bride price ethnic groups were more likely to be enrolled in school in both
Indonesia and Zambia. Importantly, when they study the effect of large-scale school construction
programs in both countries, they find that education increases more among women from ethnic
groups with bride price traditions relative to women from groups without these traditions. They
conclude that bride price traditions incentivize parents to invest in daughters' education and that
researchers and policymakers alike must take into account the cultural context (and family institu-
tions) to understand the effects of development policies.
   Gaspart and Platteau (2010) focus on a different (but widespread) aspect of bride price payments
­ the fact that a woman must return the bride price payment to the groom in the event of a divorce.
Thus, large bride prices may force women to stay in marriages that they would otherwise leave by
reducing a woman's outside option from separating. Gaspart and Platteau (2010) endogenize bride
prices in a sequential game and show that their model produces the counterintuitive prediction that
divorce will be negatively related to bride price payments. This is because altruistic parents will
endogenously ask for smaller bride prices when the probability of divorce is higher. This prediction
is borne out in data the authors collected from rural Senegal.
   Corno et al. (2020) compare how droughts interact with bride price and dowry in Sub-Saharan
Africa and India. Corno et al. find that droughts increase the likelihood of child marriage in

                                                19
Sub-Saharan Africa because bride price payments allow the parents of daughters to consumption
smooth, while droughts decrease the likelihood of child marriage in India, as droughts make dowry
payments effectively even more costly for parents with daughters. Early marriage in turn leads
to increased early fertility, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. Like Ashraf et al. (2020), Corno
et al. (2020) highlight the importance of taking into account underlying cultural institutions to
understand the direction of relationships in the data and for the design of policy.
   While the literature on the effects of bride price on the family is still relatively small, a larger
literature has focused on dowry. Bloch and Rao (2002) model the occurrence of intimate partner
violence in India in the presence of dowry. In their model, domestic violence allows men to signal
that they are dissatisfied with the marriage, which allows them to extract further transfers from the
bride's family. The bride's family is willing to make more transfers in order to avoid separation
for their daughter, which is assumed to yield her a very low payoff. Dowry payments reduce the
incidence of domestic violence by reducing the value of extracting additional transfers from the
perspective of the husband and increasing the cost of additional transfers from the perspective of
the wife's family. The authors use data they collected from the potter subcaste in three villages
in India to test this hypothesis and find that the level of dowry payment is negatively related to
intimate partner violence. Calvi and Keskar (2021) test a similar hypothesis ­ that higher dowries
lead more resources to be allocated to women ­ although they are agnostic about the mechanism.
In addition to OLS regressions, they use two instruments for dowry: (1) the leave-one-out average
of dowry payments by state and year of marriage in the Rural Economic and Demographic Survey,
which measures prevalent dowry norms at the time of marriage, and (2) gold prices in the year
of marriage. The latter instrument affects the value of dowry as it is traditionally paid in gold.
Across these different specifications, the authors find that a higher dowry leads women to have a
higher share of of resources in the household and to be less likely to be living in poverty within the
household.
   Bhalotra et al. (2020) study the effect of exogenous changes in dowry size on female neonatal
deaths, hypothesizing that dowry leads to son preference by making daughters relatively more
expensive. Like Calvi and Keskar (2021), the authors exploit the fact that much of dowry is paid
in gold, and fluctuations in the price of gold have strong effects on dowry values. Since the price
of gold is a random walk, its price when a daughter is born is predictive of her dowry when she
marries. They find that prior to 1985, when sex selection technologies were not widely available,
positive shocks to the price of gold increase neonatal mortality for girls but not boys and also lead
girls to be shorter. After 1985, positive shocks to the price of gold lead to more skewed sex ratios,
consistent with parents practicing sex-selective abortion.
Son Preference. A variety of cultural practices or attitudes, in addition to dowry, can contribute
to observed male-biased behavior in both high and low-income countries. These practices include

                                                  20
patrilocality (sons live with and care for parents in old age), patrilineality (inheritance and lineage
are passed through sons), concerns about female purity, and the importance of sons for performing
religious rites at parents' funerals (Jayachandran, 2015; Ebenstein and Leung, 2010). Moreover,
cultural traditions may lead birth order, in addition to gender, to be an important determinant of
parental investment if firstborn sons are more likely to inherit or care for parents in their old age.
In its most extreme form, son preference can lead to sex selective abortion, female infanticide and
abandonment, or the relative neglect of daughters, all of which may contribute to skewed male-to-
female sex ratios throughout South Asia, West Asia, and China (Sen, 1990; Yi et al., 1993; Gupta,
2005; Lin et al., 2014).
   Jayachandran (2017) notes that many of the drivers of son preference described above may lead
parents to want at least one or two sons but do not necessarily lead them to prefer sons after
they have at least one or two. As a result, when parents can practice sex selection, declining
fertility rates can lead to more male-biased sex ratios, even when parents' preference for sons at
any given fertility rate is not changing. Using survey data she collected from India, Jayachandran
(2017) shows that parents' self-reported desired sex-ratios (conditional on fertility level) for their
children's children are indeed more male-biased at lower fertility levels. Almond et al. (2019) find
a similar pattern in parents' preferences in China. Based on the Indian data, declines in fertility
rates in India paired with sex selection can explain 30-40% of the recent increase in gender bias in
India's sex ratios.
   Ebenstein (2010) observes a similar phenomenon in China under the one child policy, where
sex selective abortion and female infanticide led to 9.3 million missing girls aged 0-18 in the 2000
census. Just as declining fertility exacerbates skewed sex-ratios in India, Ebenstein (2010) finds
that the one child policy ­ which penalizes high fertility ­ exacerbates them in China. Ebenstein
(2010) shows that province-year-ethnicity level variation in fines on excess fertility is positively
related to sex ratios after the implementation of the one child policy but not before. Almond et
al. (2019) further show that when incomes in China increased due to land reforms, son preference
combined with the one child policy led to even more skewed sex-ratios. The authors suggest that
this is because using a ultrasound to sex-select is a costly normal good; thus, higher incomes lead
parents to sex-select more.
   Qian (2008) explores how another set of post-Mao reforms affected sex ratios in China. She
compares the effects of reforms that increased orchard production (which favors male labor) and
tea production (which favors female labor) in different areas. Using a difference-in-differences
strategy, as well as an instrumental variable based on agricultural suitability for tea, she finds
that increased tea production reduces male-female sex ratios, while increased orchard production
increases them. Since the period she studies mainly pre-dates the availability of sex-selective
abortion, she infers this is due to changes in early female mortality. Intriguingly, increased tea


                                                  21
production also increases education for both daughters and sons, while increased orchard produc-
tion decreases education for daughters and leaves sons' education unchanged. Qian (2008) con-
cludes that this is evidence that tea production doesn't simply increase parents' incentives to have
daughters but also, by increasing females' income, increases women's bargaining power within the
household.
   Sex selection also occurs in high-income countries. Almond et al. (2013) show that sex selection
persists among Asian immigrants to Canada. Specifically, the authors show that Asian immigrants
who previously had 1 or 2 daughters are more likely to have a son, and this effect appears for second
as well as first generation immigrants. Similarly, Abrevaya (2009) finds evidence of sex selection
among Asian immigrants to the United States. In particular, she shows that 3rd and 4th births are
much more likely to be boys among Indian and Chinese immigrants after the technology for sex
selective abortion became widely available, but other groups do not display the same pattern.
   Parents' desire to reach their ideal number of sons in India can also affect mothers and daughters
indirectly by reducing birth spacing. Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2011) show that, since breast-
feeding has contraceptive properties, mothers will stop breastfeeding daughters more quickly if
they have yet to reach their ideal number of sons. Consistent with this finding, Milazzo (2018)
finds that having a first born daughter leads to higher fertility and shorter birth spacing, ultimately
resulting in a higher risk of anemia and lower chance of survival for mothers.
   Son preference does not just affect sex selection and fertility behavior. It can also affect hu-
man capital investment and family structure. Several of the papers on the test score gap we dis-
cussed in Section 3 cite son preference as a potential driver of the gap. Jayachandran and Pande
(2017) also use son preference to help explain the striking differences in stunting between India
and Sub-Saharan Africa. India outperforms Sub-Saharan Africa on most health and development
indicators, but at a given level of income, Indians are much shorter than Sub-Saharan Africans.
Consistent with the authors' argument that a strong preference for oldest sons in Hindu culture
also explains a large portion of the average height/stunting gap between Indian and African chil-
dren, the height/stunting gradients over birth order are substantially steeper in India than the nearby
Muslim countries of Pakistan and Bangladesh, than in Sub-Saharan Africa, and than in tradition-
ally matrilineal areas of India. Strikingly, pre-natal investments are higher for second-born female
children with no older brother before gender is observed, but post-natal investments after gender
is observed are lower.
   Turning to the effects of son preference on family structure, Dahl and Moretti (2008) estimate
the effect of having a firstborn daughter on whether the mother is married, whether she is divorced,
and whether the child is in the custody of the father in the case of a divorce. Firstborn daughters
increase the probability of the mother never marrying and of divorce and reduce the probability of
being in the father's custody. Additionally, in cases where sex was known due to an ultrasound, the


                                                  22
authors find that the mother of a firstborn daughter is less likely to be married (suggesting that the
probability of a "shot gun marriage" fell). As a result of these effects, firstborn daughters (and their
siblings) are more likely to grow up in households without a father and grow up in settings with
fewer financial resources. Dahl and Moretti (2008) cite several pieces of evidence suggesting that
this effect is due to gender bias. Mothers in the United States have higher fertility after a firstborn
daughter, indicating that parents have more children in an attempt to have a son. This pattern is
inconsistent with the alternative explanation for the results that daughters are more expensive to
raise. In addition, Gallup polling indicates that men ­ but not women ­ report a strong preference
for having sons rather than daughters on average.
Polygyny. As documented in Section 2, polygyny is still common in much of Sub-Saharan
Africa. We discuss a few examples from a larger literature on the effects of polygyny on intra-
household decison-making and household outcomes below. Tertilt (2005) shows that polygamist
societies have higher fertility rates and lower savings rates than non-monogamous societies. She
argues that these stylized facts are consistent with the fact that polygyny leads to a shortage of
women and hence positive bride prices, incentivizing parents to have more children to save rather
than formally saving. In this context, bride prices encourage fertility even though they make mar-
riage more costly for sons because parents receive the bride price for their daughters but do not
help their sons pay the bride price. Rossi (2019) provides another explanation for high fertility
rates in polygamist societies. She finds evidence that co-wives compete with one another for their
share of the husband's resources by having more children.
Intimate Partner Violence The effect of culture on how decisions are made and how control
is exercised in the family is a particularly important question for domestic violence, more gen-
erally called intimate partner violence (IPV). IPV is one of the more disturbing ways for men
(overwhelmingly) to exercise power over their partner to influence outcomes.
   IPV is a widespread problem throughout the world. In developed countries such as the US,
surveys show that 37% of women say that they have experienced IPV over their lifetimes and it is
even more prevalent in developing countries.21 In addition to the immediate negative consequences
of IPV, women affected by IPV are more likely to develop mental health problems, alcohol and
substance abuse, unintended pregnancies, and employment difficulties.22 Children also suffer neg-
ative consequences: they tend to have lower birth weights and impose negative externalities on
their peers in school.23
   The link between IPV and women's employment can be used to learn about how decisions
are made in the the household. Viewed through the lens of bargaining theory, the predictions
  21 See Doyle and Aizer (2018).
  22 See Erten and Keskin (2018) for a review of the literature.
  23 See Carrell and Hoekstra (2010).




                                                          23
about the effects of female employment are ambiguous. Greater employment for women may
increase their bargaining power by improving their outside options, on the one hand. On the other
hand, there are now more resources to be extracted and to do this the man may use the threat
and actual imposition of violence as long as the value of the outside option is still too low to be
exercised.24 The consequences also depend on whether the violence is considered "expressive"
(the abuser enjoys the violence) or instrumental (a way to extract resources).25 Just as importantly,
IPV does not happen in a social vacuum. Overall cultural factors, such as how socially, as well
as economically, easy it is to walk out on a husband, how working women are looked upon, and
how much male identity is tied up in being the sole bread winner also matter. Several papers (in
addition to the papers on dowry discussed above) document the role of cultural factors in IPV.
   Alesina et al. (forthcoming) show that ancestral traits of different African ethnic groups are
correlated with IPV. In line with the argument from Boserup (2007) discussed above, in ethnic
groups that originally used the plough, as well as those based on fishing and husbandry, women
had a less active role in the economy. The authors tend to find an positive relationship between
IPV and ancestral production modes in which women played a less active role.
   Tur-Prats (2019) analyzes the relationship between IPV and family types in Spain. The paper
distinguishes between patrilineal "stem" families in which one son inherits all the land and stays in
the parental home with his family and "nuclear" families in which all children receive a share of the
inheritance when they leave the parental home to start their own households. The thesis explored
is that IPV should be lower in places with a historical legacy of stem families as the presence
of a mother-in-law allowed the wife to contribute more to non-domestic work. Tur-Prats (2019)
uses the 1860 Spanish census to compute the average number of married and widowed women
per household at the province level and instruments for family type using the establishment of
different inheritance laws in different parts of Spain. These laws are taken as exogenous, as they
were established many centuries ago in response to the different strengths of the nobility in the
West of the country relative to that in the East. Using a host of individual controls, as well as
historical and contemporary controls for development, the author finds that territories where the
stem family was more prevalent in the past exhibit lower IPV rates today. Using the World Value
Survey to study gender attitudes, the paper also finds that individuals that currently live in places
that were historically associated with stem families have more gender-equal attitudes. This is
indicative of the cultural transmission of attitudes towards domestic violence as the family type in
contemporary Spain is overwhelmingly nuclear.
  24 Forexample, Heath (2014) finds a positive correlation between IPV and employment in Bangladesh only for
women with a low education.
  25 Expressive violence by domestic partners is studied in the context of football games by Card and Dahl (2011).




                                                       24
5    The Family and Cultural Change
Although the vast majority of the empirical literature on culture and the family has focused on
showing that culture has persistent effects, there is also evidence that culture can rapidly change,
even within a single generation. Why does culture change? In general, starting from a steady state,
cultural change requires a "shock" to technology, institutions, or to knowledge/information that
affects beliefs and/or changes incentives to behave in norm-conforming ways.
Information and Learning. The effects of information on social beliefs, provided in the form
of different role models via the media, is shown by La Ferrara et al. (2012) and Jensen and Oster
(2009). These papers study the effect on attitudes and other outcomes produced by of the introduc-
tion of certain television programs in Brazil and India. In Brazil, the vast majority of the population
watches the 8pm soap opera aired by Rede Globo, which has had a virtual monopoly over their
production. Over the period studied by La Ferrara et al. (2012), over 70% of the female characters
portrayed had no children and some 20% of them had only one; the average number of children
for the population was substantially higher though declining over this time period. The authors
hypothesize that exposure to these different family models could affect fertility and examine this
thesis by using variation in the timing of the availability of Globo's signal across geographic areas.
They show that, ceteris paribus, Globo coverage is associated with a decrease in fertility, especially
for households with lower education.
   In a related vein, Jensen and Oster (2009) use a three-year, individual-level panel to examine
the effect of the introduction of cable television on women's status in rural India. Cable television
offers viewers different programs than those available on government channels. The most popular
Indian serials take place in urban settings, featuring women with more progressive attitudes than
are prevalent in rural areas. The authors find that those villages that saw cable television introduced
in the three-year period experienced significant decreases in the reported acceptability of domestic
violence towards women and son preference, as well as increases in women's autonomy and de-
creases in fertility. The findings in the two papers show that culture can change quickly and that
these changes are bound to have intergenerational consequences, both as a direct consequence of
the economic changes associated with the fertility decline and through the potential transmission
of beliefs to the next generation.
   Taking inspiration from the "S-shaped" curve that characterizes the evolution of married women's
labor force participation in countries with lengthy longitudinal data (e.g., the US, England, and
France), Fern´ andez (2013) develops a model of intergenerational learning in which individuals
learn from their parents and from observing other people's work decisions. She uses the model
as a lens to study about 120 years of married women's labor force participation in the US. In the
model, individuals learn both from private (noisy) signals, which are then passed on to their chil-


                                                 25
dren and from observing a (noisy) signal of the labor force participation of the prior generation.
That is, learning is from both private and social sources. The information concerns the true cost (to
a woman's marriage, to her psyche, or to her children's outcomes) of working outside the home, a
topic which has long been a source of private and social anxiety. The model generically produces
an S-shape in which, if society starts out believing in general that it is bad for women to work out-
side the home, then female labor force participation is low and beliefs change only slowly at first.
The latter evolves very slowly when few women work because of the low accuracy of the public
signal. At some point, when enough women are working, beliefs can change rapidly, as does labor
force participation. Once beliefs are more positive, learning and changes in work behavior slow
down, producing altogether the S-shaped curve. An interesting implication of the model is that
policies that push against prevailing cultural beliefs can have positive welfare implications even
if the government has the same social beliefs as everyone else. For example, subsidizing female
wages when their labor force participation is low can increase welfare not because women earn
more, but rather because by encouraging more women to work, intergenerational learning is sped
up. Calibrating the model to data moments in the 1990s and 2000s, including the propensity for
a woman to work as a function of whether her mother worked, and feeding in the time series of
wage distributions for men and women, the author shows that the model does a good job of repli-
cating 120 years of married women's labor force participation. Labor force participation starts out
very low in the 1880s and increases very slowly until the mid 19th century, accelerating markedly
between 1970 and 1990 and then flattening out. Moreover, making use of of Roper poll data avail-
able from 1936 onward regarding the "appropriateness" of a married woman working if she has a
husband capable of supporting her, Fern´  andez (2013) shows that the model's median belief on this
issue does a good job of tracking the evolution of this time series as well.
   Attitudes towards same-sex relationships have undergone remarkably rapid change in a few
decades. While in 1973, 80% of the US population thought that same-sex relationships were "al-
ways wrong" or "almost always wrong," these proportions were 41% in 2016.26 In many countries,
gay couples can now legally marry, have children, and enjoy all the rights previously restricted to
opposite-sex couples. This would have been inconceivable a scant thirty years ago. Why did this
change occur? In the context of the US, Fern´   andez et al. (2021) show that that after twenty years
of stable and very negative attitudes, opinions turned markedly more favorable following the 1992
presidential election.27 The election saw, for the first time, the two main political parties adopt
explicitly opposing stands with respect to gay people serving openly in the military, and the debate
over this policy continued during most of 1993. This was accompanied by an unprecedented level
  26 Calculated using GSS poll data.
  27 The  authors show that there was a clear structural break in the evolution of attitudes in 1992 with a significant
positive jump that thereafter continued to evolve with greater proportions becoming more positive over time in a
process of cultural diffusion.


                                                         26
of media attention on gay-related concerns over the same period. The authors hypothesize that the
debate and accompanying salience of gay-related concerns led individuals to debate and recon-
sider their positions. In keeping with contact theory (Allport et al., 1954), they show that opinion
change was greatest in those areas (states and counties) with a larger gay population as measured
in a variety of ways. This paper is suggestive of the fact that people learn or rethink their beliefs
when an issue becomes more salient and they are exposed to arguments on both sides.
   Although the analysis discussed so far depicted individuals changing their actions/beliefs mostly
without regard for how others behaved except as a source of learning, in reality the beliefs and
actions of local society (e.g., of family, friends, and neighbors) matter for another very important
reason. Culture is a social phenomenon and is maintained not only via beliefs but also via carrots
and sticks. An individual may be reluctant to change their actions, e.g., work as a married woman
with children, if others believe that this makes her a bad mother and ostracize her. An interesting
confirmation of the importance of social beliefs is provided in a field experiment by Bursztyn et al.
(2020) in the context of contemporary Saudi Arabia. In that country, the percent of women working
outside the home is very low and, the authors argue, the custom of male guardianship implies that
the latter's approval is needed for a wife to work outside the home. Recruiting samples of 30
young, college-educated married men by neighborhood in Riyadh, the authors show that men's
own opinions about their wives working outside the home are positive, whereas their incentivized
guesses about the opinions of their 29 neighbors are on average too low. Providing information
about the neighborhood average, randomized at the individual level, induces men to sign up their
wives to a mobile phone job-matching service rather than choose a $5 amazon gift card. Hence,
in this context, providing individuals with more accurate information about others' beliefs affects
their behavior towards the possibility of their wife working outside the home.
Policy Changes. In addition and as a complement to learning, changes in the environment result-
ing from the introduction of new policies can change incentives and also lead to changes in attitudes
and practices over time. Several papers demonstrate this. Bastian (2020) studies the effect of the
introduction of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) in 1975 on the labor supply of women with
children, particularly unmarried women. Using cross-state demographic heterogeneity to predict
the size of the response, the author shows that attitudes towards married women working changed
(positively) the most in the states that were predicted to have the largest labor supply response.
   Campa and Serafinelli (2019) study the effects of State Socialism ­ a very large-scale policy
change ­ on gender attitudes, exploiting the partition of East and West Germany. Campa and
Serafinelli find that women from East Germany place greater importance on career success and
that women and men alike are less likely to hold traditional gender attitudes. In line with the
findings of Bastian (2020), the authors find that the changes in attitudes are greater in areas with
greater growth in female employment.

                                                 27
   Bau (forthcoming) directly studies the effect of policy on cultural traditions that determine fam-
ily institutions. In particular, she studies a set of cultural traditions that determine whether daugh-
ters (matrilocality) or sons (patrilocality) stay with parents after marriage and care for them in their
old age. These traditions are particularly valuable for studying cultural change, since co-residence
patterns can be observed to some extent in most household survey datasets, including censuses.
Bau hypothesizes that these traditions both provide parents with old age support and mitigate in-
complete contracting problems in human capital investment by incentivizing parents to invest in
the children who will remain in the household as adults. The introduction of pension plans should
reduce the value of transmitting cultural traditions of matrilocality/patrilocality to the next genera-
tion, reducing the practice of matrilocality and patrilocality among those who were children when
the plans were introduced. Consequently, parents should also have less incentive to invest in the
education of the children who now no longer care for them in their old age. Consistent with these
predictions, in triple-differences regressions that exploit ethnicity-level variation in cultural tradi-
tions from the Ethnographic Atlas, geographic variation in pension plan exposure, and cohort-level
variation in exposure to pension policies, the paper shows that the introduction of a pension plan
in Indonesia reduced both traditionally matrilocal women's educational attainment and the proba-
bility that they resided with their parents after marriage. The results are symmetric for males from
traditionally patrilocal ethnic groups from Ghana. Thus, a specific government policy can lead to
culture change ­ and changes in family structure ­ within a single generation.
   In another example of a policy leading to cultural change with effects on the family, Beaman et
al. (2009) exploit random assignment of gender quotas for leadership positions on village councils
in West Bengal. They show that after ten years of quotas, women are more likely to stand for, and
win, elected positions in councils required to have a female chief councilor in the previous two
elections. Furthermore, they show that changed attitudes are a likely channel, as prior exposure
to a female chief councilor improves perceptions of female leaders' effectiveness and weakens
stereotypes about gender roles in the public and domestic spheres.
Technological Change. Changes in technology can also create incentives for change, as shown
by Fern´andez-Villaverde et al. (2014) in a model that features parents making a costly effort to
socialize their daughter to feel shame if she has a child out-of-wedlock with contraceptive tech-
nology (the probability that contraception does not fail) improving over time. An out-of-wedlock
child reduces the daughter's economic prospects, which is all that parents in the model care about.
The daughter cares about this as well but also enjoys sex. The authors calibrate the steady-state
of the model to various moments of the data for the US in 2000 and show how technological im-
provements in contraception reduce the level of effort parents expend on inculcating their children
with higher levels of shame and increase the prevalence of premarital sex.



                                                  28
Changes to the Environment. A growing literature examines how accidental variation in sex
ratios is correlated with attitudes, showing that culture adapts to a different environment. Grosjean
and Khattar (2018) exploit variation across Australian counties that resulted from the British policy
of sending convicts (mostly men) there and from the pull, primarily for free men, of opportunities
for employment in agriculture and gold mines. The gender imbalance persisted for a long time.
The authors show that in places with a historically skewed male-to-female ratios, present-day in-
habitants have more conservative gender attitudes, female labor force participation is lower, and
women enjoy more leisure. In contrast, Teso (2019) studies the long-run effects of reductions in
the male-to-female sex ratio in Sub-Saharan Africa due to the trans-Atlantic slave trade. Even
though sex ratios have since normalized, today, women from more affected ethnic groups are more
likely to work and are more likely to work in higher ranking jobs. Teso (2019) hypothesizes that
this is because the lack of men during the slave trade induced women to work more outside the
home. Interestingly, Teso (2019) finds that both a woman's ethnic group's experience with the
slave trade and her husband's ethnic group's experience matter, highlighting that part of the slave
trade's effects may be due to mothers transmitting more positive attitudes toward women working
to their sons in line with Fern´ andez et al. (2004). Another natural experiment is provided by ex-
ogenous variation across French departements in the death rate of soldiers in World War I. Using
the epidemiological approach to study the work behavior of migrants within France, Gay (2018)
shows that in present-day France, women whose mothers were born in departements that suffered
high death rates work more than women whose mothers were born in low death rate departements.
   Changes in sex ratios also seem to have left a mark on attitudes towards same-sex relationships.
Brodeur and Haddad (2018) in the US trace the prevalence of same-sex couples and positive at-
titudes towards same-sex relationships to a historical event, namely the gold rush and the related
high male to female ratio. Interestingly, in the Australian context, Baranov et al. (2018) show that
in areas that were heavily male-biased in the 18th and 19th century, more Australians voted against
same-sex marriage. Why there may be differences in reactions in the US vs Australia to a skewed
sex ratio remains to be resolved.

6    Conclusion & Directions for Future Research
The literature on culture and the family has important lessons for economists and policymakers
alike. As shown in a variety of contexts, the effects of policies, as well as other shocks, depend not
only on economic "fundamentals" but also on culture. As discussed previously in Sections 3 and 4,
policies such as school construction in Indonesia (Ashraf et al., 2020), the introduction of pension
programs in Ghana and Indonesia (Bau, forthcoming), or the granting of citizenship rights for
immigrants in Germany (Dahl et al., 2021) affected education and residence patterns in ways that
depended on how family institutions varied across groups. Similarly, exogenous shocks to income


                                                 29
affected the prevalence of child marriage but in opposite directions according to the nature of the
family institutions (Corno et al., 2020). Ignoring the potential interactions of family institutions,
cultural beliefs, and policies by clinging to an outdated belief in an "economic man" that lives in a
social vacuum is simply bad economics and can lead interventions to have unexpectedly negative
outcomes. We note, however, that this does not mean that we cannot learn or draw policy lessons
for one context from studies in another context. Rather, to evaluate the external validity of a
study or adapt policies across contexts, we must take into account how the cultural institutions and
prevailing social beliefs in those contexts differ.
   This handbook chapter also highlights several directions for future work. First, as discussed in
Section 2, a vast array of family institutions exist globally and have existed over time. Across
and within-countries, there is wide variation in marriage payments, post-marital residence, and
polygamy. Yet, in many cases, the drivers of this variation are unclear, and the literature may
benefit from additional conceptual frameworks for understanding why different institutions arise.
In addition to this geographic variation, as has been documented here and elsewhere, the features of
the modern family have undergone substantial change around the world, including in high-income
countries, in recent decades. Divorce and remaining unmarried (though cohabitating) are both
increasingly common, and same-sex unions have dramatically increased. These changes in family
structure in turn are likely to have meaningful intergenerational effects. Understanding the drivers
of these substantial changes, how these trends vary by education and socioeconomic status, and
whether these changes will persist into the future are important questions for future research.
   Finally, while several papers, which we discuss in Section 5, analyze how technological change,
institutional or policy changes, learning, and exogenous shocks can lead to cultural change, this
also remains a fertile area for further study. Looking to the future, it is important to understand
how new technological and institutional or legal changes (such as the rise of surrogacy) will interact
with and potentially lead to cultural change. The increasing ability to have children later in life and
a lengthening of life expectancy may bring dramatic changes to how families are formed and the
needs they satisfy. Demographic change and an aging population will pose significant challenges
and raise questions about who cares for parents. Along with the increasing cost of housing, falling
fertility, and the rise of female-to-male education gaps, these changes may have potentially pro-
found implications for family structures. And, as family institutions change, decision-making and
the division of resources within the family are likely to change in important ways as well (see Sec-
tion 4). Moreover, in both high and low-income countries, as markets and social welfare policies,
such as pension programs, continue to fill more of the roles historically satisfied through informal
family institutions, family institutions may continue to evolve in ways we cannot yet predict.




                                                  30
References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "Cultural assimilation during
  the age of mass migration," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.
Abrevaya, Jason, "Are there missing girls in the United States? Evidence from birth data," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (2), 1­34.
Akerlof, George A and Rachel E Kranton, "Economics and identity," The quarterly journal of
  economics, 2000, 115 (3), 715­753.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, "Family ties," in "Handbook of economic growth," Vol. 2
  2014, pp. 177­215.
  , Benedetta Brioschi, and Eliana La Ferrara, "Violence Against Women: A Cross-cultural
  Analysis for Africa," Economica, forthcoming.
  , Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, "On the origins of gender roles: Women and the plough,"
  The quarterly journal of economics, 2013, 128 (2), 469­530.
Allport, Gordon Willard, Kenneth Clark, and Thomas Pettigrew, The nature of prejudice,
  Addison-Wesley Reading, MA, 1954.
Almond, Douglas, Hongbin Li, and Shuang Zhang, "Land reform and sex selection in China,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (2), 560­585.
  , Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan, "Son preference and the persistence of culture: evidence
  from South and East Asian immigrants to Canada," Population and Development Review, 2013,
  39 (1), 75­95.
Anderson, Siwan, "The economics of dowry and brideprice," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2007, 21 (4), 151­174.
Antecol, Heather, "An examination of cross-country differences in the gender gap in labor force
  participation rates," Labour Economics, 2000, 7 (4), 409­426.
Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena, "Bride price and female
  education," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (2), 591­641.
Bahrami-Rad, Duman, Anke Becker, and Joseph Henrich, "Tabulated Nonsense: Testing the
  validity of the Ethnographic Atlas," Working Paper, 2020.
Baranov, Victoria, Ralph De Haas, and Pauline A Grosjean, "Men. Roots and Consequences
  of Masculinity Norms," 2018.
Bastian, Jacob, "The Rise of Working Mothers and the 1975 Earned Income Tax Credit," Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020, 12 (3), 44­75.
Bau, Natalie, "Can policy change culture? Government pension plans and traditional kinship
  practices," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
  , Martin Rotemberg, Manisha Shah, and Bryce Steinberg, "Human Capital Investment in


                                              31
  the Presence of Child Labor," NBER Working Paper, 2020.
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia
  Topalova, "Powerful women: female leadership and gender bias," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2009, 124 (4), 1497­1540.
Becker, Anke, "On the economic origins of constraints on women's sexuality," Working Paper,
  2018.
Becker, Gary Stanley and Gary S Becker, A Treatise on the Family, Harvard university press,
  2009.
Bertocchi, Graziella and Monica Bozzano, "Family structure and the education gender gap:
  evidence from Italian provinces," CESifo Economic Studies, 2015, 61 (1), 263­300.
Bhalotra, Sonia, Abhishek Chakravarty, and Selim Gulesci, "The price of gold: Dowry and
  death in India," Journal of Development Economics, 2020, 143, 102413.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
  of Preferences," Journal of Economic Theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298­319.
Bloch, Francis and Vijayendra Rao, "Terror as a bargaining instrument: A case study of dowry
  violence in rural India," American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (4), 1029­1043.
Boserup, Ester, Woman's role in economic development, Earthscan, 2007.
Botticini, Maristella and Aloysius Siow, "Why dowries?," American Economic Review, 2003, 93
  (4), 1385­1398.
Boyd, Robert and Peter J Richerson, Culture and the evolutionary process, University of
  Chicago press, 1988.
Brodeur, Abel and Joanne Haddad, "Institutions, Attitudes and LGBT: Evidence from the Gold
  Rush," 2018.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Alessandra L Gonz´      alez, and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Misperceived
  social norms: Women working outside the home in saudi arabia," American economic review,
  2020, 110 (10), 2997­3029.
Calvi, Rossella and Ajinkya Keskar, "Dowries, Resource Allocation, and Poverty," 2021.
Campa, Pamela and Michel Serafinelli, "Politico-economic regimes and attitudes: Female work-
  ers under state socialism," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (2), 233­248.
Card, David and Gordon B Dahl, "Family violence and football: The effect of unexpected emo-
  tional cues on violent behavior," The quarterly journal of economics, 2011, 126 (1), 103­143.
Carrell, Scott E. and Mark L. Hoekstra, "Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Ex-
  posed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids," American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 211­28.
Carvalho, Jean Paul and Bary Pradelski, "Identity and Underrepresentations," working paper,
  2021.


                                              32
Chiplunkar, Gaurav and Jeffrey Weaver, "Marriage markets and the rise of dowry in India,"
  Working Paper, 2019.
Corno, Lucia, Nicole Hildebrandt, and Alessandra Voena, "Age of marriage, weather shocks,
  and the direction of marriage payments," Econometrica, 2020, 88 (3), 879­915.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Enrico Moretti, "The Demand for Sons," The Review of Economic Studies,
  2008, 75 (4), 1085­1120.
Dahl, Gordon, Christina Felfe, Paul Prijters, and Helmut Rainer, "Caught between Cultures:
  Unintended Consequences of Improving Opportunity for Immigrant Girls," working paper,
  2021.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "The intergenerational trans-
  mission of risk and trust attitudes," The Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (2), 645­677.
Dossi, Gaia, David Figlio, Paola Giuliano, and Paola Sapienza, "Born in the family: preferences
  for boys and the gender gap in math," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2021, 183,
  175­188.
Doyle, Joseph J. and Anna Aizer, "Economics of Child Protection: Maltreatment, Foster Care,
  and Intimate Partner Violence," Annual Review of Economics, 2018, 10 (1), 87­108.
Ebenstein, Avraham, "The "missing girls" of China and the unintended consequences of the one
  child policy," Journal of Human resources, 2010, 45 (1), 87­115.
  , "Patrilocality and missing women," Working Paper, 2014.
   and Steven Leung, "Son preference and access to social insurance: evidence from China's
  rural pension program," Population and Development Review, 2010, 36 (1), 47­70.
Erten, Bilge and Pinar Keskin, "For Better or for Worse?: Education and the Prevalence of
  Domestic Violence in Turkey," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (1),
  64­105.
Farr´e, L´idia and Francis Vella, "The Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Role Attitudes
  and its Implications for Female Labour Force Participation," Economica, 2013, 80 (318), 219­
  247.
Fenske, James, "African polygamy: Past and present," Journal of Development Economics, 2015,
  117, 58­73.
Fern´andez, Raquel, Culture and Economics, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK,
  , "Does culture matter?," Handbook of social economics, 2011, 1, 481­510.
  , "Cultural change as learning: The evolution of female labor force participation over a century,"
  American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 472­500.
  , "Family and gender: questions for the New Institutional Economics," in "A Research Agenda
  for New Institutional Economics," Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018.
  , Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, "Mothers and sons: Preference formation and female


                                                33
  labor force dynamics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (4), 1249­1299.
   and , "Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs, work, and fertility," American economic
  journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146­77.
  , Sahar Parsa, and Martina Viarengo, "Coming Out in America: Thirty Years of Cultural
  Change," Working Paper, 2021.
Fern´                       ´ Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner, "From shame to game in
     andez-Villaverde, Jesus,
  one hundred years: An economic model of the rise in premarital sex and its de-stigmatization,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (1), 25­61.
Fern´andez, Raquel and Joyce Cheng Wong, "Free to Leave? A Welfare Analysis of Divorce
  Regimes," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (3), 72­115.
Ferrara, Eliana La, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea, "Soap operas and fertility: Evidence
  from Brazil," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (4), 1­31.
Francois, Patrick, Thomas Fujiwara, and Tanguy van Ypersele, "The origins of human proso-
  ciality: Cultural group selection in the workplace and the laboratory," Science Advances, 2018,
  4 (9).
Fryer, Roland G and Steven D Levitt, "An empirical analysis of the gender gap in mathematics,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 210­40.
Galasso, Vincenzo and Paola Profeta, "When the state mirrors the family: the design of pension
  systems," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2018, 16 (6), 1712­1763.
Gaspart, Frederic and Jean-Philippe Platteau, "Strategic behavior and marriage payments: the-
  ory and evidence from Senegal," Economic development and cultural change, 2010, 59 (1),
  149­185.
Gay, Victor, "The Legacy of the Missing Men: The Long-Run Impact of World War I on Female
  Labor Force Participation," 2018.
Giuliano, Paola, "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?," Jour-
  nal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (5), 927­952.
   and Nathan Nunn, "Ancestral characteristics of modern populations," Economic History of
  Developing Regions, 2018, 33 (1), 1­17.
Goody, Jack, The character of kinship, Vol. 17, Cambridge University Press, 1975.
  , John Rankine Goody, and Stanley Jeyaraja Tambiah, Bridewealth and dowry number 7,
  CUP Archive, 1973.
Gould, Eric D, Omer Moav, and Avi Simhon, "The mystery of monogamy," American Economic
  Review, 2008, 98 (1), 333­57.
Greif, Avner, "Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early trade: The Maghribi
  traders' coalition," The American economic review, 1993, pp. 525­548.
Grosjean, Pauline and Rose Khattar, "It's raining men! Hallelujah? The long-run consequences


                                               34
   of male-biased sex ratios," The Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 86 (2), 723­754.
Grossbard, Amyra, "An economic analysis of polygyny: The case of Maiduguri," Current an-
   thropology, 1976, 17 (4), 701­707.
Grossbard, Shoshana, On the Economics of Marriage: A Theory of Marriage Labor, and Divorce
   01 1993.
Guiso, Luigi, Ferdinando Monte, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "Culture, gender, and
   math," SCIENCE-NEW YORK THEN WASHINGTON-, 2008, 320 (5880), 1164.
Gulesci, Selim, Sam Jindani, Eliana La Ferrara, David Smerdon, Munshi Sulaiman, and
   H Young, "A Stepping Stone Approach to Understanding Harmful Norms," 2021.
Gupta, Monica Das, "Explaining Asia's "missing women": a new look at the data," Population
   and development review, 2005, 31 (3), 529­535.
Heath, Rachel, "Women's Access to Labor Market Opportunities, Control of Household Re-
   sources, and Domestic Violence: Evidence from Bangladesh," World Development, 2014, 57,
   32­46.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow, "The allocation of talent
   and us economic growth," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1439­1474.
Jacoby, Hanan G, "The economics of polygyny in sub-Saharan Africa: Female productivity and
   the demand for wives in C^   ote d'Ivoire," Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (5), 938­971.
Jayachandran, Seema, "The roots of gender inequality in developing countries," Annual Review
   of Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 63­88.
   , "Fertility decline and missing women," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
   2017, 9 (1), 118­39.
    and Ilyana Kuziemko, "Why do mothers breastfeed girls less than boys? Evidence and impli-
   cations for child health in India," The Quarterly journal of economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1485­1538.
    and Rohini Pande, "Why are Indian children so short? The role of birth order and son prefer-
   ence," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2600­2629.
Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster, "The power of TV: Cable television and women's status in
   India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1057­1094.
Jr, Raymond G Gordon, Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Dallas: SIL International, 16 ed.
   2009.
Lin, Ming-Jen, Jin-Tan Liu, and Nancy Qian, "More missing women, fewer dying girls: The
   impact of sex-selective abortion on sex at birth and relative female mortality in Taiwan," Journal
   of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (4), 899­926.
Lowes, Sara, Nathan Nunn, James A Robinson, and Jonathan L Weigel, "The evolution of
   culture and institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (4), 1065­
   1091.


                                                 35
Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Jenna Stearns, "Family Inequality: Diverging Patterns
  in Marriage, Cohabitation, and Childbearing," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (2),
  79­102.
Milazzo, Annamaria, "Why are adult women missing? Son preference and maternal survival in
  India," Journal of Development Economics, 2018, 134, 467­484.
Minnesota Population Center, "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version
  7.3 [dataset]," https://doi.org/10.18128/D020.V7.3 2020.
Murdock, George Peter, Ethnographic Atlas, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.
                           ´
Nollenberger, Natalia, Nuria    Rodr´ iguez-Planas, and Almudena Sevilla, "The math gender gap:
  The role of culture," American Economic Review P&P, 2016, 106 (5), 257­61.
Orians, Gordon H., "On the Evolution of Mating Systems in Birds and Mammals," The American
  Naturalist, 1969, 103 (934), 589­603.
Pope, Devin G and Justin R Sydnor, "Geographic variation in the gender differences in test
  scores," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 95­108.
Qian, Nancy, "Missing women and the price of tea in China: The effect of sex-specific earnings
  on sex imbalance," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (3), 1251­1285.
Rodr´                   ´
      iguez-Planas, Nuria    and Natalia Nollenberger, "Let the girls learn! It is not only about
  math. . . it's about gender social norms," Economics of Education Review, 2018, 62, 230­253.
Rosenzweig, Mark R and Oded Stark, "Consumption smoothing, migration, and marriage: Ev-
  idence from rural India," Journal of political Economy, 1989, 97 (4), 905­926.
Rossi, Pauline, "Strategic choices in polygamous households: Theory and evidence from Sene-
  gal," The Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (3), 1332­1370.
Sen, Amartya, "More than 100 million women are missing," The New York review of books, 1990,
  37 (20), 61­66.
Tertilt, Michele, "Polygyny, fertility, and savings," Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (6),
  1341­1371.
Teso, Edoardo, "The long-term effect of demographic shocks on the evolution of gender roles:
  Evidence from the transatlantic slave trade," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2019, 17 (2), 497­534.
Todd, Emmanuel, La troisi`    eme plan` ete: structures familiales et syst`      eologiques, Vol. 4,
                                                                          emes id´
  Editions du Seuil, 1983.
Tur-Prats, Ana, "Family types and intimate partner violence: A historical perspective," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (5), 878­891.
Yi, Zeng, Tu Ping, Gu Baochang, Xu Yi, Li Bohua, and Li Yongpiing, "Causes and implications
  of the recent increase in the reported sex ratio at birth in China," Population and development
  review, 1993, pp. 283­302.


                                                36
