                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TASKS, AUTOMATION, AND THE RISE IN US WAGE INEQUALITY

                                        Daron Acemoglu
                                        Pascual Restrepo

                                      Working Paper 28920
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28920


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank David Autor, Gino Gancia, Thomas Lemieux, Richard Rogerson, Esteban Rossi-
Hansberg, and Stephen Ross for their comments and suggestions, and seminar participants at
various universities and conferences for very helpful comments. We thank Eric Donald for
excellent research assistance. We also gratefully acknowledge financial support from Google,
Microsoft, the NSF, Schmidt Sciences, the Sloan Foundation and the Smith Richardson
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Tasks, Automation, and the Rise in US Wage Inequality
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
NBER Working Paper No. 28920
June 2021
JEL No. J23,J31,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

We document that between 50% and 70% of changes in the US wage structure over the last four
decades are accounted for by the relative wage declines of worker groups specialized in routine
tasks in industries experiencing rapid automation. We develop a conceptual framework where
tasks across a number of industries are allocated to different types of labor and capital.
Automation technologies expand the set of tasks performed by capital, displacing certain worker
groups from employment opportunities for which they have comparative advantage. This
framework yields a simple equation linking wage changes of a demographic group to the task
displacement it experiences. We report robust evidence in favor of this relationship and show that
regression models incorporating task displacement explain much of the changes in education
differentials between 1980 and 2016. Our task displacement variable captures the effects of
automation technologies (and to a lesser degree offshoring) rather than those of rising market
power, markups or deunionization, which themselves do not appear to play a major role in US
wage inequality. We also propose a methodology for evaluating the full general equilibrium
effects of task displacement (which include induced changes in industry composition and ripple
effects as tasks are reallocated across different groups). Our quantitative evaluation based on this
methodology explains how major changes in wage inequality can go hand-in-hand with modest
productivity gains.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
pascual@bu.edu
                                              1    Introduction

Wage and earnings inequality have risen sharply in the US and other industrialized economies
over the last four decades.1 Figure 1 depicts some salient aspects of US developments: while the
real wages of workers with a post-graduate degree rose, the real wages of low-education workers
declined significantly. The real earnings of men without a high-school degree are now 15% lower
than they were in 1980.




             Figure 1: Cumulative growth of real wages by gender and education (from Autor, 2019)

       The most popular explanation for these changes is based on skill-biased technological change
(SBTC).2 According to this framework, the demand for different types of workers comes from
an aggregate production function of the form F (AH H, AL L), where H and L are employment
levels of high-skill and low-skill workers, and AH and AL represent technologies (or equipment)
augmenting these two types of workers. SBTC corresponds to technology becoming more favorable
to high-skill workers (e.g., a greater increase in AH than in AL , provided that F has an elasticity
of substitution greater than one). One of the most powerful pieces of evidence offered in favor of
SBTC in the 1990s was that increases in the demand for skills were pervasive across industries.3
This evidence also motivated the interpretation that industry-level differences in technology played
a limited role in the transformation of US wage structure.
       This paper proposes an alternative approach for thinking about wage inequality. We argue
that much of the changes in US wage structure are driven by the automation of tasks previously
performed by certain types of workers in some industries (e.g., numerically-controlled machinery or
industrial robots replacing blue-collar workers in manufacturing or specialized software replacing
clerical workers). Workers who are not displaced from the tasks in which they have a comparative
   1
     See Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Goldin and Katz (2008), and Autor (2019) for overviews.
   2
     The literature has also recognized the role played by changes in labor market institutions (especially declining
minimum wages and unionization) and globalization. See, for example, DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996).
   3
     More precisely, the within-industry component of skill upgrading was much larger than the between-component,
representing the change in employment in high-skill relative to low-skill industries (see, for example, Bound and
Johnson, 1992; Berman, Bound and Griliches, 1994; Berman, Bound and Machin, 1998).



                                                         1
advantage, such as those with a postgraduate degree or women with a college degree, enjoyed
real wage gains, while those, including low-education men, who used to specialize in tasks and
industries undergoing rapid automation, experienced stagnant or declining real wages.

                                             A. Role of specialization across industries                                       B. Accounting for relative specialization in routine jobs

                                      60%                                                                               60%
  Change in hourly wages, 1980-2016




                                      40%                                                                               40%




                                      20%                                                                               20%


                                                                                                                                                                                           R = -1.3
                                         0                                                                                 0


                                                                                                          = -2.5
                                      -20%                                                                              -20%


                                                 -5      0      5         10       15       20      25    30   35                  -5      0        5       10       15       20          25   30     35
                                                                     Exposure to industries with                                                 Exposure to routine jobs in industries
                                                                    declining labor shares (in %)                                                 with declining labor shares (in %)



Figure 2: Relationship between change in real wages and a demographic group's exposure to industries with
declining labor share (left panel) and exposure to routine jobs in industries with declining labor share (right panel).
The dots in the figures represents 500 demographic groups, with their size indicating their share of hours worked.


                                      Figure 2 provides motivating evidence for our explanation by revisiting the role of industry
and declining labor shares--a telltale sign of automation--in US wage inequality. The left panel
documents that worker groups (defined by 500 cells distinguished by gender, age, education, race,
and native/immigrant status) that specialized in 1980 in industries that experienced subsequent
labor share declines saw their relative wages fall between 1980 and 2016.4 In contrast to an
expectation based on the previous literature, this variation accounts for 40% of the changes in the
wage structure between these groups. The right panel shows that this relationship is driven by
worker groups who specialized in routine tasks--those that are easier to automate given existing
technologies--within those industries. The task displacement measure in the right panel, which
in addition incorporates information on whether a group specializes in routine tasks in industries
with declining labor share, explains 67% of the changes in the wage structure (while the residual
explanatory power of the variable used on the left falls to 10%). Put simply, a large share of the
changes in the US wage structure during the last four decades are accounted for by the relative
wage declines of workers that specialized in routine tasks at industries that experienced labor
share declines. We will see that the same pattern holds when we focus on the component of the
labor share decline driven by automation technologies.
                                      Our framework clarifies why worker groups that specialize in tasks being automated will
bear the brunt of these changes and will suffer relative and potentially absolute wage declines.
   4
     This variable is defined for each group as the sum over industries of their 1980 share of employment in an industry
times that industry's subsequent labor share decline. The exact construction of the right-hand side variables used
in this figure and our data sources are described in Section 3.



                                                                                                                    2
To explain these facts, we start with a model of production in which each industry performs a
range of tasks, some of which can be automated, and we identify these with "routine" tasks.
There are several groups of workers, each with a different comparative advantage across tasks and
industries. While we allow technology to directly complement/augment different types of workers,
the innovation of our model is to allow for automation technologies that increase the productivity
of capital in certain routine tasks that used to be produced by workers.5
    Our framework delivers three key results. First, and in contrast to models of SBTC with
factor-augmenting technologies, in our framework automation can have a negative effect on work-
ers who are displaced from tasks they used to perform, and such changes can take place with
limited increases in total factor productivity (TFP). Hence, real wage declines and slow produc-
tivity growth despite rapid automation are not puzzles within this framework. Second, we derive
a simple equation linking wage changes of a demographic group to the task displacement it experi-
ences, which forms the basis of our reduced-form analysis. Third, our framework implies that the
task displacement experienced by a group can be measured by its employment share in routine
tasks in industries undergoing automation. Moreover, the extent of automation in an industry
can be inferred from declines in its labor share, thus providing an explanation for the relationship
reported in the right panel of Figure 2.6
    The second part of the paper documents a robust and negative (reduced-form) relationship
between our measure of task displacement and real wages across groups of workers. Our baseline
results use the decline in an industry labor share to infer the overall extent of automation and task
displacement taking place in that industry. We show that close to 50% of the variation in labor
shares (and measured task displacement) across industries is driven by automation technologies,
including the adoption of industrial robots, specialized machinery and software. In line with this
result, we find a very similar negative relationship between wage changes and task displacement
using an IV strategy that exploits the component of the labor share decline driven by automa-
tion. We document that offshoring also contributes to task displacement (and conceptually, its
effects on wages should be similar since it also works by displacing workers from their tasks),
but quantitatively it accounts for a smaller portion of observed wage changes than automation.
These results bolster our confidence that task displacement driven by automation technologies is
responsible for the relationships depicted in Figure 2.
    Importantly, task displacement retains its defining role when we flexibly control for various
    5
      We define automation technologies as any technology that enables machines/algorithms/capital to perform
tasks previously allocated to humans, which results in the displacement of workers from these tasks. Note, however,
that task displacement does not need to be associated with "job loss", and can take the form of a worker being
reallocated within the same firm or a decline in hiring of new workers into certain tasks.
    6
      There are many determinants of industry labor shares and we discuss them and explore their effects later. It is
useful to note here that we find a significant portion of industry labor share declines to be driven by the displacement
of workers from (routine) tasks because of automation (and to a lesser degree offshoring). See Elsby, Hobijn and
S
¸ ahin (2013), Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013), Piketty (2014), Dao, Das and Koczan (2019), and Hubmer (2020)
on the decline of the labor share; Acemoglu, Lelarge and Restrepo (2020) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) on the
role of automation in labor share declines; De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020) on the role of rising markups;
and Autor et al. (2020) on superstar firms.



                                                           3
forms of SBTC (for example, allowing the productivity of workers to evolve as a function of their
education levels over time). Our estimates indicate that task displacement explains 50%­70% of
the observed changes in wage structure between 1980 and 2016, while these traditional SBTC
proxies account for less than 10%. Furthermore, the relationship between task displacement and
real wages remains unchanged when we control for other potential determinants of industry labor
shares and wages, such as rising concentration, markups, import competition and the decline
of unions, or when we exploit regional variation in specialization patterns or focus on different
sub-periods. Consistent with the notion that these trends reflect changes in labor demand, we
also estimate negative effects on employment outcomes.
   Although our reduced-form analysis documents a strong negative relationship between task
displacement and relative wage changes across worker groups, it misses three indirect effects
affecting real wages in general equilibrium. First, in our regressions, the common effect of pro-
ductivity increases on real wages goes into the intercept, and so our results are not informative
about real wage level changes. Second, because automation and task displacement concentrate in
a handful of industries, they will change the sectoral composition of the economy, which can in
turn shift the demand for different types of workers. Third, our reduced-form evidence focuses on
the direct effects of task displacement, but does not account for ripple effects, which result from
displaced workers competing against others for non-automated tasks, bidding down their wages
and spreading negative wage effects of automation more broadly in the population.
   To account for these general equilibrium effects, in the last part of the paper we turn to a
quantitative exercise exploring the implications of task displacement for the wage structure, real
wage levels, TFP, output, and the sectoral composition of the economy. Our model provides
explicit formulas to compute all these general equilibrium effects as functions of our measure of
task displacement as well as the cost savings from automation, industry demand elasticities, and
a propagation matrix capturing the strength of ripple effects between different groups of workers
(i.e., how much the displacement of group g affects the wage of group g  due to task reallocation).
We show how these ripple effects can be estimated by parametrizing group-level interactions as
functions of the distance between groups along a number of dimensions. We then combine these
ripple effect estimates with a standard parametrization of demand across industries and available
estimates of the cost savings from automation.
   We find that task displacement--incorporating general equilibrium effects--accounts for about
50% of the observed relative wage changes during this period and explains 80% of the observed
increase in the college premium. These sizable distributional effects are accompanied by modest
increases in the average wage level, GDP and TFP. For example, technologies causing task dis-
placement only account for a 3.8% increase in TFP between 1980 and 2016. We thus conclude
that automation can explain a sizable fraction of changes in wage structure and real wage declines
in the data, while having a tiny impact on productivity growth.
   Our work contributes to various literatures. The first is the literature on SBTC, with papers



                                                 4
such as Bound and Johnson (1992), Katz and Murphy (1992) and Card and Lemieux (2001) that
explored the evolution of between-group wage inequality in response to changes in factor supplies
and technologies augmenting the productivity of educated workers. We differ from this literature
because of our distinct conceptual framework and focus on task displacement as the main driving
force of changes in wage structure.
       The second is the literature exploring the effects of lower equipment and computer prices
on wage inequality through capital-skill complementarity. This literature goes back to Griliches
(1969), and its implications for US wage inequality have been explored in Krusell et al. (2000).
Relatedly, Krueger (1993) and Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) emphasized the role of the com-
plementarity between computers and skills. More recently, Burstein, Morales and Vogel (2019)
quantify the effects of lower computer prices on inequality in a model where skilled workers have
a comparative advantage in using computers. These papers quantify the effects of lower cap-
ital prices on inequality by assuming that capital directly complements skilled workers. Our
framework complements this work by underscoring the role of task displacement as a separate
mechanism contributing to wage inequality. We also clarify the distinction between automation
and the capital-skill complementarity studied in this literature. Notably, we show that automation
has a powerful impact on inequality even if there are no direct capital-skill complementarities.
       Third, and most closely related to our paper is Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), who explore
the effects of technologies automating routine tasks and complementing non-routine ones on the
occupational and task structure of the economy. Our paper can be seen as a generalization of
their conceptual framework, enabling us to clarify the role of task displacement and quantify its
effects on changes in US inequality.7
       Finally, our conceptual framework builds on previous task models, in particular, Zeira (1998),
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018),
as well as Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg's (2008) model of offshoring. Our two main innovations
relative to these papers are: (i) the general structure of comparative advantage and the flexible
manner in which technologies affect the allocation of tasks to workers; (ii) our derivation of explicit
formulas linking a group's wage change to its task displacement. These formulas underpin all of
our empirical work.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces our framework
and derives the key equations for our empirical work. Section 3 presents our data sources and
measurement strategy. Section 4 presents our reduced-form evidence. Section 5 presents our
quantitative exercise. Appendix A contains proofs and reports our main robustness checks. Ap-
pendix B, which is available upon request, provides additional theoretical results and robustness
checks for our quantitative exercise.
   7
    Our findings complement works on job polarization, such as Goos and Manning (2007), Goos, Manning and
Salomons (2014), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), and Autor and Dorn (2013). In particular, we document that groups
most affected by task displacement are in the middle of the wage distribution, thus linking task displacement to
polarization. Other works studying the decline of routine occupations and their macroeconomic implications include
Gregory, Salomons and Zierahn (2018), Lee and Shin (2017), Jaimovich et al. (2020), and Atalay et al. (2020).


                                                        5
                  2   Conceptual Framework: Tasks, Wages, and Inequality

We start with a single-sector model, which illustrates how tasks are allocated to factors and how
task displacement affects wages. We then move to our full model, including multiple sectors, and
formally derive the task displacement measure we will use in our empirical work. We defer the
analysis of general equilibrium effects to Section 5.


2.1     Single Sector

Environment and equilibrium:              Output is produced by combining a mass M of tasks in a
set T using a CES aggregator with elasticity of substitution   0,
                                                                           
                                       1                       -1          -1
                                    y=            (M  y (x))          dx        ,
                                       M      T


where x indexes tasks. For example, producing a shirt requires a range of tasks, including de-
signing it; cleaning, carding, combing, and spinning the fibers; weaving, knitting, and bonding of
yarn; dying, chemical processing, and finishing; marketing and advertising; transport; and various
wholesale and retail tasks.
      The key economic decision in this model is how to perform these different tasks. Each task can
be produced using capital or different types of labor indexed by g (where g  G = {1, 2, . . . , G}):

                              y (x) = Ak  k (x)  k (x) +           Ag  g (x)        g (x).
                                                             g G


Here,    g (x)   denotes the amount of labor of type g allocated to task x, while k (x) is the amount
of capital allocated to task x. In addition, Ak and the Ag 's represent standard factor-augmenting
technologies, which make factors uniformly more productive at all tasks. More novel and im-
portant for our purposes, productivity also has a task-specific component, represented by the
functions k (x) and {g (x)}gG , which determine comparative advantage and specialization pat-
terns. Task-specific productivity is zero for factors that cannot perform the relevant task.
      Capital is supplied elastically and can be produced using the final good at a constant marginal
cost 1 q (x). Net output, which is equal to consumption, is therefore obtained by subtracting the
production cost of capital goods from output:

                                        c=y-          (k (x) q (x))  dx.
                                                  T


      We assume that all types of labor are supplied inelastically, and we denote the total supply of
labor of type g by      g.

      A market equilibrium in this economy is defined as an allocation of tasks to factors and a
production plan for capital goods that maximize consumption. To formalize this notion, we
define a critical object for the rest of our analysis: Tg , which represents the set of tasks allocated


                                                         6
to labor of type g, and Tk , which is analogously the set of tasks allocated to capital. Given a supply
of labor      = ( 1, 2, . . . ,   G ),   a market equilibrium is given by wages w = (w1 , w2 , . . . , wG ), capital
production decisions k (x), and an allocation of tasks to factors {Tk , T1 , . . . , TG }, such that: (i)
the allocation of tasks to factors minimizes costs; (ii) the choice of capital maximizes net output;
and (iii) the markets for capital and different types of labor clear.
       Throughout, we set the final good as the numeraire, so that the wg 's correspond to real wages
and the real user cost of capital is R(x) = 1 q (x).


Task shares: Cost minimization implies that the sets of tasks allocated to factors satisfy:8

             wg           wj                  wg        wj            1
  Tg = x                       for j < g ;          <         ,                 for j > g
          g (x)  Ag j (x)  Aj              g (x)  Ag j (x)  Aj k (x)  q (x)  Ak
                 1            wj
  Tk = x                              for all j .
          k (x)  q (x)  Ak j (x)  Aj

       Given an allocation of tasks to factors, we define:

                                                   1
                                         g (w, ) =             g (x)-1  dx and
                                                   M      Tg
                                                   1
                                         k (w, ) =             (k (x)  q (x))-1  dx.
                                                   M      Tk


The quantities g and k , which we refer to as the task shares of workers of type g and capital,
respectively, give the measure of the set of tasks allocated to a factor weighted by the "importance"
of the tasks.9 Task shares depend on the sets Tg and Tk , and thus on wages, factor-augmenting
technologies and task productivities. Hence we write them as functions of the vectors of wages w
and technology  = ({k (x), g (x), q (x)}xT , Ak , {Ag }gG ), but will omit this dependence when
it causes no confusion.
       The next proposition characterizes the equilibrium (all proofs are in Appendix A-1), and
expresses factor prices, shares, and output as functions of task shares. Because production in this
economy is "roundabout" (capital is produced linearly from the final good), output can be infinite.
In Appendix B-1, we derive an Inada condition that ensures finite output (in the one-sector case,
this condition implies Ak
                          -1
                              k < 1) and assume throughout that it is satisfied.

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium) There exists a unique equilibrium. In this equilibrium, output,
   8
      When a task can be produced at the exact same unit cost by different factors, we assume it is allocated to
capital or to the type of labor with the higher index. This rule simplifies our exposition and has no substantive
effect on equilibrium, except that in Proposition 1, it enables us to state that the equilibrium is unique (rather than
"essentially" unique at these non-generic points of cost equality).
    9
      In particular, this importance weight depends on the revenue share of the task in total costs, and hence the
productivity of the factor performing the task has an exponent equal to the elasticity of substitution minus one.




                                                                7
wages, and factor shares can be expressed as functions of task shares:
                                                                                 
                                                           1              -1    -1
(1)                         y =(1 - Ak
                                       -1
                                           k )    1-       
                                                           g  (Ag    g)            ,
                                                        gG                     
                                      1
                                  y          -1    1
(2)                        wg =            Ag   g
                                                
                                                  for all g  G ,
                                  g


(3)                        sK =Ak
                                  -1
                                      k .

      The proposition shows that output can be represented as a CES aggregate of different types of
labor and capital, with elasticity of substitution . This representation differs from the standard
CES production function for three reasons. First, the distribution parameters, which are exoge-
nous in the standard CES, are now endogenous and given by the task shares g 's. They not only
depend on factor prices (via the dependence of the sets Tg and Tk on factor prices), but also on
technology. In particular, automation technologies impact equilibrium prices and quantities by
reallocating tasks away from labor, directly changing the g 's and k . Second, despite appear-
ances, the elasticity of substitution between factors is not equal to , but depends on endogenous
substitution taking place as tasks are reallocated (again captured by changes in the sets Tg and
Tk , or variations in the g 's and k in response to factor prices). Finally, the term 1 - A -1
                                                                                           k  k > 0
in front of the CES accounts for the roundabout nature of production.
      Equation (2) shows that real wages are given by the marginal product of each type of labor,
which is a function of output per worker (raised to the power 1  for standard reasons) and the
factor-augmenting technology, Ag , raised to the power ( - 1) . This exponent captures the
fact that improvements in the productivity of workers from group g reduce the price of tasks
they produce, and if  < 1 this price effect dominates. More novel is that real wages also depend
directly on task shares, the g 's, highlighting a key aspect of our model: the real wage of a factor
is linked to the set of tasks allocated to that factor.
      Proposition 1 implies that we can study and quantify the effects of technology on wages, factor
shares, and output simply by tracing its impact on task shares, as we next discuss in detail.


The effects of technology: Our conceptual framework clarifies that different types of tech-
nologies have distinct impacts on wages, productivity, and output. We now discuss the effects of
three types of technologies:

      · factor augmenting: higher Ag or Ak resulting in uniform increases in productivity in all
        tasks. Factor-augmenting technologies have been the focus of much of the macro and labor
        literatures, and as we will see, they are qualitatively different from task displacement (and
        arguably a significant abstraction, since there are no examples of technologies that increase
        factor productivity in all tasks).



                                                        8
   · productivity deepening: increases in g (x) for x  Tg or in k (x) for x  Tk --which
      result in an increase in the productivity of a factor at the tasks it is currently performing.
      For example, we may have improvements in the tools used by workers to perform one of
      their tasks (think of GPS making drivers better at navigation, or upgrades in the capital
      equipment used to produce the same task). The defining feature of this type of technological
      progress is that it does not directly displace factors from the tasks they were performing.

   · task displacement: increases in k (x) for x  Tg --which therefore lead to automation and
      a reallocation of tasks away from workers toward capital. Well-known examples of technolo-
      gies causing task displacement include the introduction of numerical control or industrial
      robots for blue-collar tasks previously performed by manual workers or the introduction of
      specialized software automating various back-office and clerical tasks. Offshoring also leads
      to task displacement, and one can think about it in this framework by assuming that tasks
      can be performed abroad and imported in exchange of the final good (see also Grossman
      and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008).

   Figure 3 depicts the effects of productivity deepening and task displacement on the allocation
of tasks to factors. The figure highlights that the total impact of a change in technology on task
shares is comprised of a direct effect, given by the changes in the g 's and k driven by productivity
deepening and displacement holding all prices constant; and indirect or ripple effects, driven by
the reallocation of tasks across factors in response to changes in factor prices. The direct effects
are shown with the shaded areas, which indicate the tasks where productivity increases, while the
induced ripple effects are depicted with the dashed curves. The ripple effects alter the task shares
and prices of factors that are not themselves directly impacted by new technologies.
   In this section, we provide a characterization of the implications of these three technologies
abstracting from ripple effects. This allow us to illustrate the distinct direct impacts of these
technologies and derive a simple equation to explore the role of these direct effects. We characterize
the full general equilibrium response of wage inequality to task displacement, including ripple
effects in Section 5, where we also estimate them.
   The following assumption rules out ripple effects and is maintained until Section 5:

Assumption 1        1. Workers can only produce non-overlapping sets of tasks (i.e., g (x) > 0
      only if g (x) = 0 for all g   g ).

  2. There exist  > 0 and q > 0 such that k (x) >  and q (x) > q for all x  S = {x  k (x) > 0}.

   The first part of the assumption imposes that each tasks can be performed at most by one
type of labor, which ensures that a group displaced from the tasks it specializes in cannot in turn
displace other workers from their tasks. The second part imposes that capital productivity is high
enough and the cost of capital is low enough that all tasks in the set S = {x  k (x) > 0}, where


                                                  9
Figure 3: The direct effects of technology and ripple effects. The left panel shows the effects of an increase of
d ln deep
     g    in the productivity of group g in tasks in Tg . The right panel depicts the effects of automation technologies
reducing the task share of worker g by d ln disp
                                               g   .


capital has positive productivity, will be allocated to capital (see Appendix B-1 for details and
for a derivation of these thresholds).
    In the next proposition, we characterize the effects of different types of technologies on factor
prices, TFP, and output under Assumption 1. We present a characterization in terms of the
infinitesimal changes in the direct effects of these technologies. In particular, we let d ln deep
                                                                                              g    0
denote the direct effect of productivity deepening (for capital or some types of labor) on the task
share of group g ; and d ln disp
                            g    denote the direct displacement effect experienced by group g due
to automation (i.e., because capital productivity k (x) increases at tasks previously performed
by this group).10 These direct effects can be expressed as follows:

                                          1         g (x)-1
                            d ln deep
                                 g    =                      d ln g (x)dx
                                          M    Tg      g
                                          1                         1
                            d ln disp
                                 g    =             g (x)-1 dx                g (x)-1 dx,
                                          M    Dg                   M    Tg


where Dg  Tg is the subset of tasks in which, after the technological change, capital outperforms
  10
     In this case, the relevant change is at the extensive margin: a discrete increase in the productivity of capital in
an infinitesimal set of tasks previously performed by labor.




                                                          10
workers from group g (as shown in the right panel of Figure 3). Finally, we define

                                       1                               1
                                 g =            g (x)-1  g (x)dx                   g (x)-1 dx
                                       M   Dg                          M      Dg


as the average cost savings from producing the tasks in Dg with the now more cost effective
capital. In this expression, g (x) is the cost saving of automating task x previously performed
by workers group g .11

Proposition 2 (Technology Effects) Suppose Assumption 1 holds, so that there are no rip-
ple effects. Consider a change in technology (including factor-augmenting, productivity deepening,
and task-displacement). The impact on real wages, TFP, output, and the capital share are

                      1         -1           -1            1
(4)          d ln wg = d ln y +    d ln Ag +    d ln deep
                                                     g    - d ln disp
                                                                 g ,
                                                           

(5)       d ln TFP =            sL                 deep
                                 g  d ln Ag + d ln g    + sK  d ln Ak + d ln kdeep +                 sL       disp
                                                                                                      g  d ln g     g ,
                          g G                                                                  g G
                                                                 1
(6)          d ln sK =( - 1)  d ln Ak + d ln deep
                                             k              +    K
                                                                     sL       disp
                                                                      g  d ln g     (1 + ( - 1)  g ) ,
                                                                s gG
                            1
(7)            d ln y =       K
                                 d ln TFP + sK  d ln sK .
                          1-s

       To clarify the distinct economic forces generated by various technologies, let us first consider
the implications of factor-augmenting technologies making workers of group g (or capital) more
productive at all tasks--the d ln Ag and d ln Ak terms in the proposition. The real wage of group
g is affected primarily by productivity gains, represented by d ln y . This productivity effect raises
the wages of all workers and is a consequence of the higher demand for all tasks generated by the
increase in output. As a result, without ripple effects, factor-augmenting technologies increasing
the productivity of group g raise the wage of all other workers (and factor-augmenting technologies
increasing the productivity of capital raise all wages). Moreover, factor-augmenting technologies
                                                           -1
only affect relative wages through the term                      d ln Ag , whose sign depends on whether   1.
This ambiguous impact is rooted in the fact that factor-augmenting technologies make workers
from group g more productive but also lower the price of the tasks they produce. When  > 1
the first effect dominates and improvements in the productivity of group g at tasks it currently
performs lead to higher wages for this group as well. This is the standard mechanism emphasized
in the SBTC literature (e.g., Bound and Johnson, 1992, Katz and Murphy, 1992).
       The impact of factor-augmenting technologies on TFP can be computed from (5) as gG sL
                                                                                           g 
d ln Ag + sK  d ln Ak . This formula, which follows from Hulten's theorem, has a simple envelope
logic: a 1% increase in the productivity of all workers in group g leads to an increase in TFP of
                                                                q (x)k (x)   -1
  11
       This cost-saving is in turn given as g (x) =   1
                                                      -1
                                                           wg AkAg g (x)
                                                                                  - 1 > 0, where the expression is evaluated
at the new level of capital productivity.



                                                             11
sL           L
 g %, where sg is the share of skilled labor in GDP. Likewise, a 1% increase in the productivity of
capital at all tasks leads to an increase in TFP of sK %. Thus, relative to their modest effects on
the wage structure (especially for values of  close to 1), factor-augmenting technologies have large
productivity effects. If factor-augmenting technologies were at the root of changes in the wage
structure, then we should see sizable TFP gains (unless there is technological regress, see Acemoglu
and Restrepo, 2019). Note finally that, with no ripple effects, factor-augmenting technologies have
identical effects as technologies generating a deepening of productivity--the terms d ln deep
                                                                                         g    and
d ln deep
     k    .
      These results contrast with the effects of automation, which displaces some workers from the
tasks they are performing, and whose effects are captured by the term d ln disp
                                                                           g    in the proposition.
The impact of this type of technology on wages in (4) becomes 1
                                                                d ln y - 1
                                                                           d ln disp
                                                                                g . The first term

is once again the productivity effect, which raises the wages of all workers. More novel and
important for our purposes is the second term, which links wage changes to task displacement
and is negative (independently of whether   1). As we will see, this key insight generalizes to
our full model and forms the basis of our empirical work.
      The implications of automation for TFP and factor shares are also very different from those
                                                                        disp
of factor-augmenting technologies. The change in TFP is now gG sL
                                                                g  d ln g     g . If g is small
for groups being displaced (meaning small productivity gains from substituting capital for labor),
then TFP growth could be arbitrarily small, even if there is considerable automation. As a result,
the displacement effect can outweigh the productivity effect and, as a result, the real wage for
displaced groups can decline despite the economy's higher productivity.
      Equation (6) also shows that task displacement always results in an increase in the capital
share and a reduction in the labor share of value added--an observation that will motivate our
measurement approach in Section 2.3. This is also in stark contrast to what one would get from
factor-augmenting technologies, whose impact on factor shares depends on whether   1 (with
no ripple effects,  is also the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor).


2.2     Full Model: Multiple Sectors

Our full model generalizes the one-sector setup in the previous subsection. There are multiple
industries indexed by i  I = {1, 2, . . . , I }. Output in industry i is produced by combining the
tasks in some set Ti , with measure Mi , using a CES aggregator with elasticity   0:
                                                                           
                                       1                        -1         -1
                              yi = Ai             (Mi  y (x))         dx        ,
                                       Mi    Ti


where x again indexes tasks and Ai is a Hicks-neutral industry productivity term. As before,
tasks, Tgi denotes the set of tasks in industry i allocated to workers of type g and Tki denotes




                                                    12
those allocated to capital. Likewise, we define industry-level task shares, gi and ki , as:

                           1                                               1
              gi (w, ) =               g (x)-1  dx;ki (w, ) =                          (k (x)  q (x))-1  dx.
                           Mi    Tgi                                       Mi    Tki


       We assume that industry outputs are combined into a single final good using a constant returns
to scale aggregator. Rather than specifying this aggregator, we work with the implied expenditure
shares, sY
         i (p), where p = (p1 , p2 , . . . , pI ) is the vector of industry prices.
                                                                                   12

       The next proposition generalizes Proposition 1 to this environment and characterizes the
equilibrium in terms of task shares.

Proposition 3 (Equilibrium in multi-sector economy) There is a unique equilibrium. In
this equilibrium, output, wages, and industry prices can be expressed as functions of task shares
defined implicitly by the solution to the system of equations:
                                              1                                              1
                                       y            -1                                       
(8)                          wg =                   
                                                   Ag            sY
                                                                  i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                  -1
                                                                                        gi
                                          g                 iI
                                                                                        1

                                   1  -1            1-             1-
(9)                           pi =    Ak  ki +     wg   Ag
                                                           -1
                                                               gi
                                   Ai          g G                

(10)                            1=        sY
                                           i (p).
                                     iI


       The proposition shows that task shares, the ki 's and gi 's, continue to be a key determinant
of real wages, and we can express the equilibrium of the economy as a function of task shares,
though we no longer have a closed-form solution for output. Moreover, the effects of automation
technologies on equilibrium outcomes again work via their impact on task shares.


2.3      Mapping the Model to Data

In this subsection, we use Proposition 3 to derive an equation that links the change in wages
to the direct effects of task displacement (and other technologies), extending (4) to this envi-
ronment. This equation will form the basis of our reduced-form analysis. We will then use our
model to derive a measure of task displacement that captures its direct effects across groups of
workers. These equations and measures will be generalized to include ripple effects in our general
equilibrium analysis in Section 5.


Task displacement and wage structure:                        As before, denote the effects productivity deepen-
ing and automation on task shares in industry i by d ln deep
                                                        gi   and d ln disp
                                                                      gi , respectively. Differ-
                                                                                                              1-
                                                                                                   i (p) = i pi
  12
    For example, a CES demand system over industries with elasticity of substitution  would imply sY             .
This formulation imposes homotheticity, which can be relaxed by allowing expenditure shares to also depend on
the level of consumption, but this is not central to our focus.




                                                             13
entiating equation (8) and using Assumption 1, we obtain a generalization of (4):

                      1          -1
(11)         d ln wg = d ln y +         d ln Ag + g i
                                                       d ln deep
                                                              gi
                                                 iI
                        1                                                 1
                      +       g i
                                   d ln sY
                                         i + (1 - )(d ln pi + d ln Ai ) -     i  d ln disp
                                                                                      gi ,
                         iI                                                iI g

      i                                                                              i
where g denotes the share of group g 's wage income earned in industry i, so that iI g = 1.
   Equation (11) shows that wages depend on four terms, which we next explain (and also outline
how they will be measured in our reduced-form empirical work):

   · The common expansion of output: d ln y , which captures the productivity effect. In our
       reduced-form regressions, this effect will be absorbed by the constant term.

   · Group-specific shifters:   
                                -1                i
                                     d ln Ag + iI g  d ln deep
                                                          gi   , which represent the contribution
       of factor-augmenting technologies and productivity deepening. Following the SBTC litera-
       ture, in our reduced-form regressions we will assume that these technologies augment certain
       well-defined skills associated with education and also allow them to be gender-biased. In
       particular, we parameterize these as:

                        -1
                           d ln Ag + g i
                                          d ln deep
                                               gi   = edu(g) + gender(g) + g ,
                                    iI


       where g is an additional unobserved component, and edu(g) and gender(g) will be absorbed
       by dummies for education levels and gender. As a further refinement, we allow group-specific
       shifters to also depend on baseline group wages, which may proxy for skills as well.

   · Industry shifters :

                                           1   i
                     Industry shifterg =       g  d ln sY
                                                        i + (1 - )(d ln pi + d ln Ai ) ,
                                            iI

       which capture the effects coming from the expansion or contraction of industries in which a
       demographic group specializes (for example, due to trade in final goods, structural transfor-
       mation, or the uneven effects of automation in some sectors). In our reduced-form regres-
       sions, we control for this term by including the exposure of a group to the change in value
       added of the sectors in which it specializes.

   · Task displacement :

                                  Task displacementg =         i
                                                               g  d ln disp
                                                                       gi .
                                                          iI


       This term represents the direct effect of task displacement on a demographic group's wages
       and will be the focus of our empirical work. As equation (11) shows, the key prediction of


                                                   14
         our model is that groups exposed to taks displacement should experience a decline in their
         relative wages. Unlike other technologies, this effect is always negative--independently of
         whether the elasticity of substitution  is above or below 1. Task displacement could come
         from automation or offshoring, and we will later study their contribution to this process.


Measuring task displacement:                We now turn to measuring task displacement. Our measure
summarizes the direct effects of task-displacing technologies on different groups of workers, and
will form the basis of our reduced-form regression analysis and quantitative evaluation.
       We use two complementary strategies to measure task displacement, both of which rely on an
initial observation: task displacement takes place mainly in tasks that can be automated, which
we initially proxy with routine tasks.13 Formally, we impose the following assumption:

Assumption 2 Only routine tasks are automated and, within an industry, different groups of
workers are displaced from their routine tasks at a common rate.

       The next component of our measurement requires a proxy for the extent of task displacement
taking place in each industry. Our two strategies take different approaches to this problem. Our
first strategy develops a more comprehensive measure based on the idea that task displacement
is tightly linked to declines in industry labor shares, and uses the "unexplained" portion of the
change in labor share to infer task displacement at the industry level. Specifically, and as we
show in Appendix B-3, when  = 1 (so that the task aggregator is Cobb-Douglas) and there are
no changes in industry markups, we have:

                                                            i  R  R
(12)                         Task displacementg =           g  gi i  (-d ln sL
                                                                             i ).
                                                       iI

                                                                                    i
This measure comprises three terms: (1) a group's exposure to different industries, g , which is
given by the share of wages earned by workers of group g in industry i; (2) the percent decline
in the labor share, -d ln sL
                           i , which in our framework is tightly linked to automation in industry
       R  R
i; (3) gi i , which captures the relative specialization of group g in industry i's routine jobs,
where displacement takes place.14 The measure of task displacement in equation (12) is precisely
the one used in the right panel of Figure 2, while the left panel focuses on exposure to industries
with declining labor shares and ignores the relative specialization of workers in routine jobs.15
  13
      The idea that routine tasks are easier to automate is the main premise of Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) and
is in line with several studies that document a decline in routine jobs following automation, including Acemoglu
and Restrepo (2020) and Humlum (2020). We additionally show very similar results using various other measures
of which tasks can be automated.
   Although which tasks can be automated will likely change with advances in AI, AI technologies are not present
for most of our sample. Acemoglu et al. (2020) show that AI use takes off in the US after 2015.
   14
      Relative specialization is given by the ratio of the share of wages earned in routine jobs by workers in group g
                  R                                                                                 R
at industry i--gi   --to the share of wages earned in routine jobs by all workers in industry i--i    .
   15
      Although we use the measure in equation (12) in most of our analysis, this formula can be extended to the
more general case where   1 and markups change over time, and we provide robustness checks using this more
general formulation later in the paper.


                                                         15
      Our second strategy uses direct measures of automation technologies (and offshoring):

                                                                   i  R  R
(13)       task displacement due to automationg =                  g  gi i  automation in industryi .
                                                              iI

Although these measures can be included directly on the right-hand side of our wage regressions,
we focus on specifications where they are used as instruments for the measure of task displace-
ment based on labor share declines, which enables us to compare coefficient estimates across
specifications.
      These two strategies are complementary, and we present results using both throughout the
paper. While the second strategy has the advantage that it exploits actual measures of automa-
tion, such as adoption of industrial robots or specialized machinery and software, it might miss
other technologies generating task displacement. The more comprehensive measure exploiting the
unexplained decline in industry's labor shares captures all dimensions of task displacement but
may be confounded by other economic forces impacting labor shares.


                       3   Data, Measurement, and Descriptive Patterns

In this section, we describe our data sources, substantiate the link between task displacement
and automation technologies, and provide a first look at the relationship between a demographic
group's task displacement and its real wage changes.


3.1     Main Data Sources

We use data from the BEA Integrated Industry-Level Production Accounts on industry labor
shares, factor prices, and value added for 49 industries that can be tracked consistently from 1987
to 2016.16 We complement these industry data with proxies of the adoption of automation tech-
nologies, including BLS data on the change in the share of specialized machinery and software in
value added from 1987 to 2016, and measures of robot adoption by industry from the International
  Namely, Appendix B-3 shows that, more generally, a measure of task displacement correcting for changes in
factor prices and markups can be constructed as:

                                                      -d ln sL
                                                             i + d ln µi - si  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
                                                                            K
             Task displacementg =        i
                                         g  gi
                                            R  R
                                               i                                                            ,
                                    iI                                 1 + ( - 1)  sL
                                                                                    i  i

where d ln µi is an estimate of the increase in markups in industry i. Put differently, rather than focusing on
the raw decline in the labor share, we now incorporate the effects of prices and markups on the labor share and
focus on the unexplained component. In addition, the term 1 + ( - 1)  sL   i  i in the denominator adjusts for the
substitution toward automated tasks following a cost reduction of i --the average cost saving from automation
in industry i. When computing this measure, we set i = 30%, a choice we discuss in detail in the quantitative
section. Appendix B-3 clarifies that this expression is an approximation because it ignores the effects of augmenting
technologies or productivity deepening. It also shows, however, that the contribution of these terms to changes in
the labor share is small, and that the approximation is accurate.
  16
     These 49 industries can be consistently tracked in Census data and BLS data and cover the entire non-
government sector. When constructing our measures of task displacement, we assume that workers in the gov-
ernment sector experience no automation or offshoring.




                                                         16
Federation of Robotics (IFR).17 In particular, we rely on the adjusted penetration of robots from
1993 to 2014 described in detail in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) as a measure of robot adoption
driven by international advances in technology. We also combine these measures into a single
index of automation, computed as the predicted decline in an industry's labor share from 1987 to
2016 based on its robot adoption and utilization of software and specialized equipment (specifi-
cally, this is the predicted value of industry labor share given these three measures). In addition,
we look at a measure of changes in intermediate imports to proxy for offshoring (from Feenstra
and Hanson, 1999). Finally, to control for other trends affecting industries, we use data on sales
concentration, estimates of markups, unionization rates (from the CPS), measures of Chinese
import competition and industry TFP. These covariates are described in detail in Appendix B-4.
       On the worker side, we use US Census and American Community Survey (ACS) data to trace
the labor market outcomes of 500 demographic groups defined by gender, education (less than
high school, high school graduate, some college, college degree, and post-graduate degree), age
(proxied by 10­year age bins, from 16­25 years to 56­65), race/ethnicity (White, Black, Asian,
Hispanic, Other), and native vs. foreign-born. For each demographic group, we measure real
hourly wages and other labor market outcomes in 1980 (using the 1980 US Census) and in 2016
(pooling data from the 2014­2018 ACS), and compute the change in real wages, employment,
and non-participation rates from 1980 to 2016. In Section 4.7, we also zero in on variation in
labor market outcomes for demographic groups across US regions and commuting zones. Further
details on these data are provided in Appendix B-4.
       We measure task displacement for these 500 demographic groups exploiting their specialization
patterns across industries and in routine jobs from the 1980 Census--a year that predates major
advances in automation technologies. To do so, we create a consistent mapping of the 49 industries
in the BEA data to the Census industry classification, and for each industry, compute the share of
wages earned in routine jobs by a demographic group, using the definition of routine occupations
described in Acemoglu and Autor (2011). About a third of the occupations in the 1980 Census
are classified as routine according to this measure (see Appendix B-4).


3.2      Task Displacement and Changes in the Labor Share across Industries

The blue bars in Figure 4 summarize our measure of task displacement at the industry level,
which is given by the percent decline in an industry labor share that is not explained by changes
in factor prices.18 The whiskers indicate the range of estimates for task displacement as we vary
the elasticity of substitution  from 0.8 to 1.2 (we justify this range of elasticities in Section 5).
The figure reveals considerable variation in task displacement across industries, with the largest
  17
     The BLS Total Multifactor Productivity tables provide alternative series for labor share and factor prices in
the 49 industries used in our analysis. These figures are based on the same underlying data as the BEA's, but use
different imputations and exclude non-profit firms and firms producing services that are difficult to price. All of
our results are robust to using data from the BLS Total Multifactor Productivity Tables.
  18
     In what follows, all changes are re-scaled to 36-year equivalent changes, so that they match the length of the
time window for which we measure real wage changes.


                                                        17
levels of task displacement seen in mining, chemical products, petroleum, car manufacturing,
and computers and electronics. In what follows, we focus on the measure of task displacement
computed for  = 1 (in which case, industry-level task displacement is the same as the percent
decline in an industry's labor share), and we use different values of  for robustness.


         Task displacement and component due to observed technologies (in %), 1987-2016
   80
   60
   40
   20
   0
   -20
   -40

                                       Mining
                     Transportation pipelines
                           Chemical products
               Petroleum and coal products
                        Transportation by rail
                               Primary metals
                        Transportation by air
                               Motor vehicles
                               Legal services
                             Communications
               Nonmetallic mineral products
                 Computers and electronics
                          Computer services
                      Printing and publishing
                                   Wholesale
                             Accommodation
                         Food manufacturing
                     Transportation by water
             Other transportation equipment
                                        Retail
                Plastic and rubber products
                                   Machinery
                      Finance and insurance
                                 Construction
                      Transportation by truck
                     Transportation of transit
                                    Furniture
                              Paper products
                        Educational services
                                      Textiles
                      Ambulatory health care
                               Wood products
               Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                   Appliances
                                  Restaurants
                       Oil and gas extraction
                               Metal products
         Transportation services and support
                                    Hospitals
                        Professional services
                                  Real estate
                            Social assistance
                  Warehousing and storage
                      Administrative services
                                      Utilities
                            Personal services
                                   Recreation
                         Apparel and Leather
                      Agriculture and farming
Figure 4: Task displacement 1987-2016 and index of automation. The blue bars provide our baseline measure
of task displacement and the whiskers give the range of estimates obtained as we vary  from 0.8 to 1.2 , while the
yellow bars show the component of task displacement explained by our index of automation. See text for variable
definitions.


    The figure also plots our index of automation, which points to an important role of technology
in generating task displacement and declining labor shares across industries. This is further
confirmed in Figure 5, where we see a significant positive association between three measures of
automation and industry task displacement. The first, in the left panel, is the adjusted penetration
of robots; the second, in the middle panel, is the change in the share of software and specialized
equipment in value added; and finally the third panel shows our single index of automation.
This last summary measure explains 50% of the variation in the change in labor shares and task
displacement across industries. We provide further evidence on this point in Table A-1 in the
Appendix, where we demonstrate that offshoring is also associated with task displacement, though
it only explains 2% of the industry variation in the data. Moreover, changes in sales concentration,
markups, import competition, and declining unionization rates, are not, or are only weakly,
correlated with industry labor share changes and task displacement, and their inclusion does not
affect the association between task displacement and our measures of automation technologies.

                                                       18
         A. Industry task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                        B. Industry task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                         C. Industry task displacement (%), 1987-2016

  60




                                                                                      60




                                                                                                                                                                           60
  50




                                                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                Chemicals                                              Chemicals                                                                                     Chemicals
  40




                                                                                      40




                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                     Metals                 Motor vehicles                                                         Motor vehicles Metals                                                         Metals               Motor vehicles
  30




                                                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                           30
           Comp. services                                                                                                                  Comp. services                                                                    Comp. services
  20




                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                           20
           Retail                                               Plastics                                                                Retail
                                                                                                                                        Plastics                                                            Retail           Plastics
  10




                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                           10
           Restaurants                                                                                           Restaurants                                                                  Restaurants
           Prof. services                                                                                              Prof. services                                                           Prof. services
  0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                           0
  -10




                                                                                      -10




                                                                                                                                                                           -10
                 AgricultureApparel                                                                    Apparel
                                                                                                   Agriculture                                                                         Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                    Agriculture
  -20




                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                           -20
         0                   1               2                 3                 4           -5                         0                          5                  10                  0                    20                       40                  60
                       Log of one plus adjusted penetration                                                      Change in share of software                                                                 Component driven
                                     of robots                                                                   and specialized equipment                                                                    by automation



Figure 5: Relationship between automation technologies and task displacement across industries. See text for
variable definitions. The five industries with the highest and lowest levels of task displacement are identified in the
figures.


         The industry-level variation in addition provides support for Assumption 2. In particular,
Figure 6 depicts a strong negative association between task displacement and reductions in the
demand for routine tasks across industries (measured in one of three ways: total wages in routine
jobs, total hours in routine jobs, or total number of workers in routine jobs).19 With all three
measures, there is a significant decline in routine jobs in industries experiencing task displacement.
Table B-1 in the Appendix demonstrates the robustness of this relationship and confirms that it
holds when we instrument task displacement using our index of automation.

         A. Percent change routine wages, 1980-2016                                          B. Percent change routine hours, 1980-2016                                           C. Percent change routine employment, 1980-2016
  300




                                                                                      300




                                                                                                                                                                           300
  200




                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                           200




                                                                                                                            Restaurants                                                                       Restaurants
  100




                                                                                      100




                                                                                                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                     Prof. services       Comp. services
                                                   Comp. services                                                                                                                                         Prof. services Comp. services
                                     Restaurants                                                                                                                                                                      Retail
                                 Prof. services                                                                                   Retail
                                                                                                   Agriculture                                                                          Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                              Chemicals                                                                  Motor vehicles
  0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                 Plastics              Motor vehicles                                                 Plastics                  Chemicals
                                           Retail
               Agriculture
                                                                     Chemicals
                                          Plastics                                                                                                     Metals                                                                                Metals
  -100




                                                                                      -100




                                                                                                                                                                           -100




                                                              Motor vehicles


                                                               Metals                              Apparel                                                                              Apparel
  -200




                                                                                      -200




                                                                                                                                                                           -200




               Apparel
         -20                 0              20                40               60            -20                 0                 20                  40            60           -20                 0                 20                   40            60
                         Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                    Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                     Task displacement (%), 1987-2016



Figure 6: Relationship between task displacement and the decline of routine jobs across industries. See text for
variable definitions. The five industries with the highest and lowest levels of task displacement are identified in the
figures.


  19
    To avoid changes in occupational definitions after 2016, in this exercise we focus on changes in routine jobs by
industry between 1980 (from the 1980 US Census) and the 2012­2016 American Community Survey.




                                                                                                                                19
3.3                                        Task Displacement and Wages Across Demographic Groups

We now present descriptive statistics for our measure of task displacement at the level of demo-
graphic groups and take a preliminary look at its association with real wage changes. Figure 7
shows large differences across demographic groups in terms of task displacement between 1980
and 2016, with some experiencing a 25% reduction in their task shares, while others saw no change
in theirs. Importantly, 95% of the variation in task displacement across groups is driven by our
index of automation technologies, as can be seen from the left panel of Figure 7, which depicts
task displacement by demographic group (computed using equation (12)) against the component
driven by automation technologies (computed using equation (13)).

                                          Task displacement across groups                                                                                          Task displacement across groups
                                     40                                                                                                                       40
                                             Highschool dropout
                                             Highschool
                                             Some college
                                             College
                                     30      Post college                                                                                                     30
  Task displacement, 1980-2016 (%)




                                     20                                                                                    Task displacement, 1980-2016 (%)   20




                                     10                                                                                                                       10




                                     0                                                                                                                         0


                                              0                     10                    20                    30   40                                            $7.5        $10         $13.3            $17.8          $23.7         $31.6   $42
                                                                     Component due to automation technologies                                                                                              Hourly wage in 1980
                                                                  (robots and specialized software and machinery)                                                                                    (logarithmic scale, 2008 dollars)




Figure 7: Task displacement across 500 demographic groups. The left panel shows a scatter plot between task
displacement (on the vertical axis) and the component driven by the index of automation (in the horizontal axis).
The 45 line is shown in red. The right panel plots our measure of task displacement against the baseline hourly
wages of groups in 1980. Marker sizes indicate the share of hours worked by each group and different colors indicate
education levels. See text for variable definitions.


                                     The right panel of Figure 7 depicts task displacement by demographic group against a group's
real wage in 1980 and documents that task displacement has been particularly high during this
period for groups in the middle of the wage distribution--thus playing both an unequalizing and
a polarizing role.20
                                     Figure 8 provides a first glimpse at the relationship between task displacement and real wage
changes across demographic groups. The left panel plots the bivariate correlation between our
task displacement measure and real wage changes between 1980 and 2016 (as in the right panel
of Figure 2). The figure reveals a powerful negative relationship between task displacement and
changes in real wages, with groups experiencing the highest levels of task displacement seeing
their real wages fall or stagnate. The right panel displays a falsification exercise demonstrating
that the relationship depicted in the left panel is not driven by secular declines in labor market
  20
    Figure A-1 in the Appendix presents similar patterns for different values of  and also confirms that these
changes are very highly correlated (over 90%) with our baseline measure in equation (12).



                                                                                                                          20
fortunes of some demographic groups. It confirms that there is no correlation between our task
displacement measure, which only uses post-1980 information, and real wage changes between
1950 and 1980--a period that predates major advances in automation. All demographic groups,
including those who later on experienced adverse task displacement after 1980, enjoyed robust
real wage growth, of about 50%, between 1950 and 1980.

          A. Change in hourly wages, 1980-2016                                                     B. Previous change in hourly wages, 1950-1980
                                                                                            250%
   60%                                                            Highschool dropout
                                                                  Highschool
                                                                  Some college
                                                                  College                   200%
                                                                  Post college
   40%

                                                                                            150%



   20%
                                                                                            100%




      0                                                                                     50%




                                                                                               0

   -20%
                0%      5%     10%      15%      20%        25%       30%                                0%      5%     10%      15%      20%        25%   30%
                             Task displacement, 1980-2016                                                             Task displacement, 1980-2016



Figure 8: Reduced-form relationship between task displacement and real wage changes. Panel A plots changes in
real wages for 1980­2016. The slope of the regression line is -1.6 (standard error = 0.09). Panel B plots pretrends in
wages for 1950­1980, where the slope of the regression line is -0.2 (standard error = 0.2). Marker sizes indicate the
share of hours worked by each group and different colors indicate education levels. See text for variable definitions.


    Figure 8--like Figure 7--identifies different education levels, highlighting that task displace-
ment has been much higher for workers without a college degree. Still, the negative association
between change in wages and task displacement is visible within education groups. Relatedly, Fig-
ure 9 displays average task displacement and average real wage change by gender and education.
It reveals that men without college degree have experienced the highest levels of task displacement
as well as substantial real wage declines, while men and women with a post-graduate degree and
women with a college degree have been subject to negligible task displacement and have enjoyed
robust real wage growth. Once again, these patterns are explained by the component of task
displacement driven by automation technologies.
    Table A-2 in the Appendix provides descriptive statistics and further corroborates these
patterns.            For example, it shows that workers in the top quintile of the task displacement
distribution--experiencing the highest task displacement--saw their real wage decline by 12%,
while workers in the least exposed groups enjoyed real wage growth of about 26%.


                4      Reduced-Form Evidence of the Effects of Task Displacement

This section presents our main reduced-form results. It highlights how the direct effects of task
displacement explain a large fraction of the changes in the US wage structure between 1980
and 2016, and shows that task displacement is tightly linked to automation and its effects are

                                                                                       21
                        Task displacement and wage changes across groups
                  40%
                                   Task displacement, men            Task displacement, women   Component due to technology
                                   Wage changes, men                 Wage changes, women

                  30%



                  20%



                  10%



                  0%



                 -10%
                             Dropout                 High school           Some college              College                  Post graduate


Figure 9: Task displacement, component of task displacement driven by automation, and real wage changes by
education level and gender. See text for variable definitions.


not driven by changes in markups, industry concentration, import competition from China, or
declining unionization rates.


4.1      Baseline OLS Results

Table 1 presents estimates from an empirical analogue of equation (11):

(14)          ln wg =  d  Task displacementg +  s  Industry shifterg + edu(g) + gender(g) + g .

Here g indexes our 500 demographic groups, and  ln wg denotes the log change in real hourly
wages for workers in group g between 1980 and 2016. The error term g represents residual group-
specific changes in supply or demand, which are assumed to be orthogonal to task displacement.
As in all of our other results, regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group
and standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.
       Column 1 presents a bivariate regression identical to the one shown in Figure 8. We see a
precise and sizable negative relationship between task displacement and wage growth, with a
coefficient of 1.6 (s.e. = 0.1). This estimate implies that a 25% increase in task displacement (or
decrease in task share), which corresponds to the displacement experienced by white American
men aged 26-35 with no high school degree, is associated with a 40% decline in the relative wage
of the group. The bottom rows report the share of the variation in wage changes explained by
task displacement as well as the R2 .21 Our measure of task displacement alone explains 67% of
the variation in wage changes between 1980 and 2016.22
  21
     Following Klenow and Rodr´  iguez-Clare (1997), we decompose the variance of y in the linear model y = i xi i + 
                                                                                                               (y,xi )
as Var(y ) = i i  Cov(y, xi ) + Cov(y, ) and compute the share of the variance in y explained by xi as i  Cov
                                                                                                            Var(y )
                                                                                                                       .
                               2
These shares add up to the R of the regression, but could be negative and, as a result, some could exceed 100%.
  22
     In Appendix Table A-3, we show that task displacement also explains over 50% of wage declines. Thus it is
not only that task displacement predicts relative wage changes, but it also predicts which groups experience wage
declines--a topic to which we return in Section 5.



                                                                             22
      The rest of the table documents that this bivariate relationship is robust. Column 2 controls
for industry shifters, which absorb labor demand changes coming from the expansion of industries
in which a demographic group specializes. The coefficient estimate for task displacement is similar
to the one in column 1, -1.32 (s.e. =0.16). Column 3, which we take as our baseline specification
for the rest of the paper, controls for gender and education dummies and a group's exposure to
manufacturing, thus accounting for other demand factors favoring highly-educated workers and
for the secular decline of manufacturing. The coefficient estimate remains very similar to column
2, -1.31 (s.e. = 0.19). Even after the inclusion of these controls, task displacement still explains
55% of the variation in wage changes during this period.
      Our task displacement measure combines industry-level changes in labor shares with the dis-
tribution of employment of workers across industries and occupations (where occupations are
classified into routine and non-routine). Column 4 includes two more variables, corresponding to
the constituent parts making up our task displacement measure. The first is the same variable
as the one we considered in the left panel of Figure 2 in the Introduction: the exposure of a
demographic group to industry-level declines in the labor share, but without focusing on whether
employment is in routine or non-routine tasks in that industry. The second is a group's rela-
tive specialization in routine jobs, but this time without exploiting industry-level changes in task
displacement.23 Column 4 shows that these two variables themselves do not explain real wage
changes (conditional on task displacement and covariates), while our measure of task displace-
ment remains negatively associated with wage changes. This result confirms that our measure of
task displacement is not confounded by other industry-level changes potentially impacting labor
shares and wages or by other trends affecting workers specializing in routine tasks. Rather, it
is demographic groups specializing in routine tasks in industries undergoing sizable labor share
declines that suffer (relative) wage declines.


4.2      Baseline IV results

We now exploit information on measures of automation and offshoring to instrument for task
displacement (constructed from industry labor share declines). This strategy thus focuses on the
component of task displacement driven by automation technologies. Table 2 presents our findings.
Panel A shows the reduced-form relationship between real wage changes and the automation
measure in equation (13), focusing on our baseline specification from column 3 in Table 1.
      Column 1 uses the adjusted penetration of robots from Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020). In-
dustrial robotics is an archetypal example of automation technology, but is relevant mostly in the
 23
      Formally, these controls are defined as

                             exposure to industry labor share declines =          i
                                                                                  g  (-d ln sL
                                                                                             i )
                                                                             iI
                                                                                       R
                                                                                       gi
                                 relative specialization in routine jobs =        i
                                                                                  g    R
                                                                                          .
                                                                             iI        i




                                                          23
good-producing sectors, thus leaving out non-robotics, software-based automation taking place
in other sectors. Columns 2 and 3 focus on, respectively, specialized machinery and software as
proxies for automation. Columns 4 and 5 include the software measure together with the other
two measures, while column 6 uses the index of automation constructed from all three variables.
In all six specifications, we see a sizable effect of these variables on real wages. For example, the
share of the variation in wage changes explained by our automation index in column 6 is of 52%
(as compared to 55% for our task displacement measure in column3 of Table 1).
       In column 7, we turn to offshoring, measured as the share of imported intermediates in an
industry. As expected, offshoring also contributes to task displacement and depresses real wages of
exposed groups, but it only explains 9% of the variation in wage changes. The results in columns
6 and 7 form the basis for our claim that the bulk of the variation in task displacement is driven
by automation technologies, with a smaller contribution from offshoring.
       Panel B presents our IV estimates, again focusing on the specification from column 3 of
Table 1. In each column, the variables indicated at the heading are used as instrument for the
measure of task displacement from equation (12). Across columns 1-6, the first-stage F -statistic
is quite high, ranging from 44 to 2,357, indicating that cross-industry differences in automation
provide a powerful source of variation in task displacement. The IV estimates are broadly similar
to the OLS in Table 1. For example, in column 6, where we use the automation index, task
displacement has a coefficient of -1.28 with a standard error of 0.19. The models in columns 4 and
5, where we have multiple instruments, pass the Hansen over-identification test, which bolsters
our presumption that these measures are impacting wages via the same economic channel--the
effects of automation technologies working through task displacement.
       Finally, Panel C probes the robustness of our IV estimates by focusing on the specification
from column 4 of Table 1, where we also control for exposure to industry labor share declines
(also instrumented using our measures of automation) and relative specialization in routine jobs,
which is treated as exogenous. The results are similar to those in Panel B, even if somewhat less
precise. In column 6, for example, the IV estimate is -1.68 (s.e. = 0.47).


4.3      Task Displacement versus SBTC

How important is task displacement relative to other forms of SBTC? Table 3 explores this
question by considering different specifications of SBTC. The first column of this table regresses
wage changes on a full set of dummies for gender and education levels, but excludes our task
displacement measure. As explained in Section 2.3, these controls absorb any factor-augmenting
productivity trends common to all workers with the same education level or gender.24 Column
1 shows that without controlling for task displacement, these SBTC variables are significant
and have the expected signs. For example, the relative wage of workers with a college (but no
  24
    This allows for a slightly more general formulation of SBTC than the one used in Katz and Murphy (1992)
and Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), who parameterize SBTC as separate productivity trends for college and
non-college workers.


                                                    24
postgraduate) degree increased by 24.5% relative to those with high school, and the relative wage
of workers with a postgraduate degree increased by 42% relative to those with high school. In
this model, education dummies explain 55% of the variation in wage changes during this period.
       However, most of these differences between workers with different education levels disappear
once our task displacement measure is included in column 2 (which is identical to column 3 of
Table 1) or when it is instrumented with our index of automation in column 3. In particular,
there is no longer any differential wage growth for workers with a college degree relative to those
with a high school degree. Likewise, task displacement explains 75% of the rise in the post-college
premium, which goes down from 41.6% to 8.3%. In line with these findings, task displacement
explains 55% of the changes in the wage structure, while the education dummies explain 8%. Task
displacement also explains about 7% (out of 17%) of the change in real wages for women relative
to men during this period. These results are the basis of our claim that much of the changes in
wage structure in the US between 1980 and 2016 are related to task displacement, with a minor
role for residual and standard forms of factor-augmenting SBTC.
       The next three columns go one step further and control for other types of factor-augmenting
technologies by allowing for differential trends by the baseline real wage level of the demographic
group. The results are broadly similar to those in the first three columns, and our task displace-
ment measure explains 43% of the observed wage changes while education dummies and baseline
wages jointly explain 16% of the variation.
       In Table A-4 in the Appendix, we also control for the differential evolution of the supply
(population size) of different demographic groups, which is the equivalent of the relative supply
controls in Katz and Murphy (1992) and Card and Lemieux (2001). The inclusion of these controls
further raises the explanatory power of our task displacement measure (because demographic shifts
have gone in favor of groups experiencing task displacement). Now, task displacement explains
72% of the changes in wage structure, while the education dummies continue to explain a small
portion (4%) of the variation.
       In summary, these results suggest that task displacement has been at the root of the changes
in the wage structure from 1980 to today, while other forms of SBTC have limited explanatory
power.


4.4      Employment Outcomes

If task displacement leads to lower labor demand for a demographic group, we could see an impact
not just on its wage but on its employment as well.25 Table 4 provides results for the 1980­2016
period, focusing on the employment to population ratios in the top panel and non-participation
rate in the bottom panel.
       We find that task displacement is associated with lower employment to population ratios, both
  25
    Appendix B-1 provides an extension of our model that allows for endogenous supply responses and shows that
task displacement will lead to a relative decline in hours worked. This decline could be involuntary if the labor
market is not competitive (see, for example, Kim and Vogel, 2021).


                                                       25
in OLS (columns 1­3) and IV specifications using our index of automation as instrument (columns
4­6). Panel B reveals that most of the adjustment takes place via an increase in non-participation.
For example, using the estimates from column 2, we see that a 10 percentage point higher task
displacement is associated with a 4.6 percentage point decline in employment (s.e.=1.4) and a
similar 3.7 percentage point increase in non-participation (s.e.=1.4). Additionally, columns 3 and
6 in both panels confirm that the employment effects do not reflect adverse trends against all
workers specialized in routine jobs or those employed in industries with declining labor shares,
but are instead driven by task displacement. Overall, our task displacement measure explains
between 15% and 36% of the variation in employment and participation changes over this time
period.26


4.5      Confounding Trends: Imports, Deunionization and Other Capital

In this and the next subsection, we control for other changes affecting the US labor market and
contrast their effects with those of task displacement.
       Column 1 in Panel A of Table 5 includes the exposure of different demographic groups to
industries experiencing greater Chinese import competition as an explanatory variable. Although
industry shifters already account for the effects of trade in final goods, this control allows for
other direct effects of trade with China on the wage structure. Column 2 controls for workers'
exposure to industries with declining unionization rates, which may have reduced their rents, thus
contributing both to labor share declines and changes in the wage structure. In both specifications,
task displacement has a very similar coefficient both in OLS and IV and continues to explain a
large fraction of changes in the US wage structure. Moreover, we find no evidence that Chinese
import competition or declining unionization rates have a direct effect on the wage structure.27
       Columns 3 and 4 contrast the effects of task displacement with those of other forms of invest-
ment and technological progress. Column 3 controls for overall changes in the capital-labor ratio
of industries, which will affect labor shares away from the  = 1 benchmark. Although the CES
task displacement measures we consider in the Appendix and described in footnote 15 correct for
this type of capital deepening parametrically, the specifications presented here allow us to con-
trast the effects of task displacement to those of investments in other types of capital goods that
do not involve automation. Consistent with our emphasis on the distinct effects of automation
on the wage structure, we find that, conditional on task displacement, higher capital-labor ratios
have no impact on wages. Finally, column 4 controls for differential wage trends for workers in
industries experiencing TFP increases. Conditional on task displacement and industry shifters,
we find that other technologies increasing TFP at the industry level do not affect wage inequality.
  26
     Table B-2 in the Appendix shows similar results for hours per worker and the unemployment rate, though the
responses of these margins are somewhat less robust than for employment to population ratio and non-participation.
  27
     Both variables have a small effect working through industry shifts, but no additional effect via task displacement.
Note, in particular, that as Figure A-2 documents, conditional on our index of automation, trade and declining
unionization do not appear to be correlated with task displacement.




                                                          26
This reaffirms that the effects of non-automation technologies that raise TFP are very different
from the task-displacing effects of automation.28
       Columns 5­8 provide analogous IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument
for task displacement, and in Panel B we go one step further and allow these shocks to have a
differential effect on routine jobs in exposed industries. In all of these specifications, there is no
evidence of a sizable role for these other forces, and task displacement's effects continue to be
precisely-estimated and similar to our baseline results.29


4.6      Confounding Trends: Concentration and Markups

We next explore the role of rising sales concentration and markups, which impact industry labor
shares and might directly affect the wage structure.30 Table 6 provides our findings. Column 1 in
Panel A controls for workers' exposure to industries with rising sales concentration, and the next
three columns include their exposure to markup changes across industries using three alternative
estimates of markups at the industry level. These are: markups computed from accounting data;
markups estimated using the (inverse of the) material share and markup estimates following
the approach in De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020) (see Appendix B-4 for details). These
specifications thus capture the possibility that workers in industries experiencing an increase in
markups or concentration might suffer lower wages. Columns 5­8 provide IV estimates where we
instrument task displacement using the index of automation.
       In all specifications, we see that the OLS and IV estimates of the effects of our task displace-
ment variable are very similar to before--ranging between -1.25 and -1.31--while exposure to
rising concentration or markups have little explanatory power for wages.
       Panel B goes one step further and uses a measure of task displacement that partials out the
component of the labor share decline in an industry driven by markups (as explained in footnote
15). This correction does not affect our conclusions, and our point estimates for the effects of task
displacement remain sizable and precisely estimated. Even with this correction, markup changes
do not have a robust effect and explain no more than 3% of the variation in wage changes.
       The findings in this table suggest that our task displacement variable is not picking up con-
founding effects of rising markups or concentration. Overall, it appears that it is task displacement
  28
     The findings in columns 3­4 are in line with our model. For example, under Assumption 1, increases in capital
productivity in tasks it is already performing will lead to greater capital utilization but will not cause any task
displacement, and as such will not negatively impact workers specializing in routine tasks in these industries.
Likewise, industry TFP growth should only affect labor demand through the industry shifters, which are already
being controlled for in these regressions.
  29
     Table A-5 shows that these results are very similar when we control for exposure to labor share declines and
relative specialization in routine occupations as in column 4 of Table 1.
  30
     Appendix B-1 provides an extension of our model to an economy with markups at the industry level. We explain
how changes in markups can directly impact the wages of workers that specialize in sectors with rising markups
and how to correct for these effects as we do in Panel B of Table 6 (see also footnote 15). Table A-6 provides
additional specifications that allow markups to have a differential effect on workers in routine jobs. Finally, Table
A-7 shows the robustness of the patterns reported here to controlling for exposure to industry labor share declines
and relative specialization in routine occupations.




                                                         27
rather than rising market power that has played a defining role in the surge in US wage inequality
over the last four decades.


4.7      Regional Variation

Task and industry composition vary greatly across regions and commuting zones in the US. To
further test the association between task displacement and wages, we now investigate whether
regional variation in task displacement also predicts changes in sub-national wage structures.
       Table 7 provides estimates that exploit regional differences in specialization patterns. The
main difference is that now the unit of observation is given by group-region cells, and we exploit
differences in specialization across these cells to construct our task displacement measures. In
Panel A we look at 300 demographic groups defined by gender, education, age, and race across
nine US regions (giving us a total of 2,633 observations excluding empty cells). The OLS estimates
in columns 1-3 and the IV estimates in columns 4­6 are very similar to those in Tables 1 and 2.
       In Panel B we attempt to separate regional and national changes by including a full set of
demographic group fixed effects, which absorb all national trends affecting a demographic group.
We find negative and significant but smaller effects of task displacement (especially in columns
2­3 and 5­6). These estimates imply that task displacement at the regional level matters and has
a precisely-estimated negative impact on wages, which is in line with our theory. Nevertheless,
these results also indicate that local differences in task displacement are not as important as
national changes for understanding the evolution of the wage structure.31
       Panels C and D repeat this exercise for 54 demographic groups defined by a coarser grouping
of gender, education, age, and race, but now across 722 US commuting zones (for a total of 20,768
observations). The results are very similar to those in Panels A and B.


4.8      Further Robustness Checks

The Appendix provides a number of additional checks, all of which support our main conclusions:
       First, in Table A-8, we provide estimates of the effects of task displacement excluding immi-
grants, as well as separate estimates for men and women.
       Second, in Table B-3, we checked our results for 1980­2007, thus avoiding any persistent effects
of the Great Recession, with similar results.
       Third, in Table A-9 we present stacked-differences models with two periods, 1980­2000 and
2000­2016, which explore the differential patterns of task displacement between these sub-periods.
Panel A estimates the same specifications as in Table 1, but now using stacked differences, while
Panel B allows covariates to have different coefficients in the two subperiods. The results in both
  31
     In the presence of migration and trade across regions (especially relevant for manufacturing industries), regional
task displacement should have a smaller impact than national trends, because the latter can cause strong ripple
effects for workers in the same demographic group across different regions. For example, in the limit case where
tasks can be traded across regions with no transaction or transport costs (or labor is perfectly mobile), one would
expect task displacement to reduce the wages of all workers in a given group by the same amount across all regions.
In Panel B, the national effect is absorbed by the group fixed effects.


                                                          28
panels are similar to, but smaller in some specifications than, those in Table 1. In Panel C, we
report period-by-period estimates of the effects of task displacement on wage changes, and confirm
that our estimates are comparable across the 1980­2000 and 2000­2016 periods.
      Fourth, Table B-4 verifies that our results are similar when we compute the task displacement
measure using different values of the elasticity of substitution to account for changes in factor
prices using the formulas in footnote 15. Table B-5 confirms that the results are robust to
using labor share data from the BLS, excluding extractive industries, winsorizing the labor share
changes, or focusing only on industries with a declining labor share to construct our measure of
task displacement (rather than our baseline measure which exploited both declines and increases
in industry labor shares). Table A-10 reports similar results when we utilize several alternative
measures of which jobs can be automated. Most importantly, the results are similar when we rely
on the measure of automatable jobs from Webb (2020).


               5   General Equilibrium Effects and Quantitative Analysis

Our reduced-form evidence documented a strong negative relationship between task displacement
and relative wage changes. This evidence misses three general equilibrium effects, however. First,
in our regressions the common effect of productivity on real wages is included in the intercept,
making our estimates uninformative about wage level changes. Second, our regression estimates
focus on the direct effects of task displacement and do not account for the resulting ripple effects,
which also impact the wage structure. Third, although our regressions control for observed indus-
try changes, they do not separate out industry shifts induced by task displacement, thus missing
one component of the total effect of automation and offshoring. In this section, we develop our
full general equilibrium model, which enables us to quantify these mechanisms.


5.1     General Equilibrium Effects and the Propagation Matrix

We first generalize Proposition 2 to the case in which Assumption 1 is relaxed and there are ripple
effects. For this purpose, let us define aggregate task shares as

                                                                    1
                     g (w,  , ) =        sY
                                          i (p, c)  (Ai  pi )
                                                              -1
                                                                               g (x)-1  dx,
                                    iI                              Mi   Tgi
                                                  = i
                                                                               = gi
                                                                    1
                     k (w,  , ) =        sY
                                          i (p, c)  (Ai  pi )
                                                              -1
                                                                               k (x)-1  dx,
                                    iI                              Mi   Tki
                                                  = i
                                                                               = ki

which are given by a weighted sum of industry-specific task shares, gi (or ki ), and also depend
on industry shifters,  = (1 , . . . , I ). Because worker groups now compete for tasks, task shares
in each industry are a function of both wages and technology.
      To characterize ripple effects, consider any technological change with a direct effect of zg on


                                                        29
the real wage of group g , and denote by z the column vector of zg 's. Differentiating (2), we obtain:

                                                                                               -1
                            1  ln (w,  , )                       1  ln (w,  , )
             d ln w = z +                   d ln w  d ln w = 1 -                                    z ,
                                   ln w                                 ln w
                                                                                            

where  ln (w,  , )  ln w is the G × G Jacobian of the function ln (w,  , ) = (ln 1 (w,  , ),
ln 2 (w,  , ), . . . , ln G (w,  , )) with respect to the vector of wages w. This Jacobian summa-
rizes the effect of a change in wages on the task allocation. We refer to the G × G matrix  as
the propagation matrix . The propagation matrix summarizes the general equilibrium effects of a
vector of shocks z once we account for ripple effects.
    In the Appendix, we prove that  is well defined and has positive entries. In particular gg  0
captures the extent to which workers of type g  compete for marginal tasks against workers of type
g . Second, we show that the row sum of , which we label by g , is always between 0 and 1. Third,
the propagation matrix satisfies the following symmetry property: g - gg sL               L
                                                                          g  = g  - g  g sg for
any two groups g and g  (where sL
                                g is the labor share of group g in output). Finally, the propagation
matrix tells us whether different workers are q -complements or q -substitutes: an increase in the
supply of workers of type g  reduces the real wage of type g if and only if gg > sL
                                                                                  g   g (see
Appendix B-1 for additional properties of the propagation matrix). In what follows, we denote
row g of the propagation matrix by g = (g1 , . . . , gG ).
    The next proposition characterizes the general equilibrium effects of task displacement on
wages, industry prices, TFP, and output.                      We use d ln x to designate the column vector of
(d ln x1 , . . . , d ln xG ) across groups of workers, and with some abuse of notation, we denote the
vector of industry prices by d ln p = (d ln p1 , d ln p2 , . . . , d ln pI ).

Proposition 4 (Counterfactuals) The effect of task displacement on wages, industry prices,
and aggregates is given by the solution to the system of equations:

                                1           1         1
                    d ln wg =g     d ln y + d ln  - d ln disp for all g  G ,
                                                      
                                          Y
                                    ln si (p)
                     d ln g = gi                d ln p + ( - 1)  d ln pi for all g  G ,
                             iI        ln p
                                                           disp
                     d ln pi =         sL
                                        gi  d ln wg - d ln gi  gi          for all i  I ,
                                 g G
                                                                disp
                  d ln TFP =           sY
                                        i (p)         sL
                                                       gi  d ln gi  gi ,
                                 iI             g G
                                  1
                      d ln y =         d ln TFP + sK  d ln sK ,
                               1 - sK
                                  1
                    d ln sK = - K      sL  (d ln wg - d ln y ) .
                                 s gG g

    This proposition generalizes Proposition 2 to an economy with multiple sectors and ripple



                                                               30
effects, but for notational simplicity, focuses on task-displacing technologies.32 The expression for
wages transparently illustrates the general equilibrium forces described above: real wage changes
depend on the expansion of output, induced shifts in sectoral composition, and the ripple effects
summarized by the propagation matrix. It is because of ripple effects that a demographic group's
real wage now depends on the task displacement experienced by other groups.
       The formulas in this proposition provide the basis for our quantitative exercise. In particular,
the proposition shows that one can use our measures of task displacement across groups and
industries, together with a demand system for industries, estimates of the propagation matrix,
and estimates of the cost savings from automation, to compute the full general equilibrium effects
of these technologies.


5.2      Parametrization, Calibration, and Estimation

This subsection describes our measurement of task displacement in the presence of ripple effects.
It also explains how we parametrize the model and estimate the propagation matrix.


Measuring task displacement and the cost savings from automation:                                   Recall that  is
the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in an industry holding the task allocation
constant, while the elasticity of substitution incorporating task reallocation, i , exceeds . As a
result, when we incorporate ripple effects and task reallocation, the task displacement experienced
by group g in industry i can be expressed as

                                                -d ln sL    K
                                                       i - si  (1 - i )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
(15)                 d ln disp R  R
                          gi = gi i                                                           ,
                                                            1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i

and the task displacement measure in equation (12) becomes

                                           i  R  R         -d ln sL    K
                                                                  i - si  (1 - i )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
(16)       Task displacementg =            g  gi i                                                       .
                                     g G                               1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i


       To compute these measures, we set i = 1, which is in the spirit of our baseline assumption in
Section 2.3. We explore the robustness of our results to i = 0.8 and i = 1.2 in the Appendix.
This range for the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor aligns with the available
empirical estimates (see Oberfield and Raval, 2020; Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). For the
elasticity of substitution between tasks, which should be lower than i , we choose  = 0.5, which
is in line with the estimates in Humlum (2020).33
  32
      The proposition also shows that ripple effects do not affect our expressions for TFP, output, or sectoral prices.
This is thanks to the envelope theorem: in an efficient economy, induced worker reallocation has only second-order
effects on TFP and industry prices, even though it has a first-order impact on labor demand and wages.
   33
      The reason why we choose a different value of  here than in the reduced-form analysis is that, in the absence of
ripple effects, the task allocation of factors is constant and  gives the elasticity of substitution between factors. In
contrast, with ripple effects, the relevant elasticity is i , which is greater than . For i , we explored the robustness
of our findings to values ranging from 0.8 to 1.2--the same range used in our reduced-form analysis. The Appendix
also provides results for  = 0.625, which is the value implied by our reduced-form regression evidence, where the


                                                          31
    Finally, we set the cost savings from automation to i = 30% for all industries, which is in line
with estimates for industrial robots surveyed in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020).34


Industry demand:            We use a simple CES demand system across industries as in footnote
12: sY
     i (p) = i      p1 -
                     i .    Following Buera, Kaboski and Rogerson (2015), we set the elasticity of
substitution between industries to  = 0.2.


Propagation matrix:            Motivated by the symmetry property of the propagation matrix de-
scribed above, we parameterize the extent of competition for tasks between two demographic
groups g and g  as a function of their distance (dissimilarity) across n  N dimensions. In partic-
ular, we assume that

                1
            gg = (g - g )  sL
                            g +    n  f (dn       L           
                                          gg  )  sg  for all g  g and gg =  for all g,
                2               nN


where f is a decreasing function of the distance along a given dimension n between groups g  and
g , denoted here by dn
                     gg  . The assumption of common diagonal term is consistent with our reduced-
form evidence, which did not find major heterogeneities across groups. The parameter n  0 gives
the importance of dimension n in mediating ripple effects. We choose the following dimensions
along which we measure distance between groups: occupational and industry employment shares
(which account for similarity in the types of tasks performed), and education by age (which allows
for the possibility that, among workers with or without college, workers of similar ages might be
more substitutable than those of different ages; see Card and Lemieux (2001)).
    Using this parameterization, the wage effects from Proposition 4 can be written as:

                           g           
(17)           d ln wg =       d ln y -  Task displacementg
                                       
                                   1 g g            n
                           -            -     +         f (dn        L
                                                            g,g  )  sg   Task displacementg  + g ,
                             g  g 2             nN 
                                     1
       subject to: g = +               (g - g ) +         n  f (dn        L
                                                                 g,g  )  sg  , and n  0,
                              g  g   2               x


where f is chosen as an inverted sigmoid function of the distance between two groups.35 The
coefficient estimate for task displacement, -1.6, corresponds to -1  in the absence of ripple effects. Tables A-11
and B-6 summarize our findings.
    34
       In practice, cost savings might be different across industries, but we do not have separate estimates.
    35
       We compute distances using the dissimilarity measures doccupations
                                                                 g,g 
                                                                            =12 o
                                                                                   go
                                                                                      - go       industries
                                                                                           and dg,g         =2
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                               iI g -
                                                                                                                  i

  i
g , where the sum runs over 330 occupations and 192 industries in the US Census, respectively. In addition, the
sigmoid function takes the form
                                                                   1
                                           f (dn
                                               g,g  ) =                       - ,
                                                          1+ 1   dn
                                                                  g,g 
                                                                         -1

where   1 is a tuning parameter governing the decay of the function. For  = 1 we get f (d) = 1 - d. More
generally, the sigmoid function has a maximum of 1 when there is no dissimilarity between two groups. In our
baseline estimates in Table 8, we use a quadratic tuning parameter,  = 2. In the Appendix, we provide similar


                                                           32
parameters of this system can be estimated by GMM exploiting the moment conditions

                                                                                          
                                          1       L                         N       L    
                     
                   E g  1, zg ,       f (dg,g )  sg  zg , . . . ,       f (dg,g )  sg  zg  = 0,
                                g   g                             g   g                   
                                                                                          

where zg is either our measure of task displacement, or alternatively, our index of automation (so
that we only exploit automation-induced changes in demand).
      Table 8 provides our estimates for   and n  in equation (17). Columns 1­3 use our
task displacement measure in equation (16) to form moment conditions, while columns 4­6 use
the index of automation. The estimates in Panel A of Table 8 provide evidence of significant
ripple effects by occupation, industry, and within age×education cells, and suggest that these are
all of comparable importance.36 These estimates also imply that demographic groups suffering
displacement will compete for tasks performed by other groups that have similar age and education
and specialize in similar occupations and industries.


5.3     Quantitative Results

This subsection presents our quantitative results using the estimates of the propagation matrix
from column 1 of Table 8. We use Proposition 4 to compute the effects of task displacement
across workers and industries. We treat task displacement, as measured in equations (15) and
(16), as the driving force affecting the wage structure. Thus, this exercise leaves out other forms
of technological progress (including factor-augmenting technologies, productivity deepening, new
tasks, and sectoral TFPs) and changes in factor supplies driven by education and demographics.
      Table 9 summarizes our findings. The first column depicts the data, while the second column
presents the model-implied numbers when we feed in industry-level labor share changes as the
driving force. Finally, the third column, instead, feeds in the component of industry labor share
changes driven by our index of automation (with very similar results to those in column 2). The
first panel of the table presents the effects on wage inequality. This information is also displayed
in Figure 10, which decomposes the effects of the various mechanisms via which task displacement
affects the wage structure.
      Panel A of the figure plots the productivity effect (1 )  d ln y , which raises the wages for all
demographic groups by close to 45%. Panel B adds the implications of industry shifts caused
by task displacement, (1 )  d ln  . Because task displacement concentrates and reduces costs
in manufacturing, mining, and retail, it induces an expansion of the service sector (similar to a
Baumol effect), boosting the demand for workers specializing in services. Quantitatively, however,
estimates for different values of the tuning parameter; see Tables A-11 and B-6.
  36
     The table reports the average contribution of ripple effects along dimension n  N to the off-diagonal terms of
the propagation matrix, which is computed as

                                                            n  1                            L
                        Contribution of ripple effectsn =                   f (dn
                                                                                gg  )  sg  sg  .
                                                                                        L
                                                              sL   g   g  g                   




                                                        33
this effect is small, accounting for less than 7% of the observed changes in the US wage structure.37
       Panel C adds the direct effects of task displacement, -(1 )  d ln disp and confirms the pattern
documented in our reduced-form analysis: direct task displacement plays a dominant role in
changes in the US wage structure between 1980 and 2016. We also see in this panel that the
direct impact of task displacement causes as much as a 25% decline in the real wages of some
groups. There are, nonetheless, some notable differences from the reduced-form evidence. While
in the reduced-form regressions, task displacement accounted for 50%-70% of the changes in the
US wage structure, the second row of Table 9 shows that it accounts for as much as 100% of
the variation here. This, however, overstates the full impact of task displacement, because of the
ripple effects shown in the next row of the table and in Panel D of Figure 10.
       Once ripple effects are added (row 3 in Table 9), task displacement, with its full general
equilibrium effects, is predicted to explain about 48% of changes in the US wage structure. The
reason why this is significantly less than the direct impact of task displacement shown in row 2
is because ripple effects spread ("democratize") the negative consequences of displacement across
demographic groups and also reduce the burden on directly-affected groups. For example, the
impact on high school-graduate white men aged 26-35 in Panel C of Figure 10 is -14%. But once we
allow for the ripple effects--which incorporate the fact that they now compete for non-automated
tasks performed by other demographic groups--we find the total effect on this group in Panel
D of Figure 10 to be -5.3%. In contrast, without the ripple effects, white high school-dropout
women aged 26-35 are predicted to experience a 4% real wage increase, but incorporating the
ripple effects, they suffer a 1% decline in their real wage.
       The consequences of ripple effects are further illustrated in Figure 11. The figure plots the
direct effects of task displacement against the baseline wage of demographic groups (marker sizes
are proportional to hours worked by each group). For each group, we also include an arrow
indicating the direction of change due to ripple effects: the red markers designate groups that
benefit from ripple effects, while blue markers highlight those losing out from ripple effects. Two
features standout from this figure. First, 153 directly affected groups (accounting for 34% of
hours worked) that would have suffered larger wage losses due to task displacement are helped by
ripple effects, while 347 groups that are, on the whole, less impacted by direct task displacement
themselves share in the relative wage declines because of the ripple effects. Second, while the
directly-affected groups are typically among those that already had lower wages in 1980, the
indirectly-affected groups are more evenly spread in terms of their 1980 wage distribution.
  37
    This finding reiterates that most of the effects of task displacement are "within-industry": they are caused
by reduced demand for affected demographic groups depressing their wages and thus their earnings in all of the
industries in which they are employed, even though this reduced labor demand originates in the subset of industries
undergoing rapid automation.
  The fact that ("between") industry shifts induced by task displacement are playing a minor role in our context
does not rule out the possibility that industry shifts generated by secular structural transformation and trade
could have bigger effects on the wage structure. See, for example, Buera, Kaboski and Rogerson (2015) and
Galle, Rodr´ iguez-Clare and Yi (2017) for recent contributions quantifying the distributional effects of structural
transformation and trade.



                                                        34
        A. Productivity effect                              B. + Industry shifts                        C. + Direct effects of task displacement D. + Ripple effects

  .5




                                                      .5




                                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                             .5
  .4




                                                      .4




                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                             .4
  .3




                                                      .3




                                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                             .3
                             Highschool dropout
  .2




                                                      .2




                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                             .2
                             Highschool
                             Some college
  .1




                                                      .1




                                                                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                             .1
                             College
                             Post college
  0




                                                      0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                             0
  -.1




                                                      -.1




                                                                                                  -.1




                                                                                                                                             -.1
  -.2




                                                      -.2




                                                                                                  -.2




                                                                                                                                             -.2
  -.3




                                                      -.3




                                                                                                  -.3




                                                                                                                                             -.3
         2       2.5     3             3.5        4         2       2.5      3     3.5       4          2       2.5     3      3.5       4         2       2.5     3      3.5       4
             Hourly wage 1980 (in logs)                         Hourly wage 1980 (in logs)                  Hourly wage 1980 (in logs)                 Hourly wage 1980 (in logs)



Figure 10: Contribution of productivity effects, industry shifts, direct displacement effects, and ripple effects to
the predicted change in wages for 1980­2016. Marker sizes indicate the share of hours worked by each group and
different colors indicate education levels. See text for variable definitions.


        A final feature of the predicted wage changes in Panel D of Figure 10 is worth noting: even
though there is a large (close to 45%) productivity effect, the real wage level of 131 demographic
groups (making up 42% of the 1980 population) declines because of task displacement (in the
data, 121 groups, making up 53% of the 1980 population, experienced real wage declines). This
result highlights how task displacement can generate meaningful real wage declines. In contrast,
the canonical SBTC model cannot explain real wage declines.
        As a summary, Figure 12 plots the predicted wage changes in the model and the observed
real wage changes between 1980 and 2016. In addition to accounting for a large fraction of the
variation in US wage structure, task displacement can explain several other salient aspects of the
labor market this period. First, our quantitative results imply a 6.7% decline in the real wage
of low-education men compared to a 8.2% decline in the data. Second, in general equilibrium,
task displacement generates a 21% increase in the college premium and a 23% increase in the
post-college premium (over high school graduates)--accounting for 80% and 55% of the observed
increases, respectively. Finally, task displacement alone closes the gender gap by about 2%.
Interestingly, in all these cases, the direct effects of task displacement are dampened once we
account for ripple effects. It is also worth noting, however, that our model misses a significant
portion of wage growth coming from highly-educated workers at the top of the wage distribution.
This may reflect the complementarity between some of the new technologies and post-graduate
skills or other forces, such as winner-take-all dynamics in some high-skill professions, which are
both absent from our model.
        The second panel of Table 9 turns to the model's implications for aggregates. Despite the
large distributional effects documented above, task displacement generates only a 3.8% TFP gain
in the aggregate, and this is the reason why average real wages are predicted to grow slowly (only


                                                                                                 35
                                                                                   Direct effects and ripple effects, 1980-2016




                                                      50
                              Percent wage changes accounting for ripple effects
                              -20     -10    0      10-30  20       30       40




                                                                                   $7.5   $10     $13.3 $17.8 $23.7 $31.6             $42
                                                                                                        Hourly wage in 1980
                                                                                                  (logarithmic scale, 2008 dollars)


Figure 11: Direct effects of task displacement compared to general equilibrium effects after accounting for ripple
effects. Marker sizes indicate the share of hours worked by each group. The red markers identify groups for which
ripple effects dampened the effect of task displacement on their wages. The blue markers identify groups for which
ripple effects reduced their wages. See text for variable definitions.


by 5.7%) and many groups experience real wage declines.38 In contrast, in the data, TFP grew by
35% during this period, and average real wages rose by 29% (though two thirds of this is due to
changes in the composition of the workforce, which are not present in our model). These numbers
confirm our earlier conclusion that there were other technological advances--such as productivity
deepening, factor augmenting, sectoral TFP, or even new tasks--contributing to output, wage
growth, and productivity between 1980 and 2016. However, the congruence between the model-
implied changes in wage structure and the data suggests that these other technological changes
had small effects on inequality, except possibly at the top of the wage distribution. Finally,
task displacement accounts for the observed decline in the labor share (by construction) and the
observed increase in the capital-output ratio over this period. This suggests that the amount of
investment accompanying automation in our model is in the ballpark of the data.
       The third panel of Table 9 summarizes the sectoral implications of task displacement. In line
with the small TFP gains estimated above, we see that task displacement generates small changes
in industry composition and accounts for only 0.4 of the 8.8 percentage point decline in the share
of manufacturing in value added. The results in this panel and in Panel B of Figure 10 further
reinforce the view that automation and offshoring affect the economy and inequality through very
  38
    In a competitive economy with elastic supply of capital (as in our model), d ln TFP = g sL g  d ln wg , which
shows that average wage growth equals (1 s )  d ln TFP > 0. Thus the modest wage gains are directly linked to the
                                          L

small TFP gains generated by automation. While the model predicts a larger increase in output per worker, this is
driven not by higher TFP, but by growing investment (the rising capital-output ratio).




                                                                                                           36
                                                                 Observed and predicted wage change, 1980-2016




                                             .6
                                             .5
                              Observed wage change, 1980--2016
                                     .1     .2     .3      .4
                                                                                                        Highschool dropout
                               0

                                                                                                        Highschool
                                                                                                        Some college
                                             -.1




                                                                                                        College
                                                                                                        Post college
                                             -.2




                                                                 -.2           0             .2            .4           .6
                                                                       Wage change due to task displacement, 1980--2016


Figure 12: Predicted (horizontal axis) vs. observed (vertical axis) wage changes. The 45 line is shown in red.
Marker sizes indicate the share of hours worked by each group and different colors indicate education levels. See
text for variable definitions.


different channels than structural transformation or trade in final goods.39


                                                                       6   Concluding Remarks

This paper argued that a significant portion of the rise in US wage inequality over the last four
decades has been driven by automation (and to a lesser extent offshoring) displacing certain work-
groups from employment opportunities for which they had comparative advantage. To develop
this point, we proposed a conceptual framework where tasks are allocated to different types of
labor and capital, and automation technologies expand the set of tasks performed by capital and
displace workers previously employed in these tasks. We derived a simple equation linking wage
changes of a demographic group to the task displacement it experiences.
    Our reduced-form evidence is based on estimating this equation and reveals a number of strik-
ing new facts. Most notably, we documented that between 50% and 70% of the changes in US wage
structure between 1980 and 2016 are accounted for by the relative wage declines of worker groups
specialized in routine tasks in industries experiencing rapid automation. In our first set of regres-
sion models, industry level task displacement is approximated by (the unexplained component of)
labor share declines. We also estimate very similar results using explicit measures of industry-level
automation and offshoring, confirming that our task displacement variable captures the effects
of automation technologies (and to a lesser degree offshoring) rather than increasing markups,
  39
     Despite its small effect on sectoral shares, task displacement taking place within manufacturing generates a
large 8.2% reduction in the wage bill of that sector, which accounts for 25% of the decline in manufacturing labor
demand for 1980­2016.


                                                                                         37
industry concentration, or import competition. These alternative economic trends themselves do
not appear to play a major role in the evolution of the US wage structure.
   Our reduced-form regressions estimate the direct effects of task displacement on relative wages,
but miss important general equilibrium forces. We developed a methodology to quantify the gen-
eral equilibrium effects of task displacement, which can account for the implications of automation
working through productivity gains, ripple effects and changes in industry composition. Our full
quantitative evaluation shows that task displacement explains close to 50% of the observed changes
in US wage structure. Most notably, task displacement leads to sizable increases in wage inequal-
ity, but only small productivity gains--thus providing a possible resolution to a puzzling feature
of US data.
   There are several interesting areas for future research. First, our framework has been static,
and thus any effects from capital accumulation, dynamic incentives for the development of new
technologies and education and skill acquisition are absent. Incorporating those is an important
direction for future research. Second, and relatedly, we did not attempt to model and estimate
the effects of technologies introducing new labor-intensive tasks (which we argued to have been
important in previous work, Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018). This is yet another avenue for future
research. Finally, our empirical work has been confined to the US and the 1980-2016 period,
for which we have all the data components necessary for implementing our reduced-form and
structural estimation. Expanding these data sources and the empirical exploration of the role of
task displacement to earlier periods and other economies is an important direction for research that
may help us understand the technological and institutional reasons why the US wage structure
was quite stable for the three decades leading up to the mid-1970s.

                                           References

Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor (2011): Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment
  and Earnings vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, chap. 12, pp. 1043­1171. Elsevier.
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and B. Price (2016): "Import Competition
  and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s," Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1), S141­S198.
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, J. Hazell, and P. Restrepo (2020): "AI and Jobs: Evidence from Online
  Vacancies," Working Paper 28257, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, D., C. Lelarge, and P. Restrepo (2020): "Competing with Robots: Firm-Level Evidence
  from France," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 110, pp. 383­88.
Acemoglu, D., and P. Restrepo (2018): "The Race between Man and Machine: Implications of
  Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment," American Economic Review, 108(6), 1488­
  1542.
        (2019): "Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor," Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 33(2), 3­30.
         (2020): "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets," Journal of Political Economy,
  128(6), 2188­2244.
Acemoglu, D., and F. Zilibotti (2001): "Productivity Differences*," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 116(2), 563­606.


                                                38
Atalay, E., P. Phongthiengtham, S. Sotelo, and D. Tannenbaum (2020): "The Evolution of
  Work in the United States," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12(2), 1­34.
Autor, D., and D. Dorn (2013): "The Growth of Low-skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US
  Labor Market," American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553­97.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2020): "The Fall of the
  Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2), 645­709.
Autor, D. H. (2019): "Work of the Past, Work of the Future," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109, 1­32.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998): "Computing Inequality: Have Computers
  Changed the Labor Market?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1169­1213.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): "The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279­1333.
Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994): "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
  U. S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 109(2), 367­397.
Berman, E., J. Bound, and S. Machin (1998): "Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
  International Evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1245­1279.
Bound, J., and G. Johnson (1992): "Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980's: An Evaluation
  of Alternative Explanations," American Economic Review, 82(3), 371­92.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and R. Rogerson (2015): "Skill Biased Structural Change," Discussion
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Burstein, A., E. Morales, and J. Vogel (2019): "Changes in Between-group Inequality: Computers,
  Occupations, and International Trade," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(2), 348­400.
Card, D., and T. Lemieux (2001): "Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College for
  Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 705­746.
Dao, M. C., M. Das, and Z. Koczan (2019): "Why is Labour Receiving a Smaller Share of Global
 Income?," Economic Policy, 34(100), 723­759.
David, H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
  of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121­68.
De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020): "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeco-
 nomic Implications," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2), 561­644.
DiNardo, J., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996): "Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
  of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
  pp. 1001­1044.
Elsby, M. W., B. Hobijn, and A. S    ¸ ahin (2013): "The Decline of the US Labor Share," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2013(2), 1­63.
Feenstra, R. C., and G. H. Hanson (1999): "The Impact of Outsourcing and High-technology Capital
  on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979­1990," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3),
  907­940.
Fernald, J. (2014): "A Quarterly, Utilization-adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity," Discussion
  paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Galle, S., A. Rodr´   iguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2017): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate and
  Distributional Effects of Trade," Working Paper 23737, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldin, C. D., and L. F. Katz (2008): The Race Between Education and Technology. Harvard University
 Press Cambridge.
Goos, M., and A. Manning (2007): "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in
 Britain," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 118­133.


                                                  39
Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2014): "Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased
 Technological Change and Offshoring," American Economic Review, 104(8), 2509­26.
Gregory, T., A. Salomons, and U. Zierahn (2018): "Racing With or Against the Machine? Evidence
 from Europe," Working Paper No. 7247, CESifo Working Paper.
Griliches, Z. (1969): "Capital-Skill Complementarity," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 51(4),
 465­468.
Grossman, G. M., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008): "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,"
 American Economic Review, 98(5), 1978­97.
Hubmer, J. (2020): "The Race Between Preferences and Technology," Unpublished manuscript, University
 of Pennsylvania.
Hubmer, J., and P. Restrepo (2021): "Not a Typical Firm: The Joint Dynamics of Firms, Labor Shares,
 and Capital-Labor Substitution," Working Paper 28579, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Humlum, A. (2020): "Robot Adoption and Labor Market Dynamics," Working paper, University of
 Chicago.
Jaimovich, N., I. Saporta-Eksten, H. E. Siu, and Y. Yedid-Levi (2020): "The Macroeconomics
  of Automation: Data, Theory, and Policy Analysis," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2013): "The Global Decline of the Labor Share," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61­103.
       (2018): "Accounting for Factorless Income," NBER Working Papers 24404, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963­1987: Supply and Demand
 factors," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35­78.
Kim, R., and J. Vogel (2021): "Trade Shocks and Labor Market Adjustment," American Economic
  Review: Insights, 3(1), 115­30.
Klenow, P. J., and A. Rodr´      iguez-Clare (1997): "The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
  Has It Gone Too Far?," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 73­103.
Krueger, A. B. (1993): "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Microdata,
 1984-1989," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1), 33­60.
                                      ~
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. RAos-Rull,      and G. L. Violante (2000): "Capital-Skill Com-
  plementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Econometrica, 68(5), 1029­1053.
Lee, S. Y. T., and Y. Shin (2017): "Horizontal and Vertical Polarization: Task-Specific Technological
  Change in a Multi-Sector Economy," Working Paper 23283, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oberfield, E., and D. Raval (2020): "Micro Data and Macro Technology," Econometrica.
Piketty, T. (2014): Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Webb, M. (2020): "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Labor Market," Working paper, Stanford
 University.
Wright, G. C. (2014): "Revisiting the Employment Impact of Offshoring," European Economic Review,
 66, 63­83.
Zeira, J. (1998): "Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  113(4), 1091­1117.




                                                 40
      Table 1: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages, 1980-2016.

                                                           Dependent variables:
                                                Change in wages and wage declines, 1980­2016
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                           -1.598              -1.323             -1.307             -1.659
 Task displacement
                                          (0.094)             (0.158)            (0.188)            (0.444)
                                                                0.210              0.310              0.347
 Industry shifters
                                                              (0.091)            (0.120)            (0.158)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                                     0.178
 decline                                                                                            (0.664)
 Relative specialization in routine                                                                   0.072
 jobs                                                                                               (0.073)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.67               0.55               0.55                0.70
 displacement
 R-squared                                  0.67               0.70               0.84                0.84
 Observations                               500                500                500                 500
 Other covariates:
 Manufacturing share, and
                                                                                                       
 education and gender dummies

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups, defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The de-
pendent variable is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. Besides the covariates reported in
the table, columns 3 and 4 control for baseline wage shares in manufacturing and dummies for education (for no
high school degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. All regressions are weighted
by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in
parentheses.




                                                       41
                      Table 2: IV estimates instrumenting task displacement with automation and offshoring measures.

                                                                                               Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                                Specialized                          Robot APR         Machinery and        Combined
      Instrument:                                            Robot APR                              Software                                                                  Offshoring
                                                                                machinery                           and software         software           measure
                                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)
                                                                                                         Panel A. Reduced-form estimates
                                                                 -2.014                                               -2.029
      Routine at industries adopting robots
                                                                (0.451)                                              (0.439)
      Routine at industries adopting specialized                                    -0.969                                           -1.352
      machinery                                                                    (0.430)                                          (0.315)
                                                                                                       -4.076         -4.097         -4.645
      Routine at industries adopting software
                                                                                                      (0.823)        (0.880)        (0.918)
                                                                                                                                                               -1.334
      Routine at automating industries
                                                                                                                                                              (0.210)
                                                                                                                                                                                  -2.243
      Routine at offshoring industries
                                                                                                                                                                                 (1.009)

      Share variance explained by task displacement              0.30               0.16               0.17            0.47           0.42                     0.52               0.09
      R-squared                                                  0.79               0.77               0.80            0.83           0.82                     0.83               0.76
      Observations                                               500                500                500             500            500                      500                500
42




                                                                                                              Panel B. IV estimates
                                                                 -1.216             -0.894             -1.480         -1.345         -1.216                    -1.279             -0.813
      Task displacement
                                                                (0.246)            (0.317)            (0.357)        (0.214)        (0.184)                   (0.193)            (0.299)

      Share variance explained by task displacement              0.51               0.38              0.62           0.56                    0.51            0.54                 0.34
      R-squared                                                  0.84               0.83              0.83           0.84                    0.84            0.84                 0.82
      First-stage F                                              98.00              44.98             67.40        439.92                   831.72         785.80                 30.62
      Overid p-value                                                                                                 0.56                    0.31
      Observations                                                500                500               500            500                     500             500                 500
                                                                                         Panel C. Role of industry and occupation          in driving results
                                                                 -1.265             -0.186           -2.951         -2.075                  -1.425          -1.677                -2.494
      Task displacement
                                                                (0.830)            (0.934)          (1.003)        (0.534)                 (0.462)         (0.466)               (0.714)
                                                                  0.302             -1.656           -0.857          0.103                   0.362           0.310                 0.063
      Exposure to industry labor share decline
                                                                (0.913)            (1.558)          (1.346)        (0.792)                 (0.743)         (0.686)               (0.959)
                                                                  0.011             -0.165            0.269          0.137                   0.037           0.075                 0.201
      Relative specialization in routine jobs
                                                                (0.143)            (0.161)          (0.147)        (0.088)                 (0.080)         (0.081)               (0.110)

      R-squared                                                  0.83               0.82               0.79              0.83               0.84               0.84                0.83
      First-stage F                                              6.32               33.72              5.46              32.80             229.90             156.33              23.71
      Observations                                               500                 500               500                500               500                500                 500
     Notes: This table presents reduced-form and IV estimates of the relationship between task displacement and changes in real wages for 500 demographic groups, defined by gender,
     education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. Panel A provides reduced-form estimates,
     where the instruments are indicated at the column headers and described in detail in the text and Appendix B-4. Panel B provides IV estimates. Panel C provides IV estimates
     where we also control for relative specialization in routine jobs and exposure to industry labor share declines (this last term instrumented too using our proxies for technology and
     offshoring). Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters, group's baseline wage share in manufacturing, and dummies for education (for
     no high school degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F -statistics that
     are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust
     to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                                                       Table 3: Task displacement vs. SBTC, 1980­2016.

                                                                        Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                                                SBTC by education level                Allowing for SBTC by wage level
                                                       OLS                   OLS                   IV                  OLS                  OLS                   IV
                                                       (1)                   (2)                   (3)                 (4)                  (5)                   (6)
      Gender: women                                    0.173                0.104                0.105                 0.245                 0.154                0.165
                                                      (0.019)              (0.020)              (0.020)               (0.024)              (0.026)              (0.027)
      Education: no high school                        0.016                 0.023                0.023                0.051                 0.039                0.040
                                                      (0.024)              (0.020)              (0.019)               (0.023)              (0.018)              (0.018)
      Education: some college                          0.053                -0.070               -0.068                0.027                -0.057               -0.046
                                                      (0.031)              (0.032)              (0.033)               (0.024)              (0.031)              (0.031)
      Education: full college                          0.245                -0.019               -0.013                0.180                 0.005                0.027
                                                      (0.039)              (0.050)              (0.052)               (0.036)              (0.049)              (0.050)
      Education: more than college                     0.416                 0.083               0.090                 0.292                 0.093                0.118
                                                      (0.046)              (0.062)              (0.064)               (0.048)              (0.061)              (0.061)
      Log of hourly wage in 1980                                                                                       0.235                 0.115                0.130
43




                                                                                                                      (0.046)              (0.043)              (0.046)
                                                                            -1.307               -1.279                                     -1.028               -0.902
      Task displacement
                                                                           (0.188)              (0.193)                                    (0.185)              (0.194)

      Share variance explained by:
      - educational dummies                             0.55                 0.08                 0.09                 0.37                 0.09                 0.12
      - baseline wage                                                                                                  0.15                 0.07                 0.08
      - task displacement                                                    0.55                 0.54                                      0.43                 0.38
      R-squared                                         0.76                 0.84                 0.84                 0.81                 0.85                 0.84
      First-stage F                                                                              785.80                                                         562.20
      Observations                                      500                  500                  500                   500                  500                 500

      Other covariates:
      Industry shifters and
                                                                                                                                                                   
      manufacturing share
     Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and different proxies of skill-biased technical change and the change in real wages
     across 500 demographic groups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real
     wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. Columns 1­2 and 4­5 report OLS estimates. In columns 3 and 6 we report IV estimates instrumenting task displacement using
     our index of automation. Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters and baseline wage shares in manufacturing. The
     bottom rows of the table report the share of variance explained by task displacement and the different proxies of skill biased technical change. When using our index
     of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are
     weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                                           Table 4: Task displacement and employment outcomes, 1980-2016.

                                                                            Dependent variable: Labor market outcomes 1980­2016
                                                                        OLS Estimates                                  IV Estimates
                                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)


                                                                                       Panel A. Employment to population ratio
                                                         -0.676               -0.465             -0.785         -0.720          -0.422                           -0.729
      Task displacement
                                                        (0.112)              (0.141)            (0.317)        (0.112)         (0.149)                          (0.366)

      Share variance explained by:
      - task displacement                                 0.31                0.21                 0.36                 0.33                0.19                 0.34
      - educational dummies                                                   0.10                 0.12                                     0.12                 0.12
      R-squared                                           0.31                0.77                 0.78                 0.31                0.77                 0.78
      First-stage F                                                                                                   3246.45              785.80               156.33
      Observations                                        500                  500                 500                  500                 500                  500

                                                                                            Panel B. Non-participation rate
                                                         0.668                0.374              0.772            0.718                     0.337                0.747
44




      Task displacement
                                                        (0.120)              (0.138)            (0.312)          (0.120)                   (0.149)              (0.361)

      Share variance explained by:
      - task displacement                                 0.30                0.17                 0.34                 0.32                0.15                 0.33
      - educational dummies                                                   0.16                 0.19                                     0.18                 0.19
      R-squared                                           0.30                0.80                 0.81                 0.30                0.80                 0.81
      First-stage F                                                                                                   3246.45              785.80               156.33
      Observations                                        500                  500                 500                  500                 500                  500


      Covariates:
      Industry shifters, manufacturing share,
                                                                                                                                                                  
      education and gender dummies
      Exposure to labor share declines and
                                                                                                                                                                  
      relative specialization in routine jobs

     Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and labor market outcomes for 500 demographic groups, defined by gender, education,
     age, race, and native/immigrant status. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the change in the employment to population ratio from 1980 to 2016. In Panel B, the
     dependent variable is the change in the non-participation rate from 1980 to 2016. Columns 1­3 report OLS estimates. Columns 4­6 report IV estimates using our index
     of automation to instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table, columns 2­3 and 5­6 control for industry shifters, baseline wage shares in
     manufacturing, and dummies for education (for no high school degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. Columns 3 and 6 control for
     relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage
     F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group
     in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                 Table 5: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--controlling for other trends, 1980-2016.

                                                                                          Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                    OLS estimates                                                                IV estimates
                                             Chinese      Decline in         Rising K L                              Chinese       Decline in             Rising K L
                                                                                                 Rising TFP by                                                         Rising TFP by
                                             imports'    unionization         ratio by                               imports'     unionization             ratio by
                                                                                                    industry                                                              industry
                                           competition      rates             industry                             competition       rates                 industry
                                                (1)           (2)                (3)                   (4)              (5)            (6)                    (7)           (8)


                                                                                 Panel A. Controlling for main effect of other shocks
                                              -1.259         -1.308             -1.306          -1.314           -1.235           -1.277                     -1.274        -1.285
      Task displacement
                                             (0.203)        (0.219)            (0.189)         (0.187)          (0.203)          (0.210)                    (0.193)       (0.189)
                                               0.012          0.017              0.014          -0.042            0.012           -0.032                      0.015        -0.031
      Effect of other shocks by industry
                                             (0.013)        (0.841)            (0.078)         (0.371)          (0.012)          (0.821)                    (0.078)       (0.367)

      Share variance explained by task
                                              0.53           0.55               0.55                  0.55             0.52               0.54                  0.53        0.54
      displacement
      R-squared                               0.84           0.84               0.84                  0.84             0.84            0.84                  0.84           0.84
      First-stage F                                                                                                   851.32         1126.35                883.48         952.66
      Observations                             500            500                   500                500             500             500                   500            500

                                                                             Panel B. Controlling for effects on workers in routine jobs
45




                                              -1.312         -1.629             -1.128          -1.299          -1.285           -1.580                      -1.055        -1.267
      Task displacement
                                             (0.184)        (0.451)            (0.221)         (0.199)         (0.185)          (0.523)                     (0.264)       (0.208)
      Effect of other shocks on routine        0.001          0.678             -0.049          -0.035           0.001            0.601                      -0.059        -0.044
      jobs                                   (0.006)        (0.806)            (0.054)         (0.196)         (0.006)          (0.899)                     (0.059)       (0.197)

      Share variance explained by task
                                              0.55           0.68               0.47                  0.54             0.54               0.66                  0.44        0.53
      displacement
      R-squared                               0.84           0.84               0.84                  0.84             0.84            0.84                  0.84           0.84
      First-stage F                                                                                                   929.19          224.85                362.42         686.25
      Observations                             500            500                   500                500             500             500                   500            500


     Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500 demographic groups controlling for trade
     in final goods, declining unionization rates, other forms of capital investments, and other technologies leading to productivity growth in an industry. These groups are
     defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In Panel A,
     we control for the main effect of these shocks on workers in exposed industries. In Panel B, we allow these shocks to have a differential impact on workers in routine jobs
     in exposed industries. Columns 1­4 report OLS estimates. Columns 5­8 report IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument task displacement. Besides
     the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters, baseline wage share in manufacturing, and dummies for education (for no high school
     degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that
     are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard
     errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
     Table 6: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--controlling for changes in markups and industry con-
     centration, 1980-2016.

                                                                                          Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                    OLS estimates                                                                IV estimates
                                                        Markups from       Markups from                                           Markups from          Markups from
                                       Rising sales                                              Markups from     Rising sales                                          Markups from
                                                         accounting         materials                                              accounting            materials
                                      concentration                                              DLEU (2020)     concentration                                          DLEU (2020)
                                                          approach            share                                                 approach               share
                                             (1)             (2)                (3)                    (4)             (5)             (6)                   (7)             (8)


                                                                          Panel A. Controlling for main effect of markups and concentration
                                            -1.368           -1.315              -1.417          -1.314          -1.339          -1.283                      -1.365         -1.286
      Task displacement
                                           (0.178)          (0.204)             (0.204)         (0.183)         (0.186)         (0.204)                     (0.205)        (0.187)
      Exposure to rising markups or          1.874            0.261              -0.767          -0.670           1.835           0.211                      -0.721         -0.663
      concentration                        (1.429)          (1.442)             (0.425)         (1.005)         (1.433)         (1.419)                     (0.417)        (1.000)

      Share variance explained by:
      - task displacement                   0.57             0.55               0.59                  0.55            0.56             0.54                      0.57       0.54
      - markups/concetration                0.04             -0.00              -0.07                 0.01            0.04            -0.00                     -0.07       0.01
      R-squared                             0.84              0.84               0.84                 0.84            0.84             0.84                      0.84       0.84
      First-stage F                                                                                                   747              798                       704        784
      Observations                          500               500                   500                500            500              500                       500        500
46




                                                                           Panel B. Net out markups from construction of task displacement
                                            -1.738           -1.712             -1.122          -1.323          -1.809           -1.759                      -1.090         -1.177
      Task displacement
                                           (0.223)          (0.238)            (0.149)         (0.161)         (0.257)          (0.277)                     (0.164)        (0.151)
      Exposure to rising markups or          0.694           -0.684             -2.089          -2.127           0.721           -0.654                      -2.016         -1.930
      concentration                        (1.503)          (1.397)            (0.528)         (0.748)         (1.482)          (1.377)                     (0.535)        (0.794)

      Share variance explained by:
      - task displacement                   0.57             0.56               0.54                  0.50            0.60                0.58                   0.53       0.44
      - markups/concetration                0.02             0.01               -0.19                 0.03            0.02                0.01                  -0.19       0.03
      R-squared                             0.83             0.83                0.85                 0.86            0.83                0.83                   0.85       0.86
      First-stage F                                                                                                   471                 405                    301        197
      Observations                          500               500                   500                500            500                 500                    500        500


     Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500 demographic groups controlling for changes
     in market structure and markups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real
     wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In Panel A, we control for groups' specialization in industries with changes in market structure leading to higher markups. In
     column 1, we proxy changes in market structure by rising sales concentration in the industry. In columns 2­4, we directly control for changes in markups. These are
     computed as the ratio of revenue to costs in column 2, the inverse of the materials' share in gross output in column 3, and markups estimated using a production function
     approach as in De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020) in column 4. In Panel B, we also subtract the percent increase in markups from the percent decline in the labor
     share when computing our measure of task displacement (using the accounting markup in columns 1 and 5). Columns 1­4 report OLS estimates. Columns 5­8 report
     IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters,
     baseline wage shares in manufacturing, and dummies for education (for no high school degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. When
     using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All
     regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                          Table 7: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages, 1980-2016: regional variation.

                                                                                      Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                                                              OLS estimates                                         IV estimates
                                                               (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)
                                                                                                  Panel A. Variation across US regions
                                                              -1.601                -1.070               -1.307            -1.650                        -1.134                 -1.497
      Task displacement
                                                             (0.111)               (0.118)              (0.252)           (0.107)                       (0.121)                (0.285)

      R-squared                                               0.62                   0.81                   0.82        0.62              0.81                                  0.81
      First-stage F                                                                                                   1548.83           893.34                                 146.35
      Observations                                            2633                  2633              2633              2633              2633                                  2633
                                                                            Panel B. Variation across US regions absorbing national trends by group
                                                              -1.296               -0.263            -0.373            -1.714            -0.412                                 -0.601
      Task displacement
                                                             (0.100)              (0.082)           (0.119)           (0.097)           (0.112)                                (0.171)

      R-squared                                               0.88                   0.95                   0.95            0.26                         0.70                   0.71
      First-stage F                                                                                                       293.03                        546.96                 150.16
      Observations                                            2633                   2633                 2633              2633                         2633                   2633
                                                                                               Panel C. Variation across commuting zones
47




                                                              -1.234                -0.943               -1.119            -1.385                        -1.225                 -1.472
      Task displacement
                                                             (0.146)               (0.140)              (0.221)           (0.189)                       (0.180)                (0.286)

      R-squared                                               0.36                   0.56                   0.56      0.35              0.55                                    0.54
      First-stage F                                                                                                 558.65            487.63                                   92.12
      Observations                                           20768                20768             20768            20768             20768                                   20768
                                                                        Panel D. Variation across commuting zones absorbing national trends by group
                                                              -0.767              -0.418            -0.414           -1.169            -0.522                                   -0.567
      Task displacement
                                                             (0.070)             (0.065)           (0.147)          (0.097)           (0.061)                                  (0.188)

      R-squared                                               0.71                   0.78                   0.79                  0.10                   0.36                   0.39
      First-stage F                                                                                                              694.53                 137.33                 69.31
      Observations                                           20768                  20768                  20768                 20768                  20768                  20768

      Covariates:
      Industry shifters, manufacturing share,
                                                                                                                                                                                 
      education and gender dummies
      Exposure to labor share declines and
                                                                                                                                                                                 
      relative specialization in routine jobs

     Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across demographic groups × region cells. In panels A and B, we focus
     on 300 demographic groups defined by gender, education, age, and race across 9 Census regions. In panels C and D, we focus on 54 demographic groups defined by gender, education,
     age, and race across 722 commuting zones. The dependent variable is the change in real wages for each cell from 1980 to 2016. In Panels B and D we provide estimates controlling
     for group fixed effects, which account for all national trends affecting a specific group. Columns 1­3 report OLS estimates and Columns 4­6 report IV estimates using our index of
     automation to instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table and the panel headers, columns 2­3 and 4­5 control for industry shifters, baseline wage shares
     in manufacturing, regional dummies, and dummies for education (for no high school degree, some college, college degree and postgraduate degree) and gender. Columns 3 and 6 control
     for relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure to industry labor share decline. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics
     that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group-region cell in 1980. Standard
     errors robust to heteroskedasticity and correlation within demographic group (in Panels A and B) or commuting zone (in Panels C and D) are reported in parentheses.
                                                        Table 8: Estimates of the propagation matrix.

                                                                        Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                   GMM estimates                       GMM using automation index
                                                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)                      (4)            (5)                  (6)


                                                      0.885                0.881               0.818                      0.878          0.872               0.800
      Own effect,  
                                                     (0.047)              (0.050)             (0.053)                    (0.048)        (0.050)             (0.054)
      Contribution of ripple effects via              0.362                0.357               0.310                      0.366          0.360               0.321
      occupational similarity                        (0.087)              (0.090)             (0.091)                    (0.087)        (0.091)             (0.091)
      Contribution of ripple effects via              0.221                0.222               0.363                      0.225          0.225               0.366
      industry similarity                            (0.105)              (0.105)             (0.113)                    (0.105)        (0.105)             (0.113)
      Contribution of ripple effects via              0.179                0.179               0.170                      0.178          0.179               0.167
      education­age groups                           (0.024)              (0.024)             (0.024)                    (0.024)        (0.024)             (0.024)

      Observations                                     500                  500                   500                      500            500                 500
48




      Covariates:
      Industry shifters                                                                                                                                        
      Manufacturing share                                                                                                                                      
     Notes: This table presents estimates of the propagation matrix using the parametrization in equation (17). Here, ripple effects are parametrized as functions of the
     similarity of groups in terms of their 1980 occupational distribution, industry distribution, and education×age groups. The table reports our estimates of the common
     diagonal term  and a summary measure of the strength of ripple effects operating through each of these dimensions, defined by

                                                                                           n  1                            L
                                                       Contribution of ripple effectsn =                   f (dn
                                                                                                               gg  )  sg  sg  ,
                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                             sL   g g  g                     

     which equals the average sum of the off diagonal terms of the propagation matrix explained by each dimension of similarity. Estimates and standard errors are obtained
     via GMM. Columns 1­3 provide GMM estimates using our measure of task displacement to construct the instruments used in the moment conditions. Columns 4­6
     provide GMM estimates using our index of automation to construct the instruments used in the moment conditions. All models are weighted by the share of hours
     worked by each group in 1980.
                             Table 9: Results from quantitative exercise.

                                                                       Model prediction
                                                     Data for                                 Variation due to
                                                                        computed using
                                                     1980­2016                                automation index
                                                                         Proposition 4
                                                         (1)                  (2)                     (3)


 Wage structure:
 Share wage changes explained:
 -due to industry shifts                                                      6.78%                 5.72%
 -adding direct displacement effects                                         100.54%                84.21%
 -accounting for ripple effects                                               48.35%                41.10%
 Rise in college premium                               25.51%                 21.82%                18.29%
 -part due to direct displacement effect                                      40.92%                33.91%
 Rise in post-college premium                          40.42%                 24.06%                19.88%
 -part due to direct displacement effect                                      48.04%                39.11%
 Change in gender gap                                  15.37%                 1.83%                 1.75%
 -part due to direct displacement effect                                      6.31%                 5.38%
 Share with declining wages                            53.10%                 41.71%                44.89%
 -part due to direct displacement effects                                     49.61%                49.62%
 Wages for men with no high school                     -8.21%                 -7.18%                 -7.09%
 -part due to direct displacement effects                                    -13.97%                -13.52%
 Wages for women with no high school                   10.94%                 1.24%                 -1.47%
 -part due to direct displacement effects                                     6.21%                 -0.06%

 Aggregates:
 Change in average wages, d ln w                       29.15%                 5.71%                 4.61%
 Change in GDP per capita, d ln y                      70.00%                 23.42%                18.93%
 Change in TFP, d ln tfp                                 35%                  3.77%                 3.04%
                             L
 Change in labor share, ds                              -8 p.p.             -11.69 p.p             -9.45 p.p
 Change in K Y ratio                                   30.00%                 41.93%                35.15%


 Sectoral patterns:
 Share manufacturing in GDP                           -8.80 p.p              -0.41 p.p             -0.43 p.p
 Change in manufacturing wage bill                     -35.00%                -8.23%                -9.98%

Notes: This table summarizes the effects of task displacement on the wage distribution, wage levels, aggregates and
sectoral outcomes. All these objects are computed using the formulas in Proposition 4 and the parametrization
and estimates for the industry demand system and the propagation matrix in Section 5.2. Column 2 computes
the model predictions based on our baseline measure of task displacement (constructed from industry labor share
declines), while column 3 computes the model predictions due to variation in the index of automation. The wage
data reported in column 1 are from the 1980 US Census and 2014­2018 ACS. The data for GDP, the labor share,
the capital-output ratio data, and the sectoral patterns for manufacturing are from the BEA and the BLS. The
TFP data is from Fernald (2014).




                                                        49
 Appendix A: Online Appendix to "Tasks, Automation, and the
                Rise in US Wage Inequality"
                                    Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
                                                          June 7, 2021


                 Appendix A-1               Proofs of the results in the main text

Proof of Proposition 1.                 We first show that an equilibrium exists and is unique. The
equilibrium of this economy solves the following optimization problem

                        max                 y-          (k (x) q (x))  dx
             {k(x), 1 (x),...,   G (x)}xT           T
                                                                                        
                                                    1                       -1          -1
                         subject to: y =                       (M  y (x))          dx        ,
                                                    M      T

                                      y (x) = Ak  k (x)  k (x) +                  Ag  g (x)      g (x)   x  T ,
                                                                            g G

                                            g   =        g (x)  dx     g  G .
                                                    T


This involves the maximization of a concave objective function subject to a convex constraint
set. As a result, this optimization problem is i. unbounded or ii. has a unique solution (up to a
set of measure zero). Suppose the problem is not unbounded (Proposition B-2 in this appendix
provides conditions under which the maximization problem is bounded). Let wg be the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the constraint for labor of type g . It follows that the solution to this
optimization problem is given by an allocation of tasks to factors such that

                                                                                           
                             wg              wg                    1                       
                   Tg  x                                ,                       for all g  ,
                          Ag   g ( x )  A g    g  ( x )   k
                                                            ( x )  q ( x )  A k            
                                                                                           
                                                                            
                                  1                  wg                     
                   Tk  x                                      , for all g .
                          k (x)  q (x)  Ak Ag  g (x)                        
                                                                            

The tie-breaking rule described in footnote 8 then selects a unique equilibrium allocation. This
argument shows that, when the maximization problem is bounded, there is a unique equilibrium,
where the task allocation is as described in the main text. In what follows, we characterize the
equilibrium as a function of this unique task allocation.
   The demand for task x is

                                                               1
(A-1)                                               y (x) =       y  p(x)- ,
                                                               M




                                                                 A-1
where p(x) is this task's price. Given the allocation of tasks {Tk , T1 , . . . , TG }, this price is

                                                       1
                                                                           if x  Tk
                                                A  q (x)  k (x)
                                                k
                                               
(A-2)                                   p(x) = 
                                                   wg
                                                                           if x  Tg .
                                               
                                                Ag  g (x)
                                               

This implies that the demand for capital and labor at the task level is given by:

                                              1
                                                 y  (Ak  q (x)  k (x))-1                    if x  Tk
                                              M
                             k (x) q (x) = 
                                              0                                             if x  Tk .
                                               1
                                                  y  (Ag  g (x))-1  wg
                                                                     -
                                                                                        if x  Tg
                                              M
                                   g (x) = 
                                              0                                         if x  Tg .

     To derive equation (2), we integrate over the demand for labor across tasks in the previous
expression and rearrange to obtain:
                                                                            1                                               1
                      1                                                y             -1      1                              

        g   =            y  (Ag  g (x))-1  wg
                                            -
                                               dx  wg =                          Ag  
                                                                                                          g (x)   -1
                                                                                                                       dx       .
                 Tg   M                                                g                     M       Tg


     Equation (1) follows by noting that by definition gross output y is

                                                  y=       y (x)p(x)dx.
                                                       T


Substituting for y (x) from equation (A-1), we obtain the ideal price condition:

                                                       1
(A-3)                                             1=           p(x)1- dx.
                                                       M   T


Substituting for the equilibrium task prices from equation (A-2) yields

                                                                                1-
                             1                                         wg                 1
                1 = Ak
                       -1
                                       (q (x)  k (x))-1 dx +                                         g (x)-1 dx .
                             M    Tk                             g G   Ag                 M     Tg


Next substituting for wg from equation (2), we can rewrite this equation in terms of task shares
as
                                                                                 1-
                                                                1y                
                                         1 = Ak
                                                -1
                                                    k +     g   
                                                                                        .
                                                        g G    Ag           g


Rearranging this equation and using the fact that A -1
                                                   k k < 1 yields the expression for output in




                                                           A-2
equation (1).
   Finally, we can compute factor shares as:

                                      1
                               sK =               y  p(x)1- dx y = Ak
                                                                      -1
                                                                          k .
                                      M      Tk


Because of constant-returns to scale, we must have sL = 1 - sK .
   To conclude, note that in any competitive equilibrium we have sL , sK  [0, 1], and so

                                                   1  Ak
                                                         -1
                                                             k ,

as claimed in the main text.

Proof of Proposition 2. We now characterize the effects of a small change in technology. As
in the text, we use Dg  Tg to denote the set of tasks that used to be performed by group g and
where, after the technological change, capital now outperforms labor. The definitions of d ln deep
                                                                                              g

and d ln disp
         g    in the main text imply

(A-4)                           d ln g = ( - 1)d ln deep
                                                    g    - d ln disp
                                                                g .


   To characterize the effects of technology on wages, we first log-differentiate equation (2):

                                          1          -1          1
                             d ln wg =      d ln y +    d ln Ag + d ln g .
                                                                 

Plugging the formula for d ln g in (A-4) yields the expression for wage changes in (4).
   Let us next define changes in TFP, which are:

                                      d ln TFP = d ln y - sK  d ln k,

where k = Tk k (x) q (x)dx. This definition corresponds to gross TFP, defined as the change in
gross output that is not explain by the change in capital and intermediate inputs, k . This can
also be written in its dual representation as:

(A-5)                    d ln TFP =          sL
                                              g  d ln wg -         sK (x)d ln q (x)dx,
                                       g G                   Tk


where sK (x) denotes the share of capital k (x) in gross output and sL
                                                                     g denote the share of labor
of type g in gross output.
   To obtain this expression, note that because of constant returns to scale, Euler's theorem




                                                       A-3
implies

                                                 y=          wg   g   +         k (x) q (x)dx.
                                                       g G                 Tk


For any small change in technology, we have

                                                                                                            1
d ln y =         sL
                  g  d ln wg +           sK (x)d ln k (x)dx -                   sK (x)d ln q (x)dx +                     (k new (x) q new (x))dx,
           g G                      Tk                                    Tk                                y gG    Dg


where the k new (x) and q new (x) denote the new capital usage and prices in the newly-automated
tasks. Rearranging, we have

                                                1                                  
d ln y -              sK (x)d ln k (x)dx +                  (k new (x) q new (x))dx = sL  d ln wg -                               sK (x)d ln q (x)dx.
                 Tk                             y gG     Dg                         gG g                                     Tk


Finally, using the fact that

                                 1                                                   1
                      sK d ln k = dk =              sK (x)d ln k (x)dx +                            (k new (x) q new (x))dx,
                                 y             Tk                                    y gG      Dg


we obtain the dual representation of TFP.
    We now return to determining the contribution of different types of technologies to TFP. For
this, we use the ideal price index condition in equation (A-3), which we can rewrite as

                                                                                               1-
                                1                                                         wg            1
                 1=    Ak
                          -1
                                          (q (x)  k (x))      -1
                                                                      dx +                                        g (x)-1 dx .
                                M    Tk                                         g G       Ag            M    Tg


Log-differentiating this equation following an arbitrary change in technology and capital prices,
we obtain:

(A-6)                   sL
                         g  d ln wg -          sK (x)d ln q (x)dx =sK  d ln Ak + d ln deep
                                                                                      k
                  g G                     Tk

                                                                                +         sL                 deep
                                                                                           g  d ln Ag + d ln g
                                                                                    g G
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                  1   K      disp       L       disp 
                                                                                +    s  d ln k -       sg  d ln g    .
                                                                                  -1              g  G               
                                                                                                                     

Let us define the last line as
                                                                              
                                           1   K      disp       L       disp 
                                         =    s  d ln k -       sg  d ln g    ,
                                           -1              g  G               
                                                                              

which represents the reallocation of tasks from labor to capital.
    To develop this expression further, let us recall the definition of the cost-saving gains from



                                                                          A-4
automating task x:

                                                                                  -1       
                                     1   wg Ak  q (x)  k (x)
                                                                                           
                             g (x) =                                                    - 1 > 0.
                                     -1        Ag  g (x)                                   
                                                                                           

Averaging this across tasks, we obtain the average cost-saving gains from automating tasks in Dg
(which was also defined in the text):

                                   1                                    1
                           g =              g (x)-1  g (x)dx                           g (x)-1 dx.
                                   M   Dg                               M         Dg


Using these definitions,  can be rewritten as

                                                                   1-                         
                   1  A-1  1                            -1      wg      1               -1    
                                                                                              
          =              k          ( q ( x )  k
                                                 ( x ))    dx -                 g ( x )    dx 
             g G  - 1 
                              M Dg                              Ag      M Dg                  
                                                                                              
                                                                1-          
                 1         1  (Ak  q (x)  k (x))-1 - wg
                                                                            
           =                                                        g (x)-1  dx
             g G M Dg  - 1    
                                                             Ag             
                                                                            
                              1-
                 1        w g
           =                      g (x)-1  g (x)dx
             g G M   D g  A g
                           1-
                     wg            1
           =                                g (x)-1 dx  g .
               g G   Ag            M   Dg


                                       wg 1-          1
Next, using the fact that sL
                           g =         Ag             M   Tg g (x)
                                                                      -1
                                                                           dx , we can rewrite  as:

                                    1
                                                   g (x)-1 dx
                                    M
                                sL                                                sL       disp
                                              Dg
                          =      g  1                                 g =          g  d ln g     g .
                            g G                            -1               g G
                                                   g (x)        dx
                                    M         Tg


   Substituting this expression for  into equation (A-6) and using the dual representation of
TFP in equation (A-5), we obtain the TFP expressions in equation (5) as desired.
   The output equation, (7), can be obtained from the TFP equation, (5). Note that by definition
we have

                                            d ln y = d ln TFP + sK  d ln k.

Moreover, k = sK  y , which implies

                                               d ln k = d ln sK + d ln y.




                                                            A-5
Combining these two equations yields

                                                      1
                                          d ln y =      K
                                                          d ln TFP + sK  d ln sK
                                                   1-s
                                                      1
                                          d ln k =        d ln TFP + d ln sK .
                                                   1 - sK

   To obtain the factor share changes, note that

                                d ln sK = ( - 1)  d ln Ak + d ln deep
                                                                 k    + d ln disp
                                                                             k ,


which follows from the fact that sK = Ak
                                         -1
                                             k . We can rewrite this expression as follows:

                                                                        1                              disp 
           d ln sK =( - 1)  d ln Ak + d ln deep
                                           k    +                          (  - 1 )   +     s L
                                                                                              g  d ln  g
                                                                       sK               g G                 
                                                                        1
                     =( - 1)  d ln Ak + d ln deep +                         sL  d ln disp  (1 + ( - 1)  g ),
                                             k
                                                                       sK gG g       g



which yields equation (6) in the proposition.

Proof of Proposition 3.                     We first show that an equilibrium exists and is unique. Denote
the aggregator of industry output by H (y1 , . . . , yI ). The equilibrium of this economy solves the
following optimization problem

                  max                    H (y1 , . . . , yI ) -       (k (x) q (x))  dx
     {k(x), 1 (x),...,   G (x)}xTi ,iI                            T
                                                                                                      
                                                          1                               -1          -1
                                         subject to: yi =                    (M  y (x))          dx        i  I ,
                                                          M              T

                                                     y (x) = Ak  k (x)  k (x) +                 Ag  g (x)    g (x)   x  T ,
                                                                                          g G

                                                          g   =        g (x)  dx   g  G .
                                                                  T


This involves the maximization of a concave objective function subject to a convex constraint
set. As a result, this optimization problem is i. unbounded or ii. has a unique solution (up to a
set of measure zero). Suppose the problem is not unbounded (Proposition B-2 in this appendix
provides conditions under which the maximization problem is bounded). Let wg be the Lagrange
multiplier associated with the constraint for labor of type g . It follows that the solution is given
by an allocation of tasks to factors such that

                                                                               
                                wg          wg              1                 
                                                                               
                    Tgi  x                        ,                  for all g ,
                            Agi  g (x) Ag i  g (x) k (x)  q (x)  Aki           
                                                                               
                                                                   
                                   1            wg                 
                    Tki  x                             , for all g .
                          k (x)  q (x)  Aki Agi  g (x)
                                                                   
                                                                   


                                                                  A-6
The tie-breaking rule described in footnote 8 then selects a unique equilibrium allocation. This
argument shows that, when the maximization problem is bounded, there is a unique equilibrium,
where the task allocation is as described in the main text. In what follows, we characterize the
equilibrium as a function of this unique task allocation (we provide a sufficient condition for finite
output at the end of the proof).
    The demand for task x in sector i is

                                                      1
                                           y (x) =        y  sY
                                                              i (p)  p(x)
                                                                          -
                                                                             (Ai pi )-1 .
                                                      Mi

Given {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi }, the price of task x is

                                                          1
                                                                                if x  Tki
                                                   A  q (x)  k (x)
                                                   k
                                                  
                                           p(x) = 
                                                      wg
                                                                                if x  Tgi .
                                                  
                                                   Ag  k (x)
                                                  

The demand for capital and labor at task x can be written as

                             1
                                  y  sY
                                      i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                      -1
                                                          (Ak  q (x)  k (x))-1 if x  Tki
                            M  i
             k (x) q (x) = 
                           
                            0
                                                                                if x  Tk .
                             1
                                  y  sY
                                      i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                      -1
                                                          (Ag  g (x))-1  wg -
                                                                               if x  Tg
                            M  i
                   g (x) = 
                           
                            0
                                                                               if x  Tg .

    Integrating these demands, as in the proof of Proposition 1, and rearranging, we have

                                    1
                g   =                   y  sY
                                            i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                            -1                  -
                                                                (Ag  g (x))-1  wg  dx
                        iI    Tgi   Mi
                                            1                                                                             1
                                      y           -1                                   1                                  
                         wg =                     
                                                 Ag             sY
                                                                 i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                    g (x)   -1
                                                                                                                     dx       ,
                                       g                   iI                          Mi     Tgi


which thus establishes equation (8) as desired.
    To derive the industry price index in equation (9), we observe that

                                                                                                             1
                                                             1   1                                1-        1-
                             pi  yi =    p(x)  y (x)dx  pi =                               p(x)        dx        .
                                      Ti                     A i Mi                   Ti




                                                                    A-7
Using the allocation of tasks {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi }, this implies
                                                1
           1   1                 1-            1-
      pi =                p(x)        dx
           A i Mi    Ti
                                                                                                                     1

          1      1                                                     1                                            1-
        =    Ak                  (q (x)  k (x))-1 dx +      1-
                                                           wg   Ag
                                                                   -1
                                                                                                        g (x)-1 dx     ,
          Ai     Mi          Tki                       g G             Mi                           Tgi            

which yields equation (10) in the proposition.
    Finally, because industry shares must add up to 1, equation (10) holds, completing the proof.
    Although not reported, factor shares can be computed as

(A-7)                                 sK =Ak
                                             -1
                                                                sY
                                                                 i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                     ki
                                                           iI
                                           L
(A-8)                                  s       =1 - Ak
                                                       -1
                                                                        sY
                                                                         i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                         -1
                                                                                             ki .
                                                                   iI



Proof of Proposition 4. We first provide a proof for the existence and some of the properties
of the propagation matrix .
    Define the matrix

                                                                   1  ln (w,  , )
                                                    =1-                           .
                                                                          ln w

This matrix satisfies several properties. First, because  g wg  0, all of its off-diagonal entries
are negative. This implies that  is a Z -matrix.
    Second,  has a positive dominant diagonal. This follows from the fact that

                                                                        1  ln g
                                                     gg = 1 -                   > 0,
                                                                          ln wg

and

                                                                                  1  ln g
                                       gg -                gg = 1 -                       > 1.
                                                    g  g                      g     ln wg

                                                                               ln g
This last inequality follows from the fact that g                              ln wg    0, which is true since when all wages
rise by the same amount, workers lose tasks to capital but do not experience task reallocation
among them.
    Third, all eigenvalues of  have a real part that exceeds 1. This follows from an application of
Gershgorin circle theorem, which states that for each eigenvalue  of , we can find a dimension
g such that

                                                        - gg <                    gg .
                                                                           g  g



                                                                        A-8
This inequality requires that

                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                R()  gg -      gg , gg +      gg                 .
                                                                                 
                                          g  g           g  g                    
                                                                                 

Because gg - g g gg > 1 for all g , as shown above, all eigenvalues of  have a real part that
is greater than 1.
   Fourth, since  has negative off diagonal elements and all of its eigenvalues have a positive
real part, we can conclude that it is an M -matrix.
   Because  is an M -matrix, its inverse  exists and has positive and real entries, gg  0, as
desired. Moreover, each eigenvalue of  has a real part that is positive and less than 1. Finally,
                                                                           r
the row and column sums of  are also less than 1. In particular, denote by g the sum of the
elements of row g of . Then:

                                      r r             r       r r             r 
                (1, 1, . . . , 1)                                                                    
                                 1 = (1 , 2 , . . . , G )    (1 , 2 , . . . , G ) = (1, 1, . . . , 1) .


This equality requires that

                                              r                   r
                                          gg  g +             gg  g  = 1.
                                                       g  g

                                              r   r           r
Now, suppose without loss of generality, that 1 > 2 > . . . > G > 0 (all rows must have strictly
positive sums, since gg = 0 for all g  would imply that  is singular, contradicting the fact that
all its eigenavlues have real parts in (0, 1)). We have

                                              r                   r
                                          11  1 +             1g  g  = 1,
                                                       g  1


which implies that

                          1  ln 1   r     1     ln 1 r          1     ln 1 r
                     1-             1 =1+               g   1 +              .
                           d ln w1         g 1 d ln wg           g 1 d ln wg 1

              ln 1
Because g    d ln wg    0, we can rewrite this inequality as

                                        r          1        ln 1 r
                                        1 <1+                        1.
                                                       g   d ln wg 1

An identical argument establishes that column sums of  lie in (0, 1).
   Having introduced the propagation matrix , we are now in a position to derive the formulas
characterizing the effects of technology on wages, sectoral prices, and TFP.
                  e
   First, define wg = wg Ag as the wage per efficiency unit of labor of g workers. Equation (8)




                                                           A-9
then implies
                                                                   1

                                              e       y                            1
                                             wg   =                     g (w,  , )  .
                                                    Ag        g


Log-differentiating this equation in response to an automation (task-displacing) technology, we
obtain:

                        e           1         1            1                1  ln g
                  d ln wg =           d ln y - d ln disp
                                                    g    +     gi  d ln i +          d ln w.
                                                            iI                ln w

Stacking these equations for all groups, we can write:

          e                                                                          disp                      e
   d ln w1         d ln y                iI 1i  d ln i                       d ln 1                     d ln w1    
                                                                                                                   
   d ln w1e     1  d ln y             1  iI 2i  d ln i                    1  d ln disp
                                                                                     2       1  ln      d ln w1e   
               =                     +                                   -                  +                      .
                                                                                               ln w                
  
      ...      
                   ...
                  
                                     
                                        
                                            ...                          
                                                                            
                                                                                 ...        
                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           ...     
                                                                                                                   
   d ln wGe        d ln y                iI Gi  d ln i                       d ln disp                  d ln wGe   
                                                                                     G


We can solve this system of equations as

                  e                                                                                   disp
           d ln w1            d ln y                    iI 1i  d ln i                         d ln 1         
                  e                                                                                   disp   
           d ln w1
                         =    d ln y               +    iI 2i  d ln i                    -    d ln 2
                         1                         1                                     1                   
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                             
          
              ...       
                        
                             
                              ...
                                                  
                                                  
                                                       
                                                           ...                          
                                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                                  ...        
                                                                                                             
           d ln wGe           d ln y                    iI Gi  d ln i                         d ln disp      
                                                                                                      G


which implies

                                               g         1          1
                                   d ln wg =     d ln y + g  d ln  - g  d ln disp ,
                                                                    

where

                                                                   ln sY
                                                                       i (p)
                d ln g =            gi  d ln i =        gi                    d ln p + ( - 1)  d ln pi .
                              iI                   iI                ln p

   Turning to industry prices, note that these are given by equation (10). By definition, the
equilibrium task allocation {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi } solves the cost-minimization problem:
                                                                                                 1

                                                  1  -1            1-  -1     1-
                        pi =       min               Ak  ki +     wg  Ag  gi     .
                             {Tki ,T1i ,...,TGi } Ai          g G            

The envelope theorem then implies that

                                                                                                
                                                             1  A-1  ddisp -               disp 
          d ln pi =         sL
                             gi    d ln wg - (Ai pi )   -1
                                                                 k
                                                                                   1-  -1
                                                                                  wg  Ag  dgi   ,
                      g G                                    -1       ki
                                                                             g  G               
                                                                                                


                                                                  A-10
since the reallocation of tasks across factors in response to changes in factor prices has a second-
order effect on industry prices. Here, the term

                                                                                            
                                                    1  A-1  ddisp -                    disp 
                           i = (Ai pi )-1               k                w 1-
                                                                           g   A -1
                                                                                 g   d gi 
                                                                                            
                                                    -1       ki
                                                                    g  G                    
                                                                                            

is a generalization of the term  in the proof of Proposition 2, and again corresponds to cost
savings from the reallocation of tasks from labor to capital, but now in industry i.
   Similarly, we define the industry versions of cost savings at the task level (when tasks in the
set Dgi in industry i previous to perform by factor g are automated):

                                                                                           -1       
                                               1   wg Ak  q (x)  k (x)
                                                                                                    
                                 gi (x) =                                                        - 1 > 0,
                                               -1        Ag  g (x)                                  
                                                                                                    

and average percent cost-saving gains in industry i as

                                      1                                          1
                               gi =                 g (x)-1  gi (x)dx                            g (x)-1 dx.
                                      Mi      Dgi                                Mi        Dgi


Using these definitions, we can write i as

                                                                              1-                         
                         1   A-1  1                                        wg      1                     
  i =(Ai pi )-1                  k            ( q ( x )   k ( x )) -1
                                                                      dx -                 g ( x ) -1
                                                                                                      dx 
                                                                                                         
                    g G  - 1 
                                       Mi Dgi                              Ag      Mi Dgi                
                                                                                                         
                                                                           1-          
                        1          1   (Ak  q (x)  k (x))-1 - wg
                                                                                       
        =(Ai pi )-1                                                            g (x)-1  dx
                    g G Mi Dgi  - 1    
                                                                        Ag             
                                                                                       
                                        1-
                        1          wg
        =(Ai pi )-1                         g (x)-1  gi (x)dx
                    g G M i D gi   A g
                                      1-
                    -1         wg             1
        =(Ai pi )                                           g (x)-1 dx  gi .
                         g G   Ag             Mi      Dgi


                                                                                                        wg 1-  1
Again as in the proof of Proposition 2, using the fact that sL
                                                             gi = (Ai pi )
                                                                           -1
                                                                                                        Ag     M i   Tg g (x)
                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                     dx ,
we get

                                       1
                                                           g (x)-1 dx
                                      Mi             Agi                                             disp
                          i =     sL
                                   gi  1                                      gi =         sL
                                                                                            gi  d ln gi  gi ,
                              g G                                  -1                g G
                                                           g (x)        dx
                                       Mi             Tg


which yields the desired formula for d ln pi in the proposition.
   We now turn to TFP. As before, we use the dual definition of TFP, which now implies

(A-9)                                                d ln TFP =           sL
                                                                           g  d ln wg .
                                                                    g G



                                                                   A-11
To derive a formula for TFP, first note that given a price vector p, we can define the cost of
producing the final good as ch (p). Moreover, Shephard's lemma implies that

                                                          ch (p) pi
                                               sY
                                                i (p) =             .
                                                          pi ch

Our choice of numeraire, which implies that the final good has a price of 1, then implies

                                                     1 = ch (p).

Log-differentiating this expression yields

                         0=          sY
                                      i (p)  d ln pi
                               iI

                                                                      disp   
                           =         sY
                                      i (p)       sL
                                                   gi  d ln wg - d ln gi  gi
                               iI              gG                            
                           =         sL
                                      g  d ln wg -        sY
                                                           i (p)         sL
                                                                          gi  gi
                               g G                   iI            g G


Rearranging this expression, and using the dual definition of TFP in equation (A-9), yields the
formula for the contribution of automation to TFP in the proposition.
   Turning to output, the primal definition of TFP implies

                                         d ln y = d ln TFP + sK  d ln k.

Moreover, k = sK  y , which implies

                                            d ln k = d ln sK + d ln y.

Combining these two equations yields

                                            1
                                d ln y =        d ln TFP + sK  d ln sK
                                         1 - sK
                                            1
                                d ln k =        d ln TFP + d ln sK .
                                         1 - sK

   Finally, we provide a derivation for the change in the capital share. Recall that the capital
share is given by

                                      1 - sK             1
                      d ln sK = -         K
                                             d ln sL = - K           sL
                                                                      g  (d ln wg - d ln y ) .
                                        s               s      g G




                                                       A-12
                                                                                            Appendix A-2                                                                   Additional Figures and Tables


                                         Baseline task displacement                                                                                              Elasticity of substitution of 0.8                                                                                           Elasticity of substitution of 1.2
                                                                                                    Highschool dropout                                                                                                          Highschool dropout                                                                                                          Highschool dropout
                                                                                                    Highschool                                                                                                                  Highschool                                                                                                                  Highschool
                                    50                                                              Some college                                            50                                                                  Some college                                            50                                                                  Some college
                                                                                                    College                                                                                                                     College                                                                                                                     College
                                    40                                                              Post college                                            40                                                                  Post college                                            40                                                                  Post college
 Task displacement, 1980-2016 (%)




                                                                                                                         Task displacement, 1980-2016 (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Task displacement, 1980-2016 (%)
                                    30                                                                                                                      30                                                                                                                          30


                                    20                                                                                                                      20                                                                                                                          20


                                    10                                                                                                                      10                                                                                                                          10


                                    0                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                                           0




                                         $7.5      $10       $13.3       $17.8      $23.7       $31.6         $42                                                $7.5        $10         $13.3       $17.8      $23.7       $31.6         $42                                                $7.5        $10         $13.3       $17.8      $23.7       $31.6         $42
                                                                      Hourly wage in 1980                                                                                                         Hourly wage in 1980                                                                                                         Hourly wage in 1980
                                                                (logarithmic scale, 2008 dollars)                                                                                           (logarithmic scale, 2008 dollars)                                                                                           (logarithmic scale, 2008 dollars)




Figure A-1: Task displacement across 500 demographic groups sorted by their hourly wage in
1980. The figure plots task displacement for each of the 500 demographic groups used in our
analysis against their baseline hourly wage in 1980. Marker sizes indicate the share of hours
worked by each group and different colors indicate education levels. The left panel uses our
baseline measure of task displacement in equation (12). The middle and right panels use the CES
version in footnote 15 for  = 0.8 and  = 1.2 respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 A-13
            A. Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                                                                           B. Conditional on automation measure, 1987-2016




      60




                                                                                                                                                    60
      50




                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                            Chemicals


      40




                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                      Metals
                                                                     Motor vehicles
      30




                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                Comp. services                                                                                                                              Chemicals
      20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                            Plastics            Retail
      10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                    Restaurants                                                                                                                            Restaurants
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Metals
                                                                              Prof. services                                                                                                                                 Retail
      0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prof. services
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Comp. services
      -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Motor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Plastics vehicles
                                                  Apparel                                                                                                                                      Apparel
                                                                                  Agriculture
      -20




                                                                                                                                                    -20
                -20                        -10                              0                            10               20                  30                -20                      -10                           0                          10                         20        30
                                             Rising sales concentration, 1997--2016                                                                                                       Rising sales concentration, 1997--2016


            A. Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                                                                           B. Conditional on automation measure, 1987-2016
      60




                                                                                                                                                    60
      50




                                                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                Chemicals
      40




                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                            Motor vehicles               Metals
      30




                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                       Comp. services                                                                                                                                                  Chemicals
      20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                 Retail
                                                          Plastics
      10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                  Restaurants                                                                                                                                                  Restaurants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Metals
                                                       Prof. services                                                                                                                                              Retail
      0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prof. services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Comp. services
      -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agriculture        Plastics Motor vehicles
              Apparel                                                                                                                                                               Apparel
                            Agriculture
      -20




                                                                                                                                                    -20
            -10                                    0                                   10                       20                            30          -20                                  -10                                 0                               10                  20
                                Percent change in accounting markups, 1987--2016                                                                                              Percent change in accounting markups, 1987--2016


            A. Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                                                                           B. Conditional on automation measure, 1987-2016
      60




                                                                                                                                                    60
      50




                                                                                                                                                    50




                             Chemicals
      40




                                                                                                                                                    40




                              Metals
                  Motor vehicles
      30




                                                                                                                                                    30




              Comp. services                                                                                                                                                                         Chemicals
      20




                                                                                                                                                    20




              Retail                               Plastics
      10




                                                                                                                                                    10




              Restaurants                                                                                                                                                            RestaurantsMetals
              Prof. services                                                                                                                                                         Retail
      0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                     Prof. services
                                                                                                                                                                                    Comp. services
      -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                                                                                                                                                                      Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                              Motor vehicles                       Plastics
                                                                                                                               Apparel                                                                                                                                                  Apparel
              Agriculture
      -20




                                                                                                                                                    -20




            0                                     10                                   20                       30                            40          -10                              0                                  10                              20                  30
                            Increased competition from Chinese imports, 1990--2011                                                                                          Increased competition from Chinese imports, 1990--2011


            A. Task displacement (%), 1987-2016                                                                                                           B. Conditional on automation measure, 1987-2016
      60




                                                                                                                                                    60
      50




                                                                                                                                                    50




                                                                                Chemicals
      40




                                                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                               Metals                          Motor vehicles
      30




                                                                                                                                                    30




                                            Comp. services                                                                                                                   Chemicals
      20




                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                           Retail                                   Plastics
      10




                                                                                                                                                    10




                                              Restaurants                                                                                                                                     Restaurants                  Metals
                                            Prof. services                                                                                                                                      Retail
      0




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                         Prof. services
                                                                                                                                                                                         Comp. services
      -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Plastics   Motor vehicles
                                                                                                Apparel                                                                                                                                                Apparel
                                                 Agriculture
      -20




                                                                                                                                                    -20




            -10                        0                               10                          20                30                  40                           -10                               0                               10                              20             30
                                   Decline in unionization rate (in p.p), 1983--2016                                                                                             Decline in unionization rate (in p.p), 1983--2016



Figure A-2: Relationship between task displacement 1987-2016 and sales concentration (first
panel), rising markups (second panel), Chinese import penetration (third panel) and declining
unionization (fourth panel). In all cases, Panel A provides the bivariate relationship and Panel B
controls for our index of automation.




                                                                                                                                          A-14
                      Table A-1: Determinants of task displacement and labor share declines across industries, 1987­2016.

                                                                           Dependent variable: task displacement and labor share declines, 1987­2016
                                                          (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)                (8)
                                                                                              Panel A: Labor share decline, 1987­2016
                                                         0.582                          0.341           0.323          0.340          0.388          0.345           0.307
        Adjusted penetration of robots
                                                        (0.103)                        (0.122)         (0.115)       (0.125)         (0.121)        (0.123)         (0.157)
                                                                         1.940          1.655           1.629          1.659          1.484          1.654           1.611
        Change in share of specialized machinery
                                                                        (0.301)        (0.330)         (0.340)       (0.354)         (0.365)        (0.333)         (0.340)
                                                         3.157           3.072          3.489           3.323          3.501          3.419          3.493           3.489
        Change in share of software
                                                        (1.206)         (1.247)        (1.206)         (1.274)       (1.345)         (1.262)        (1.231)         (1.210)
                                                                                                        0.496
        Change in share of imported intermediates
                                                                                                       (0.295)
                                                                                                                      -0.008
        Change tail index of revenue concentration
                                                                                                                     (0.112)
                                                                                                                                      0.174
        Percent change in accounting markups
                                                                                                                                     (0.180)
                                                                                                                                                      -0.027
        Chinese imports penetration
                                                                                                                                                     (0.170)
                                                                                                                                                                     0.045
        Decline in unionization rate
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.084)
        F-stat technology variables                      15.88           21.21          19.07           17.41           18.41         15.85          17.88           11.25
A-15




        Share variance explained by technology            0.27            0.45           0.50            0.49            0.51          0.49           0.51            0.49
        R-squared                                        0.27            0.45           0.50             0.51            0.51          0.54          0.51             0.51
        Observations                                       49              49             49              49              49            49             49              49
                                                                                               Panel B: Task displacement, 1987­2016
                                                         1.298                          0.967           0.936           0.957         1.016          0.967           0.745
        Adjusted penetration of robots
                                                        (0.353)                        (0.414)         (0.398)        (0.425)        (0.420)        (0.419)         (0.533)
                                                                         3.089          2.282           2.238           2.307         2.104          2.282           2.001
        Change in share of specialized machinery
                                                                        (0.502)        (0.579)         (0.599)        (0.638)        (0.659)        (0.585)         (0.657)
                                                         5.943           5.222          6.401           6.124           6.474         6.328          6.402           6.403
        Change in share of software
                                                        (1.956)         (2.176)        (1.925)         (2.038)        (2.195)        (2.073)        (1.957)         (1.881)
                                                                                                        0.829
        Change in share of imported intermediates
                                                                                                       (0.559)
                                                                                                                       -0.046
        Change tail index of revenue concentration
                                                                                                                      (0.253)
                                                                                                                                      0.182
        Pecrent change in accounting markups
                                                                                                                                     (0.327)
                                                                                                                                                     -0.003
        Chinese imports penetration
                                                                                                                                                    (0.244)
                                                                                                                                                                     0.284
        Decline in unionization rate
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.252)
        F-stat technology variables                       9.35           19.10          15.27          13.50           13.51          11.08          14.65            6.52
        Share variance explained by technology            0.35            0.35           0.48           0.46            0.48           0.47           0.48            0.42
        R-squared                                         0.35           0.35           0.48           0.49            0.48           0.49           0.48             0.50
        Observations                                       49              49             49             49              49             49             49              49

       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between automation technologies, offshoring, and changes in market structure (proxied by markups or rising
       sales concentration) on task displacement across the 49 industries in our analysis. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the decline in the labor share from 1987­2016.
       In Panel B, the dependent variable is the task displacement measure from equation (12) computed at the industry level (or equivalently, the percent decline in the labor
       share). All regressions are weighted by the share of industry value added in 1987. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                            Table A-2: Summary statistics for demographic groups by quintiles of task displacement.

                                                                Labor-market outcomes                                   Educational levels
                                                                              Employment
                                                                                  to
                                                      Wage          Wage
                                       Task dis-                              population      Hourly     Completed        Some       Completed       Post-
        Quintile             N                       change        change                                                                                       Share male
                                      placement                                  ratio       wage 1980   high-school     college      college       college
                                                    1980­2016     1980­2007
                                                                                change
                                                                               1980­2016


        1--Lowest           191          4.8%         26.5%        24.2%         0.00 pp       $26.9         0.0%        12.2%         42.1%        44.8%         80.0%
        2                   141         15.5%          5.9%         7.1%        -0.80 pp       $18.3        17.5%        69.2%         1.8%          0.1%         61.8%
        3                   63          21.0%          3.1%         3.6%        -3.71 pp       $17.3        73.0%        13.2%         0.2%          0.0%         55.5%
        4                   69          24.9%         -5.1%        -3.4%        -8.72 pp       $15.1        36.9%        19.4%         0.0%          0.0%         66.3%
        5--Highest           36         28.9%        -12.0%        -8.5%       -16.23 pp       $15.7        61.2%         1.2%          0.0%         0.0%         99.3%
        All                 500         16.8%          7.2%         7.6%        -4.80 pp       $19.9        32.8%        22.3%         13.4%        13.9%         73.0%

       Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the 500 demographic groups used in our analysis. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and
       native/immigrant status. The table breaks down these groups by quintiles of exposure to task displacement and provides summary statistics for groups in each quintile
       and for all groups pooled together. See the main text and Appendix B-4 for definitions and data sources.
A-16
            Table A-3: Task displacement and real wage declines, 1980­2016.

                                                           Dependent variables:
                                                Change in wages and wage declines, 1980­2016
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                             Panel A. Dummy for declining real wages 1980­2016
                                           4.071           3.691             4.164           6.586
 Task displacement
                                          (0.265)         (0.639)          (1.062)         (1.614)
                                                           -0.290           -0.495          -0.317
 Industry shifters
                                                          (0.383)          (0.641)         (0.789)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                           -2.880
 decline                                                                                   (2.499)
 Relative specialization in routine                                                         -0.446
 jobs                                                                                      (0.266)

 Share variance explained by task
                                           0.48                0.44               0.49               0.78
 displacement
 R-squared                                 0.48                0.49               0.65               0.66
 Observations                              500                 500                500                500

                                                    Panel B. Real wage declines, 1980­2016
                                           -0.445           -0.418           -0.647                  -1.149
 Task displacement
                                          (0.072)          (0.080)          (0.074)                 (0.166)
                                                             0.021            0.272                   0.185
 Industry shifters
                                                           (0.025)          (0.077)                 (0.069)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                                     0.789
 decline                                                                                            (0.208)
 Relative specialization in routine                                                                   0.087
 jobs                                                                                               (0.023)

 Share variance explained by task
                                           0.50                0.47               0.73               1.30
 displacement
 R-squared                                 0.50                0.51               0.78               0.80
 Observations                              500                 500                500                500

 Other covariates:
 Manufacturing share, and
                                                                                                      
 education and gender dummies

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups, defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. In Panel A,
the dependent variable is a dummy for real wage declines from 1980 to 2016. In Panel B, the dependent variable is
given by the negative component of real wage changes from 1980 to 2016, defined by the minimum of the observed
wage change and zero. Besides the covariates reported in the table, columns 3 and 4 control for baseline wage
shares in manufacturing and education and gender dummies. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours
worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.




                                                     A-17
                        Table A-4: Task displacement vs. SBTC--controlling for changes in relative supply, 1980-2016.

                                                                                   Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                                                           SBTC by education level                Allowing for SBTC by wage level
                                                                  OLS                 OLS                  IV                 OLS                 OLS                 IV
                                                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)                 (5)                 (6)
        Gender: women                                             0.193               0.094               0.099              0.254                0.159               0.175
                                                                 (0.029)             (0.020)             (0.019)            (0.028)             (0.026)             (0.028)
        Education: no high school                                 -0.098              -0.041              -0.044              0.039               0.014               0.018
                                                                 (0.076)             (0.050)             (0.051)            (0.034)             (0.033)             (0.032)
        Education: some college                                   0.128               -0.066              -0.056             0.035               -0.052              -0.038
                                                                 (0.063)             (0.034)             (0.036)            (0.025)             (0.030)             (0.031)
        Education: full college                                   0.375               -0.027              -0.008              0.192               0.006               0.037
                                                                 (0.084)             (0.054)             (0.055)            (0.036)             (0.049)             (0.049)
        Education: more than college                              0.499               0.026               0.049               0.292               0.070               0.107
                                                                 (0.067)             (0.079)             (0.076)            (0.047)             (0.067)             (0.063)
        Log of hourly wage in 1980                                                                                            0.254               0.137               0.156
                                                                                                                            (0.055)             (0.049)             (0.053)
A-18




        Change in supply                                          -0.104              -0.060              -0.062             -0.014              -0.026              -0.024
                                                                 (0.062)             (0.035)             (0.036)            (0.024)             (0.023)             (0.023)
                                                                                      -1.718              -1.634                                 -1.152              -0.962
        Task displacement
                                                                                     (0.312)             (0.297)                                (0.208)             (0.201)

        Share variance explained by:
        - educational dummies                                      0.75               0.04                0.08                 0.39               0.08                0.13
        - baseline wage                                                                                                        0.16               0.09                0.10
        - supply changes                                          -0.28               -0.16               -0.17               -0.04              -0.07               -0.06
        - task displacement                                                           0.72                 0.69                                   0.48                0.40
        R-squared                                                  0.43                0.75                0.74              0.80                 0.83                0.83
        First-stage F                                              9.98               18.73                2.96              34.42               34.96                5.82
        Observations                                               493                 493                 493                493                 493                 493

        Other covariates:
        Industry shifters and manufacturing share                                                                                                                      
       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement, changes in labor supply, and different proxies of skill-biased technical change and the
       change in real wages across 500 demographic groups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable
       is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In all specifications, we measure changes in labor supply by the change in hours worked from 1980 to
       2016, and instrument it using the predetermined trend in hours for 1970­1980. In addition, in columns 3 and 6 we also instrument task displacement with our index of
       automation. Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters and baseline wage shares in manufacturing. The bottom rows of
       the table report the share of variance explained by task displacement and the different proxies of skill biased technical change. When using our index of automation as
       an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the
       share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
       Table A-5: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--controlling for other trends and for exposure to
       industry labor share declines and relative specialization in routine jobs.

                                                                                            Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                      OLS estimates                                                                IV estimates
                                               Chinese      Decline in         Rising K L                              Chinese       Decline in             Rising K L
                                                                                                   Rising TFP by                                                         Rising TFP by
                                               imports'    unionization         ratio by                               imports'     unionization             ratio by
                                                                                                      industry                                                              industry
                                             competition      rates             industry                             competition       rates                 industry
                                                  (1)           (2)                (3)                   (4)              (5)            (6)                    (7)           (8)


                                                                                   Panel A. Controlling for main effect of other shocks
                                                -1.601         -1.816             -1.767          -1.813           -1.483           -1.753                     -1.672        -1.763
        Task displacement
                                               (0.524)        (0.467)            (0.574)         (0.476)          (0.669)          (0.520)                    (0.640)       (0.586)
                                                 0.003          1.136             -0.028          -0.164            0.006            1.065                     -0.017        -0.149
        Effect of other shocks by industry
                                               (0.019)        (1.532)            (0.094)         (0.380)          (0.022)          (1.560)                    (0.097)       (0.411)

        Share variance explained by task
                                                0.67            0.76              0.74                  0.76             0.62               0.73                  0.70        0.74
        displacement
        R-squared                               0.84            0.84              0.84                  0.84             0.84            0.84                  0.84           0.84
        First-stage F                                                                                                   206.62          277.15                210.06         187.47
        Observations                             500            500                   500                500             500             500                   500            500
A-19




                                                                               Panel B. Controlling for effects on workers in routine jobs
                                                -1.730         -2.388             -1.785          -1.726          -1.675           -2.447                      -1.828        -1.695
        Task displacement
                                               (0.459)        (0.715)            (0.444)         (0.438)         (0.512)          (0.905)                     (0.478)       (0.496)
        Effect of other shocks on routine       -0.008          1.013             -0.127          -0.144          -0.007            1.060                      -0.128        -0.141
        jobs                                   (0.012)        (0.854)            (0.064)         (0.247)         (0.012)          (0.983)                     (0.063)       (0.252)

        Share variance explained by task
                                                0.73            1.00              0.75                  0.72             0.70               1.03                  0.77        0.71
        displacement
        R-squared                               0.84            0.84              0.84                  0.84             0.84            0.84                  0.84           0.84
        First-stage F                                                                                                   291.82          90.39                 272.01         268.17
        Observations                             500            500                   500                500             500             500                   500            500


       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500 demographic groups controlling for trade
       in final goods, declining unionization rates, other forms of capital investments, and other technologies leading to productivity growth in an industry. These groups are
       defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In Panel
       A, we control for the main effect of these shocks on workers in exposed industries. In Panel B, we allow these shocks to have a differential impact on workers in routine
       jobs in exposed industries. Columns 1­4 report OLS estimates. Columns 5­8 report IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument task displacement.
       Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters, baseline wage share in manufacturing, education and gender dummies, relative
       specialization in routine jobs, and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F
       statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in
       1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
       Table A-6: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--controlling for differential effect of markups and
       concentration on routine jobs.

                                                                                           Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                     OLS estimates                                                                IV estimates
                                                         Markups from       Markups from                                           Markups from          Markups from
                                         Rising sales                                             Markups from     Rising sales                                          Markups from
                                                          accounting         materials                                              accounting            materials
                                        concentration                                             DLEU (2020)     concentration                                          DLEU (2020)
                                                           approach            share                                                 approach               share
                                              (1)             (2)                (3)                    (4)             (5)             (6)                   (7)             (8)


                                                             Panel A. Controlling for effects of markups and concentration on workers in routine jobs
                                             -1.200            -1.363         -1.290           -1.106          -1.152          -1.238          -1.249                        -1.082
        Task displacement
                                            (0.196)           (0.354)        (0.237)          (0.171)         (0.218)         (0.440)         (0.240)                       (0.174)
        Effects of rising markups or         -0.526             0.207          0.041            1.870          -0.603          -0.146           0.074                         1.891
        concentration on routine jobs       (0.798)           (1.354)        (0.221)          (0.535)         (0.815)         (1.551)         (0.217)                       (0.523)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                  0.50             0.57               0.54                   0.46           0.48                0.52                  0.52         0.45
        - markups/concetration               0.01             -0.02              0.00                  -0.08           0.01                0.01                  0.00        -0.08
        R-squared                            0.84              0.84              0.84                   0.85           0.84                0.84                  0.84         0.85
        First-stage F                                                                                                  515                 178                   723          721
A-20




        Observations                          500              500                   500                500            500                 500                   500          500

                                                                            Panel B. Net out markups from construction of task displacement
                                             -1.499           -1.363             -1.290          -1.106          -1.440           -1.238                      -1.249         -1.082
        Task displacement
                                            (0.238)          (0.354)            (0.237)         (0.171)         (0.270)          (0.440)                     (0.240)        (0.174)
        Effects of rising markups or         -1.101           -1.157             -1.249           0.764          -1.155           -1.384                      -1.176          0.809
        concentration on routine jobs       (0.745)          (1.064)            (0.419)         (0.609)         (0.757)          (1.169)                     (0.419)        (0.593)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                  0.49              0.45              0.63                   0.42           0.47                0.41                   0.61        0.41
        - markups/concetration               0.01              0.10              -0.08                 -0.03           0.01                0.12                  -0.08       -0.03
        R-squared                            0.84              0.84               0.84                  0.85           0.84                0.84                   0.84        0.85
        First-stage F                                                                                                  348                 178                    723         721
        Observations                          500              500                   500                500            500                 500                    500         500


       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500 demographic groups controlling for changes
       in market structure and markups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real
       wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In Panel A, we control for groups' relative specialization in routine jobs at industries with changes in market structure leading
       to higher markups. In column 1, we proxy changes in market structure by rising sales concentration in the industry. In columns 2­4, we directly control for changes in
       markups. These are computed as the ratio of revenue to costs in column 2, the inverse of the materials' share in gross output in column 3, and markups estimated using a
       production function approach as in De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020) in column 4. In Panel B, we also subtract the percent increase in markups from the percent
       decline in the labor share when computing our measure of task displacement (using the accounting markup in columns 1 and 5). Columns 1­4 report OLS estimates.
       Columns 5­8 report IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control
       for industry shifters, baseline wage shares in manufacturing, and education and gender dummies. When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report
       first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by
       each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
       Table A-7: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--controlling for changes in markups and concentrations
       and for exposure to industry labor share declines and relative specialization in routine jobs.

                                                                                            Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                                      OLS estimates                                                                IV estimates
                                                          Markups from       Markups from                                           Markups from          Markups from
                                         Rising sales                                              Markups from     Rising sales                                          Markups from
                                                           accounting         materials                                              accounting            materials
                                        concentration                                              DLEU (2020)     concentration                                          DLEU (2020)
                                                            approach            share                                                 approach               share
                                               (1)             (2)                (3)                    (4)             (5)             (6)                   (7)             (8)


                                                                            Panel A. Controlling for main effect of markups and concentration
                                              -1.389           -1.614              -2.074          -1.573          -1.374          -1.584                      -2.131         -1.499
        Task displacement
                                             (0.461)          (0.454)             (0.460)         (0.542)         (0.481)         (0.486)                     (0.527)        (0.584)
        Exposure to rising markups or          1.969            0.721              -1.290          -0.404           1.984           0.749                      -1.312         -0.468
        concentration                        (1.556)          (1.754)             (0.552)         (1.159)         (1.485)         (1.766)                     (0.576)        (1.163)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                   0.58             0.68               0.87                  0.66            0.58             0.66                      0.89       0.63
        - markups/concetration                0.04             -0.01              -0.12                 0.01            0.04            -0.01                     -0.12       0.01
        R-squared                             0.84              0.84               0.85                 0.84            0.84             0.84                      0.85       0.84
        First-stage F                                                                                                   326              385                       252        214
A-21




        Observations                          500               500                   500                500            500              500                       500        500

                                                                             Panel B. Net out markups from construction of task displacement
                                              -1.216           -1.651             -1.244          -1.970          -1.722           -1.881                      -1.378         -1.228
        Task displacement
                                             (0.554)          (0.560)            (0.229)         (0.401)         (0.605)          (0.574)                     (0.345)        (0.436)
        Exposure to rising markups or          1.662           -0.640             -2.511          -2.045           0.951           -1.042                      -2.731         -1.935
        concentration                        (1.677)          (1.903)            (0.645)         (0.719)         (1.670)          (2.013)                     (0.805)        (0.786)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                   0.40             0.54               0.60                  0.74            0.57                0.62                   0.67       0.46
        - markups/concetration                0.04             0.01               -0.23                 0.03            0.02                0.02                  -0.25       0.03
        R-squared                             0.84             0.83                0.85                 0.87            0.83                0.83                   0.85       0.86
        First-stage F                                                                                                   236                 355                    108         47
        Observations                          500               500                   500                500            500                 500                    500        500


       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500 demographic groups controlling for changes
       in market structure and markups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real
       wages for each group from 1980 to 2016. In Panel A, we control for groups' specialization in industries with changes in market structure leading to higher markups. In
       column 1, we proxy changes in market structure by rising sales concentration in the industry. In columns 2­4, we directly control for changes in markups. These are
       computed as the ratio of revenue to costs in column 2, the inverse of the materials' share in gross output in column 3, and markups estimated using a production function
       approach as in De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020) in column 4. In Panel B, we also subtract the percent increase in markups from the percent decline in the labor
       share when computing our measure of task displacement (using the accounting markup in columns 1 and 5). Columns 1­4 report OLS estimates. Columns 5­8 report
       IV estimates using our index of automation to instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table, all specifications control for industry shifters,
       baseline wage shares in manufacturing, education and gender dummies, relative specialization in routine jobs, and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines.
       When using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index.
       All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
Table A-8: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages for men, women,
and native-born workers, 1980-2016.

                                                               Dependent variables:
                                                             Change in wages, 1980­2016
                                             (1)                (2)              (3)                     (4)
                                      Panel A. Change in real wages for native-born workers 1980­2016
                                           -1.573           -1.288          -1.482          -1.660
 Task displacement
                                          (0.099)          (0.191)         (0.231)         (0.526)
                                                             0.212           0.113           0.213
 Industry shifters
                                                           (0.115)         (0.176)         (0.292)

 Share variance explained by task
                                             0.68                0.56               0.64                0.72
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.68              0.71             0.85           0.85
 Observations                                250               250              250             250
                                                Panel B. Change in real wages for men 1980­2016
                                            -1.515           -1.083           -0.827          -1.570
 Task displacement
                                           (0.107)          (0.193)          (0.085)         (0.302)
                                                              0.374            0.604           0.520
 Industry shifters
                                                            (0.158)          (0.124)         (0.123)

 Share variance explained by task
                                             0.84                0.60               0.46                0.87
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.84             0.86              0.96            0.96
 Observations                                250              250               250             250
                                               Panel C. Change in real wages for women 1980­2016
                                            -1.568           -1.676           -2.657          -2.805
 Task displacement
                                           (0.182)          (0.234)          (0.367)         (0.790)
                                                             -0.077            0.754           0.240
 Industry shifters
                                                            (0.084)          (0.282)         (0.358)

 Share variance explained by task
                                             0.53                0.57               0.90                0.95
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.53                0.54               0.66                0.68
 Observations                                250                 250                250                 250

 Other covariates:
 Manufacturing share, and
                                                                                                         
 education and gender dummies
 Exposure to labor share declines
 and relative specialization in                                                                          
 routine jobs

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant
status. In all panels, the dependent variable is the change in real wages from 1980 to 2016. Panel A presents
estimates for native-born workers. Panel B presents estimates for men. Panel C presents estimates for women.
Besides the covariates reported in the table, column 3 controls for each group's baseline wage share in manufacturing
and by Census region, and column 4 controls for relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure to
industry labor share declines. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.




                                                       A-22
Table A-9: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages, stacked-
differences models, 1980-2000 and 2000-2016.

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         Change in real wages 1980­2000, 2000­2016
                                                  (1)               (2)             (3)                            (4)
                                                        Panel A. Common coefficients across periods
                                                 -1.310            -1.045          -0.938            -0.612
 Task displacement
                                                (0.102)           (0.130)         (0.204)           (0.352)
                                                                    0.248          -0.438            -0.438
 Industry shifters
                                                                  (0.058)         (0.112)           (0.132)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                                     0.191
 decline                                                                                            (0.402)
                                                                                                     -0.056
 Exposure to routine occupations
                                                                                                    (0.041)

 Share variance explained by
 - task displacement                            0.46            0.36             0.33              0.21
 - task displacement in 80s                     0.26            0.21             0.19              0.12
 - task displacement in 00s                     0.59            0.47             0.42              0.27
 R-squared                                      0.42            0.46             0.56              0.57
 Observations                                   1000            1000             1000              1000
                                            Panel B. Allow covariates to have period-specific coefficients
                                               -1.310          -1.205           -1.273            -1.419
 Task displacement
                                              (0.102)         (0.132)          (0.144)           (0.275)

 Share variance explained by
 - task displacement                              0.46             0.42             0.44              0.50
 - task displacement in 80s                       0.26             0.24             0.26              0.29
 - task displacement in 00s                       0.59             0.54             0.57              0.64
 R-squared                                        0.42             0.58             0.74              0.74
 Observations                                     1000             1000             1000              1000
                                                 Panel C. Period specific estimates of task displacement
                                                 -2.081           -1.333           -1.364            -2.109
 Task displacement 80­00
                                                (0.277)          (0.248)          (0.252)           (0.728)
                                                 -1.100           -1.159           -1.220            -1.077
 Task displacement 00­16
                                                (0.113)          (0.141)          (0.169)           (0.391)

 Share variance explained by
 - task displacement                             0.45                  0.42                 0.44                  0.45
 - task displacement in 80s                      0.42                  0.27                 0.27                  0.42
 - task displacement in 00s                      0.49                  0.52                 0.55                  0.48
 R-squared                                       0.46                  0.58                 0.74                  0.74
 Observations                                    1000                  1000                 1000                  1000

 Covariates:
 Industry shifters                                                                                                  
 Manufacturing share, gender and
                                                                                                                    
 education dummies
 Exposure to labor share declines
 and relative specialization in                                                                                     
 routine jobs

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500
demographic groups using a stacked-differences specification for 1980­2000 and 2000­2016. These groups are defined by
gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages for 1980­2000
and 2000­2016. Panel A provides estimates assuming common coefficients across periods. Panel B allows covariates to have
period-specific coefficients. Panel C provides period-specific estimates of task displacement. Besides the covariates reported
in the table, column 2 controls for industry shifters, column 3 controls for groups' baseline wage share in manufacturing at the
beginning of each period and for education and gender dummies, and column 4 controls for relative specialization in routine
jobs and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines. Observations are weighted by the share of hours worked by each
group at the beginning of each period. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.



                                                            A-23
Table A-10: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--alternative
measures of jobs that can be automated.

                                                       Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                                      (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                              Panel A. Top 40
                                                     -1.391               -1.016            -1.100                 -2.496
 Task displacement
                                                    (0.147)              (0.164)           (0.193)                (0.534)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                     0.52                 0.38                 0.41                 0.93
 displacement
 R-squared                                           0.52                0.64                   0.82                0.84
 Observations                                        500                 500                    500                 500
                                                                   Panel B. Alternative       definitions
                                                     -1.875             -1.674                 -1.673              -1.793
 Task displacement
                                                    (0.082)            (0.148)                (0.197)             (0.469)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                     0.76                 0.67                 0.67                 0.72
 displacement
 R-squared                                            0.76            0.77              0.85            0.85
 Observations                                         500             500               500             500
                                                     Panel C. Occupations suitable to automation via robots
                                                     -1.184          -1.163            -0.848          -0.658
 Task displacement
                                                    (0.080)         (0.111)           (0.157)         (0.291)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                     0.69                 0.68                 0.49                 0.38
 displacement
 R-squared                                            0.69            0.69             0.81            0.82
 Observations                                         500             500              500             500
                                                   Panel D. Occupations suitable to automation via software
                                                     -1.757          -1.709           -1.456          -1.546
 Task displacement
                                                    (0.132)         (0.150)          (0.222)         (0.513)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                     0.68                 0.66                 0.56                 0.59
 displacement
 R-squared                                           0.68               0.68             0.81             0.82
 Observations                                        500                500              500              500
                                                            Panel E. Occupations suitable to automation
                                                                      via robots or software
                                                     -1.459            -1.417           -1.027           -0.869
 Task displacement
                                                    (0.092)           (0.116)          (0.173)          (0.324)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                     0.71                 0.69                 0.50                 0.42
 displacement
 R-squared                                           0.71                 0.71                 0.81                 0.82
 Observations                                        500                  500                  500                  500

 Covariates:
 Industry shifters                                                                                                   
 Manufacturing share, gender and
                                                                                                                     
 education dummies
 Exposure to labor share declines and
                                                                                                                     
 relative specialization in routine jobs

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages across 500
demographic groups using different definitions of routine jobs. These groups are defined by gender, education, age, race, and
native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages from 1980 to 2016. In Panel A, we define routine
occupations as the top 40% in the routine index distribution (as opposed to the top 30%). In Panel B, we use an alternative
construction of the routine index described in Appendix B-4. In Panel C, we use a measure of occupational suitability to
automation via robots from Webb (2020). In Panel D, we use a measure of occupational suitability to automation via software
from Webb (2020). In Panel E we combine these two indices in a single one. Besides the covariates reported in the table,
column 2 controls for industry shifters, column 3 controls for each group's baseline wage share in manufacturing and dummies
for education level and gender, and column 4 control for relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure to industry
labor share declines. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust
to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.


                                                              A-24
                                    Table A-11: Robustness checks for estimates of full general equilibrium effects.

                                                                     Baseline          Baseline          Baseline          Baseline        Estimates of      Estimates of
                                                    Data for        calibration       calibration       calibration       calibration      propagation       propagation
                                                    1980­2016       but setting       but setting       but setting       but setting       matrix for        matrix for
                                                                       = 0.625          i = 0.8           i = 1.2             = 0.5            =1                =5
                                                        (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)


        Wage structure:
        Share wage changes explained:
        -due to industry shifts                                         7.99%             4.85%            8.40%             8.08%             6.82%             6.88%
        -adding direct displacement effects                            83.00%            99.88%           100.90%           101.84%           100.58%           100.64%
        -accounting for ripple effects                                 50.61%            34.75%            58.59%            46.40%           48.63%            49.17%
        Rise in college premium                       25.51%           22.40%            19.38%            22.31%            21.33%           21.63%            22.45%
        -part due to direct displacement effect                        32.74%            45.96%            35.89%            40.92%           40.92%            40.92%
        Rise in post-college premium                  40.42%           25.00%            20.54%            25.21%            23.19%           24.01%            24.87%
        -part due to direct displacement effect                        38.43%            54.06%            42.01%            48.04%           48.04%            48.04%
        Change in gender gap                          15.37%            2.53%            -4.45%             8.52%            1.17%             2.13%             1.73%
A-25




        -part due to direct displacement effect                         5.05%            -0.19%            12.81%            6.31%             6.31%             6.31%
        Share with declining wages                    53.10%           44.66%            48.97%            34.20%            26.49%            40.84%           46.24%
        -part due to direct displacement effects                       49.48%            55.52%            38.49%            34.58%            51.41%           48.83%
        Wages for men with no high school             -8.21%            -7.67%            -2.74%           -11.32%           -3.16%            -7.27%            -7.13%
        -part due to direct displacement effects                       -11.02%           -10.02%           -17.50%           -9.32%           -15.32%           -13.25%
        Wages for women with no high school           10.94%            1.47%            -2.18%             5.38%             4.66%            1.52%             1.07%
        -part due to direct displacement effects                        5.13%            2.48%             10.37%            10.86%            4.86%             6.93%

        Aggregates:
        Change in average wages, d ln w               29.15%            5.71%             6.41%            5.02%             9.52%             5.71%             5.71%
        Change in GDP per capita, d ln y              70.00%           23.52%            26.72%            20.34%            25.75%           22.75%            23.78%
        Change in TFP, d ln tfp                        35%              3.77%             4.23%            3.31%             6.29%             3.77%             3.77%
                                   L
        Change in labor share, ds                     -8 p.p.         -11.75 p.p        -13.40 p.p       -10.11 p.p.       -10.71 p.p        -11.24 p.p        -11.93 p.p.
        Change in K Y ratio                           30.00%           42.12%            46.83%            37.21%            39.01%            40.62%           42.62%

        Sectoral patterns:
        Share manufacturing in GDP                   -8.80 p.p         -0.42 p.p        -0.36 p.p.        -0.46 p.p.        -0.60 p.p.       -0.42 p.p.        -0.42 p.p.
        Change in manufacturing wage bill            -35.00%            -8.19%           -7.36%            -8.84%            -6.93%            -8.91%           -7.89%

       Notes: This table summarizes the effects of task displacement on the wage distribution, wage levels, aggregates, and sectoral outcomes. All these objects are computed
       using the formulas in Proposition 4 and the parametrization and estimates for the industry demand system and the propagation matrix described in the column headers.
       The wage data reported in column 1 are from the 1980 US Census and 2014­2018 ACS. The data for GDP, the labor share, the capital-output ratio data, and the sectoral
       patterns for manufacturing are from the BEA and the BLS. The TFP data is from Fernald (2014).
   Appendix B: Supplemental Material for "Tasks, Automation,
             and the Rise in US Wage Inequality"
                                 Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
                                                June 7, 2021


                            Appendix B-1     Additional Theory Results

Existence of q
             ¯ and conditions for finite output

This section proves the existence of the threshold q
                                                   ¯ introduced in Assumption 1 and provides
primitive conditions under which the economy will produce finite output.

Proposition B-1 (Existence of q
                              ¯) Suppose that workers can only produce non-overlapping
sets of tasks (i.e., g (x) > 0 only if g (x) = 0 for all g   g ). Consider the set of tasks where
capital has positive productivity, S = {x  k (x) > 0}. Suppose that there exists  > 0, such that
for all x  S we have k (x) >  . Then there exists a threshold q
                                                              ¯ such that, if q (x) > q for all
x  S , all the tasks in S are allocated to capital.

Proof. Consider an allocation with Tk = S and where Tg = {x  g (x) > 0, x  S }. This allocation
is the unique equilibrium of the economy if and only if

                              wg             1
                                                      for all x  S and g  G .
                           Ag  g (x) q (x)  Ak  k (x)

Using the formula for wages in equation (2) and the fact that k (x) >  , it follows that a sufficient
condition for this inequality is that
                 1                                                1
             y         -1    1                                    
                                                        -1
                      Ag                        g (x)        dx
             g               M    xg (x)>0,xS                                1
(B-1)                                                                             for all x  S and g  G ,
                                 Ag  g (x)                               q0  Ak  

where q0 = inf xS q (x).
   The left hand side of (B-1) is increasing in q0 (since output increases in q (x) and the candidate
task allocation remains unchanged); while the right-hand side is decreasing in q0 and converges
to zero as q0 goes to infinity. Let q
                                    ¯ denote the point at which (B-1) holds with equality. It follows
that if q0  q
            ¯ (that is, q (x)  q
                               ¯ for all x  S ), inequality (B-1) holds and the task allocation
described in Assumption 1 is the unique equilibrium.
   Finally, we provide conditions under which the economy produces final output. To do so, it is




                                                    B-1
convenient to introduce the derived production function of the economy as

                           F (k, ) = max H (y1 , . . . , yI )
                                                                               
                                     1                             -1          -1
                    subject to: yi =                  (M  y (x))          dx        i  I ,
                                     M            T

                              y (x) = Ak  k (x)  k (x) +                 Ag  g (x)    g (x)   x  T ,
                                                                   g G

                                   g   =        g (x)  dx   g  G ,
                                           T

                                  k=           (k (x) q (x))  dx.
                                           T


This gives a standard constant-returns to scale production function that depends on the supply
of labor and the total resources used to produce capital, k .

Proposition B-2 (Finite output) The economy produces finite output if and only if the fol-
lowing Inada condition holds:

(B-2)                                                 lim Fk (k, ) < 1.
                                                      k


Moreover, in any equilibrium with positive and finite consumption, we have that sK  [0, 1).
Instead, in any equilibrium with infinite output, sK = 1.

Proof. A competitive equilibrium maximizes c(k ) = F (k, ) - k .
    When the Inada condition (B-2) holds, we have that c(k ) reaches a unique maximum at some
k   0. Moreover, c(k  ) = (1 - sK )F (k  , ), which requires sK  [0, 1).
    When the Inada condition fails, c(k ) is an increasing function and the economy achieves
infinite output. Moreover, because limk Fk (k, ) > 1, we have that limk Fk (k, ) = m > 1.
Thus, the capital share is given by

                            Fk (k, )  k          k              1
                     sK = lim           = m  lim      = m  lim       = 1,
                           k F (k, )        k F (k, )     k Fk (k, )


where we used l'H^
                 opital's rule in the third step.


Extensions with Markups and Endogenous Labor supply

Proposition B-3 (Extension with markups) Given labor-supply levels                                     = ( 1, 2, . . . ,   G)
and industry markups µ = (µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µI ), and conditional on an allocation of tasks {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi },




                                                            B-2
equilibrium wages, industry prices, and output are a solution to the system of equations
                                            1                                                       1
                                   y              -1                                                
(B-3)                    wg =                     
                                                 Ag             sY
                                                                 i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                       µ-
                                                                                        i
                                                                                          
                                                                                              gi
                                       g                   iI
                                                                                        1

                                µi  -1                            1-
(B-4)                       pi =  A     ki +     w 1-
                                                   g   A -1
                                                         g    gi
                                Ai  k        g G                 
(B-5)                       1=         sY
                                        i (p).
                                  iI

Moreover, following advances in automation or changes in markups, the change in the real wage
of group g is given by

                               g          1          1
                  d ln wg =       d ln y + g  d ln  - g  d ln disp for all g  G ,
                                                     

where the industry shifters are now given by

                                    ln sY
                                        i (p)
            d ln g =        gi                 d ln p + ( - 1)  d ln pi - d ln µi                  for all g  G .
                       iI             ln p

Proof. Let

                                                                    p
                                                            µi 
                                                                   mci

denote the markup charged in industry i, where pi is the industry price and mci the marginal
cost. Production optimality requires that

                                                          y             pi  y
                                  mci = p(x)                     p(x) =          .
                                                          y (x)         µi y (x)

Using this last equation, we can solve for the quantity of task x used in sector i as

                                           1
(B-6)                       y (x) =            y  sY
                                                   i (p)  (µ  p(x))
                                                                    -
                                                                       (Ai pi )-1  µ- 
                                                                                    i ,
                                           Mi

where p(x) is the price of task x. Following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 3, we




                                                                 B-3
can therefore compute the demand for capital and labor at task x as

                          1            Y               -1
                               y  µ-
                                   i  si (p)  (Ai pi )     (Ak  q (x)  k (x))-1 if x  Tki
                         Mi
                        
          k (x) q (x) = 
                        
                         0
                                                                                 if x  Tk .
                          1            Y               -1
                               y  µ-
                                   i  si (p)  (Ai pi )     (Ag  g (x))-1  wg -
                                                                                if x  Tg
                         M  i
                g (x) = 
                        
                         0
                                                                                if x  Tg .

    To derive equation (B-3), we add-up the demand for labor across tasks, and rearrange the
resulting expression:

                                1           Y               -1
            g   =                   y  µ-
                                        i  si (p)  (Ai pi )     (Ag  g (x))-1  wg
                                                                                -
                                                                                   dx
                    iI    Tgi   Mi
                                      1                                                                                         1
                                  y               -1                                         1                                  
                                                                  
                     wg =                   Ag    
                                                               µ-
                                                                i     sY
                                                                       i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                          g (x)    -1
                                                                                                                           dx       .
                                  g                       iI                                 Mi     Tgi


    To derive the industry price index in equation (B-5), note that due to constant returns to
scale and the presence of markups, we must have
                                                                                                                   1
                         1                                        µi 1                                  1-        1-
                             pi  yi =         p(x)  y (x)dx  pi =                                p(x)        dx        .
                         µi                Ti                     A i Mi                    Ti


Using the allocation of tasks {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi }, this implies
                                                1
          µi 1                       1-        1-
     pi =                     p(x)        dx
          A i Mi         Ti
                                                                                                                                        1

          1      1                                                          1                                            1-
        =    Ak                       (q (x)  k (x))-1 dx +      1-
                                                                wg   Ag
                                                                        -1
                                                                                                             g (x)-1 dx     ,
          Ai     Mi               Tki                       g G             Mi                           Tgi            

which yields the expression for industry prices in the proposition.
    Finally, because industry shares must add up to 1, we have equation (B-5), which is equivalent
to a price-index condition for industries.
    The expressions for wage changes and industry shifters are derived using the same steps as in
the proof of Proposition 4, but now accounting for the markup term in equation (B-4).

Proposition B-4 (Extension with labor supply) Suppose that households choose their la-
bor supply and consumption to maximize

                                                  c1
                                                   g
                                                     -c         1+
                                                                g
                                          max             -            subject to: cg  wg          g,
                                          g ,cg   1 - c        1+

and let  = (1 - c ) (c +  ). Conditional on an allocation of tasks {Tki , T1i , . . . , TGi }, equilibrium

                                                                       B-4
wages, labor supply, industry prices, and output solve the system
                                                                                                  1
                                          1        -1                                             +
(B-7)                       wg =y         +    Ag  +
                                                                  sY
                                                                   i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                   -1
                                                                                         gi
                                                            iI
                                                                                                    
                                                    (-1)                                            +
                                          
(B-8)                            g   =y   +    Ag   +
                                                                       sY
                                                                        i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                        -1
                                                                                              gi
                                                                  iI
                                                                                              1

                                  1  -1            1-   -1      1-
(B-9)                        pi =    Ak  ki +     wg   Ag   gi
                                  Ai          g G              

(B-10)                           c = 1 - Ak
                                            -1
                                                               sY
                                                                i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                -1
                                                                                    ki  y
                                                         iI

(B-11)                        1=           sY
                                            i (p).
                                      iI

   Moreover, the effect of task displacement on wages and employment is given by

                           g             1            1
             d ln wg =          d ln y +   g  d ln  -   g  d ln disp for all g  G ,
                           +             +            +
                           g                          
              d ln   g   =      d ln y +   g  d ln  -   g  d ln disp for all g  G ,
                           +             +            +

where the propagation matrix now becomes

                                                                                        -1
                                                1  ln (w,  , )
                                           = 1-
                                                +      ln w

Proof. The household problem gives the labor-supply curve

                                                                          
(B-12)                                                             g   = wg .

Plugging this labor-supply curve into the expression for wages in equation (8) yields

                                               1                                                      1
                                 y                       -1                                           
                            wg =                    Ag   
                                                                        sY
                                                                         i (p)  (Ai pi )
                                                                                         -1
                                                                                               gi         .
                                 wg                               iI


Using this equation to solve for wg yields equation (B-7). In turn, plugging (B-7) into equation
(B-12) yields (B-8).
   The derivations of the remaining expressions in the proposition are identical to those in the
proof of proposition 3.
   Turning to the effect of technologies on wage changes, and following the same steps as in the
derivation of Proposition 4, we obtain

                         1         1                    1            1                1  ln g
           d ln wg =       d ln y - d ln           g   - d ln disp
                                                              g    +     gi  d ln i +          d ln w.
                                                                      iI                ln w

Using the fact that d ln     g   =   d ln wg (from the labor-supply curve in B-12), we can rewrite this


                                                                       B-5
as

                       1          1             1                                                  1  ln g
           d ln wg =     d ln y -   d ln disp
                                         g    +                              gi  d ln i +                    d ln w.
                       +          +             +                       iI                         +   ln w

Solving this system for wage changes gives the formula for the propagation matrix in the propo-
sition.


Propagation Matrix and Elasticities of Substitution

This section provides additional properties of the propagation matrix and relates it to traditional
definitions of elasticities of substitution.
     First, let us recall that the Morishima elasticity of substitution between capital and labor of
type g can be defined as

                                                                    1
                                       k,   g    =                                        .
                                                               ln(sL  k
                                                                   g s )
                                                     1+
                                                                 ln Ak
                                                                                      k

Similarly, the Morishima elasticity of substitution between capital and labor can be defined as

                                                                    1
                                         k, =                                             ,
                                                         ln(sL sk )
                                                     1+
                                                           ln Ak
                                                                                      k

and the Morishima elasticity of substitution between labor of type g  and g can be defined as

                                                                  1
                                         g , g
                                                 =                                            .
                                                               ln(sL   L
                                                                    g sg  )
                                                         1+
                                                                 ln      g
                                                                                          k

The Morishima elasticities tell us about changes in factor shares as one factor becomes more abun-
dant or productive. In the presence of multiple factors, these elasticities need not be symmetric,
as is the case with only two factors of production.
     Also, define the q -elasticity of substitution between capital and labor of type g by the identity

                                           Q                        1
                                           k,    g
                                                         =                        ,
                                                             1  ln wg
                                                             sk  ln Ak
                                                                              k

and the q -elasticity of substitution between labor of type g  and g by

                                                                    1
                                          Q ,        g
                                                         =                            .
                                            g
                                                              1  ln wg
                                                             sL
                                                              g   ln g
                                                                       
                                                                               k



                                                              B-6
The q -elasticities of substitution tell us whether factors are q -complements (a positive elasticity)
or q -substitutes (a negative elasticity), and are symmetric in a competitive economy by definition
(a corollary of Young's theorem).
   Note that in all these definitions we are holding k --the resources devoted to produce capital--
constant.

Proposition B-5 (Elasticities of substitution and ) The Morishima elasticity of sub-
stitution between capital and labor is

                                                1                                       sL
                                                                                         g
                                k, =                         where: ¯ =                      g  (0, 1).
                                          ¯ 1                                     g G   sL
                                           +   (¯ - 1)
                                           sk

Moreover, the Morishima elasticities of substitution between pairs of factors are

                                      1                                                                 1
     k,   g   =                                 L
                                                                      g , g
                                                                              =                                  ,
                  g k ¯              s                                                  sL
                                                                                         g       gg g g 
                   s + sL + (g - 1) + k (¯ - 1)                                   1+   g - g  -     - L
                                     s                                                           sL   sg 
                                                                                                  g


and the q -elasticities of substitution are

                      Q                  1                                                          1
                      k,       =                                               Q ,          =                .
                           g       g   1                                           g    g
                                                                                                1    gg 
                                     +    (g - 1)                                                 g - L
                                    sk                                                                sg  

Proof. First, note that we can rewrite the definition of the set Tg as

                                1     wg  Ak    1     wg   Ak       1
                       Tg = x                                 ,              g 
                               g (x)     Ag   g (x)     Ag      k (x)  q (x)
                                   1          1    wg   Ak 
                       Tk = x                              g .
                               k (x)  q (x) g (x)   Ag

   These expressions imply that the effect of an increase in Ak on the allocation of tasks is
equivalent to a uniform rise in wages. That is:

                                                     ln g           ln g
                                                           =              .
                                                     ln Ak     g    ln wg

   Using this property, we can compute the change in wages as

                                           1          1  ln g           1  ln g
                               d ln wg =     d ln y +          d ln w +          d ln Ak .
                                                        ln w              ln w

We can then solve for the change in wages as

                                                       1          1
                                            d ln w =     d ln y +    d ln Ak .
                                                                  


                                                             B-7
Moreover, using the definition of , we get

                                                        1
                                                          =  - 1.
                                                        

Plugging this into the expression for wages, we obtain

                                                   g
                                 d ln wg =            d ln y + (g - 1)d ln Ak .
                                                   

Finally, holding k constant, we have that d ln y = sK  d ln Ak . Therefore

                                 1           1  ln wg                     g   1
(B-13)                        Q
                                         =                            =     + k  (g - 1).
                              k,             sk  ln Ak                     s
                                     g                            k


In addition, we also have that

                                      ln sL
                                          g                   g
(B-14)                                                 =        - 1  sk + (g - 1)
                                   ln Ak                      
                                                   k

   Using equation (B-14), we can compute the Morishima elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor as

                           1        ln(sL sk )
                              =1 +
                           k,         ln Ak
                                                                      k
                                                              L
                                             1  ln s
                                 =1 +          
                                             sk  ln Ak
                                                                  k
                                             1          sLg    ln sL
                                                                   g
                                 =1 +
                                             sk   g G   s L    ln Ak
                                                                           k
                                             1          sLg           g
                                 =1 +                                   - 1  sk + (g - 1)
                                             sk   g G   s L           
                                      1  ¯
                                 =1 + k    - 1  s k + (¯ - 1)
                                     s   
                                  ¯ 1
                                 = + k  (¯ - 1)
                                   s

   Similarly, using equation (B-14), we can compute the Morishima elasticity of substitution




                                                                  B-8
between capital and labor of type g as

                     1                ln(sL  k
                                          g s )
                             =1 +
                    k,   g                ln Ak
                                                              k
                                      ln sL
                                          g
                                                              L
                                                             s  ln sL
                             =1 +                        +
                                      ln Ak                  sk  ln Ak
                                                     k                        k
                                  g                    sL      ¯
                             =1 +   - 1  sk + (g - 1) + k        - 1  sk + (¯ - 1)
                                                       s      
                              g     ¯              sL
                             = sk + sL + (g - 1) + k ( ¯ - 1).
                                                    s

     We now turn to the elasticities involving chnages in                            g .   Following a change in     g ,   we have:

                                                                  g          gg
(B-15)                                       d ln wg =              d ln y -    d ln       g .
                                                                             

Holding k constant, d ln y = sL
                              g   d ln               g .     Therefore,

                                         1                1  ln wg                1    gg 
                                         Q
                                                 =                            =     g - L .
                                                         sL
                                                          g   ln g
                                                                                        sg  
                                         g , g                            k


     Finally, we can write the Morishima elasticity of substitution between labor of type g  and g
as

                             1                ln(sL  L
                                                  g sg  )                          ln wg             ln wg
                                     =1+                                  =1+                   -                .
                             g , g
                                                      ln      g                    ln g              ln g
                                                                      k                     k                k

Using the formula for the change in wages in equation (B-15), we obtain

                                     1                     sL
                                                            g            gg g g 
                                             =1+               g - g  -     - L   ,
                                     g , g
                                                                         sL
                                                                          g   sg 

which completes proof of the proposition.

Proposition B-6 (Quasi-symmetry of the propagation matrix) The propagation matrix
satisfies the symmetry property

                                                                  gg        g  g
(B-16)                                                   g -       L
                                                                      = g  - L .
                                                                  sg         sg

Proof. By definition  Q ,            = Q
                                       g,
                                                     , which implies the symmetry property in (B-16).
                             g   g               g




                                                                      B-9
                  Appendix B-2      Estimating the Propagation Matrix

This appendix provides additional details regarding the estimation of the propagation matrix.
   Our estimation strategy makes two assumptions:

   · The propagation matrix has a common diagonal term gg =   0. This is motivated by the
     strong reduced form evidence between task displacement and the observed change in real
     wages.

   · The extent of competition for tasks between groups is determined by their similarity across
     a set of characteristics N . We operationalize this by assuming that

                                    gg g g
                                        + L =2      n  f (dn
                                                           g,g  ).
                                    sL
                                     g    sg   n  N


   Using these two assumptions, and combining them with the theoretical restriction that

                                           gg        g  g
                                     g -    L
                                               = g  - L ,
                                           sg         sg

yields the parametrization used in the main text.




                                             B-10
                      Appendix B-3            Measuring Task Displacement

Theoretical derivations

This section derives our measures of task displacement in the extended version of our model that
allows for markups.
   We assume that tasks can be partitioned into routine tasks Ri and non-routine tasks Ni , whose
union equals Ti . Moreover, let Rgi and Ngi denote the (disjoint) sets of routine and non-routine
tasks allocated to workers of type g .
   Assumption 2 is equivalent to:

    i Only routine tasks have been automated, which implies that Dgi  Rgi

   ii Routine tasks in a given industry have been automated at the same rate for all workers,
     which implies that

                                             -1
                                    Dgi g (x) dx
                                                   = i  0 for all g.
                                    Rgi g (x)-1 dx

   Before continuing with our derivations, we introduce some notation that we will use throughout
                         Y
this appendix. Define by X the share of wages in some cell X earned within another sub-cell
                        i
Y . For example, define g as the share of wages earned by members of group g in industry i as a
fraction of their total wage income:

                                 i           sY
                                              i ( p)  (Ai pi )
                                                               -1
                                                                   gi
                                 g =                                              .
                                             sY
                                              g  ( p)  (Ag  pg  )
                                                                  -1
                                                                      gg
                                         g

       R
Define gi as the share of wages earned by members of group g in industry i in routine jobs as a
fraction of the total wage income earned by workers of group g in industry i:

                                                          g (x)-1 dx
                                         R          Rgi
                                         gi =                          .
                                                          g (x)-1 dx
                                                    Tgi

           R
And define i as the share of wages earned by workers in industry i in routine jobs as a fraction
of the total wage income earned by workers in industry i:

                                                    1-
                                                   wg            g (x)-1 dx
                                          g G             Rgi
                                  R
                                  i =                                         .
                                                    1-
                                                   wg            g (x)-1 dx
                                             g G           Tgi




                                                      B-11
   We next define the average cost-saving gains from automating tasks in sector i as

                                                    Rg
                                                    i
                                            i =      R
                                                        gi ,
                                                g G i

      Rg                                                                            R
where i  is the share of wages in industry i paid to g workers in routine jobs, and i is the
share of wages in industry i paid to workers in routine jobs.
                                                              L
   Finally, for each type of worker g , define the elasticity gi by

                                        1  ln sL
                                         g 
                                               i
                                                 = sk  (1 - gi
                                                            L
                                                               ).
                                        i  ln wg

     L                                                                L
When gi > 1, an increase in wg reduces the labor share. Instead, when gi < 1, an increase in wg
increases the labor share.
   The following proposition characterizes the change in the labor share as a function of various
driving forces:

   1. task displacement generated by automation or offshoring, d ln disp
                                                                    gi generating productivity
      gains gi > 0;

   2. productivity deepening and factor augmenting technologies taking place in that industry,
      and denoted by d ln deepp
                          gi    and d ln Agi . Note that, in this proposition, factor-augmenting
      technologies may vary by industry;

   3. changes in markups at the industry level, denoted by d ln µi ;

   4. changes in wages, d ln wg due to other shocks in the economy or changes in factor supplies;

   5. and changes in the user cost of capital. In particular, we assume there are two types of
      technologies increasing the productivity of capital or reducing its price. On the one hand
      we have the task displacement technologies introduced above. And on the other hand, we
      have uniform declines in the user cost of capital driven by lower capital prices at all tasks
                                                                    1
      or cheap access to credit. Formally, we write q (x) =         Ri    q0 (x) and consider changes in
      q0 (x) leading to task displacement or changes in Ri common to all uses of capital in a given
      industry.

Proposition B-7 (Industry labor shares) Let sL
                                             i denote the labor share in industry i. Also,
              1
let q (x) =   Ri    q0 (x), where Ri captures uniform changes in the price of capital at all tasks in
                     e
industry i, and let wgi = wg Agi denote the wages per efficiency unit of labor paid in industry i for
workers of type g . Following a change in technology (task displacement, productivity deepening,




                                                  B-12
Aki , Agi , and Ai ) factor prices (wg , Ri ), and markups µi , we have

              d ln sL                            L     R
                    i = - d ln µi - 1 + ( - 1)  si  i  i  i

                                                    g                 deep 
                       + (1 - sL
                               i )  ( - 1)          i  d ln deep
                                                            gi - d ln ki
                                                 gG                        
                       + (1 - sL         L          e         L         K
                               i )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln(Ri Aki ),


where
                                 g        e
                  L
                                 i  d ln wg        L                          K                  g  L
                  i =             g                gi                         i =                i  gi ,
                                           e
                           g G g  i  d ln wg                                               g G


and

                                                e            g        e
                                          d ln wi =          i  d ln wgi .
                                                       g G


Proof. Given a vector of wages and technologies, we can write the labor share as

                                                              e 1-
                                                             wgi    gi
                                          1     g G
(B-17)                             sL
                                    i =      -1                         e 1-
                                                                                     ,
                                          µi Ak  ki +                  wgi    gi
                                                                 g G


where recall that the denominator is also equal to

                                                                     e 1-
                                     p1
                                      i
                                        -
                                          = Ak
                                               -1
                                                   ki +             wgi    gi .
                                                              g G


   We can decompose changes in the labor share into four terms:

                           contribution of        contribution of                    contribution of
               d ln sL
                     i =                      +                              +
                           markups                task displacement                  prod. deepening
                               contribution of             contribution of
                           +                          +                          ,
                               eff. wage changes           price of capital

which we now derive in detail.
1. Contribution of markups: this is simply given by -d ln µi .
2. Contribution of task displacement: we can compute this as

                  contribution of                     Rg                                   Rg
                                           =-         i   i + (1 - )  sL
                                                                       i                   i   i  gi
                  task displacement             g G                                  g G


where the first term captures the effect of task displacement on the numerator and the second
term the effect on the denominator of the labor share expression in equation (B-17). Using the


                                                          B-13
definition of i , this can be simplified as

                          contribution of
                                                 = - 1 + ( - 1)  sL     R
                                                                  i  i  i  i .
                          task displacement

3. Contribution of productivity deepening: we can compute this as

  contribution of                       g                                                      deep 
                       = ( - 1)         i  d ln deep
                                                gi   - ( - 1)  sL
                                                                g 
                                                                       g
                                                                       i  d ln deep
                                                                               gi   + sk
                                                                                       i  d ln ki    ,
  prod. deepening                   g G                            g G                              

where the first term captures the effect of task displacement on the numerator and the second
term the effect on the denominator of the labor share expression in equation (B-17). We can
rewrite this as

                  contribution of                                 g                        
                                      = ( - 1)  (1 - sL
                                                      i )         i  d ln deep
                                                                          gi   - d ln deep
                                                                                      ki
                  prod. deepening                              gG                          

4. Contribution of wages per efficiency unit of labor: We now turn to the contribution of
                                                            L
wages per efficiency unit of labor. Using the definition of gi , we can compute their effect as

                         contribution of              g
                                            =         i  (1 - sL         L           e
                                                               i )  (1 - gi )  d ln wgi .
                         wage changes           g G


                        L
Using the definition of i and d ln wi , we obtain

                             contribution of
                                                  = (1 - sL         L
                                                          i )  (1 - i )  d ln wi .
                             wage changes

5. Contribution of price of capital: To compute the effects of a uniform change in capital
                                               L
prices, we first provide explicit formulas for gi , which we will use in our derivations below. We
have that

                  1  ln sL   1  g                             g     ln g i         g        
                   g 
                         i
                           = g  i  (1 - ) +                   i             - s L  i  (1 - ) ,
                  i  ln wg i                              g         ln wg i                 

where the first two terms capture the effect of task displacement on the numerator and the third
term the effect on the denominator of the labor share expression in equation (B-17). Here, we
used the fact that the effect of wages on the denominator equals the direct effect holding the task
allocation constant--an implication of the envelope theorem. We can rewrite this expression as

                                                                        g 
                          1  ln sL                                      i    ln g i
                           g 
                                   i
                                     = (1 - sL
                                             i )  (1 - ) +               g          ,
                          i    ln wg                                g   i  ln wg i




                                                       B-14
which implies that

                                                                    g   
                                          L          1              i    ln g i
                                          gi   =-                    g          ,
                                                  1 - sL
                                                       i        g   i  ln wg i

and
                                                                           g 
                                                                           i    ln g i
(B-18)                             (1 - sL        L
                                         i )  ( - gi )      =               g          .
                                                                    g      i  ln wg i

   Consider a uniform change in the cost per efficiency unit of capital d ln(Ri Aki ) on the labor
share of industry i. The effect of this change in the allocation of tasks is the same as a uniform
reduction in wages of d ln(Ri Aki ). Moreover, the effect of d ln(Ri Aki ) on the denominator of
the labor share is just its direct effect--an application of the envelope theorem. Thus, we get

         contribution of                       g     ln g i
                              =-               i             d ln(Ri Aki ) - sk
                                                                              i  (1 - )  d ln(Ri Aki ),
         price of capital           g G g            ln wg

where the first term captures the effect of task changes on the numerator and the second term
the effect on the denominator of the labor share expression in equation (B-17). Using equation
(B-18), we can rewrite this expression as

      contribution of               g
                         =-         i  (1 - sL        L                      k
                                             i )  ( - gi )  d ln(Ri Aki ) - si  (1 - )  d ln(Ri Aki ).
      price of capital        g G


                                 K
Finally, using the definition of i , we can rewrite this as

                          contribution of
                                                    = -(1 - sL         K
                                                             i )  (1 - i )  d ln(Ri Aki ),
                          price of capital

which completes the proof of the proposition
   We are now in a position to derive the measures of task displacement used in the text. We
start with the case with no ripple effects, no change in markups, and  = 1, which gives the
baseline measure in equation (12).

Proposition B-8 Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Suppose also that  = 1 and there are
                 L   K
no markups. Then i = i = 1 and task displacement can be computed as

                                          R                                                 R
                                          gi                                                gi
              d ln disp
                   g      =        i
                                   g      R
                                             (-d ln sL
                                                     i )        and         d ln disp
                                                                                 gi     =   R
                                                                                                  (-d ln sL
                                                                                                          i ).
                              iI          i                                                 i




                                                           B-15
Moreover, total task displacement taking place in industry i is given by

                                    d ln disp
                                         i    =        g
                                                       i  d ln disp         L
                                                               gi = (-d ln si ).
                                                  iI

Proof. Proposition B-7 implies that

                                                                      (-d ln sL
                                                                              i )
                                      d ln sL    R
                                            i = -i  i  i =                 R
                                                                                  .
                                                                         i

   Moreover, by definition

                          -1             -1             -1                R
                 Dgi g (x) dx Rgi g (x) dx Dgi g (x) dx                   gi
   d ln disp
        gi     =               =                              =  R
                                                                 gi   i = R
                                                                              (-d ln sL
                                                                                      i ).
                 Tgi g (x)-1 dx Tgi g (x)-1 dx Rgi g (x)-1 dx             i

and task displacement for worker groups is given by

                                                                          R
                                                                          gi
                             d ln disp
                                  g    =        i
                                                g  d ln disp
                                                        gi =
                                                                      i
                                                                      g   R
                                                                                (-d ln sL
                                                                                        i ).
                                           iI                    iI       i


   The next Proposition derives the more general measure in footnote 15.

                                                             L   K
Proposition B-9 Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then, i = i = . In the ab-
sence of productivity deepening or factor-augmenting technologies affecting the labor share, task
displacement can be computed as

                                  R
                                 gi -d ln sL                   L
                                           i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
           d ln disp
                g      =     i
                             g    R
                       iI        i                      1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i
                        R
                       gi        -d ln sL                   L
                                        i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
           d ln disp
                gi   =  R
                                                                                              .
                       i                             1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i

Moreover, total task displacement taking place in industry i is given by

                                            -d ln sL                   L
                                                   i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
       d ln disp
            i    =        g
                          i  d ln disp
                                  gi =                                                                   .
                     iI                                         1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i

Proof. Proposition B-7 implies that

       d ln sL                            L       R            L
             i = -d ln µi - (1 + ( - 1)  si  i )  i  i + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri ),


which gives

                             -d ln sL                   L
                                    i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln qi )
                       i =                                                                .
                                             (1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i )  i
                                                                      R




                                                          B-16
   Moreover, following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition B-8, we get

                                           -1
                                  Dgi g (x) dx
                   d ln disp
                        gi      =
                                  Tgi g (x)-1 dx
                                             -1             -1
                                    Rgi g (x) dx Dgi g (x) dx
                                =                 
                                    Tgi g (x)-1 dx Rgi g (x)-1 dx
                                  R
                                = gi  i
                                    R
                                    gi  -d ln sL                   L
                                               i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
                                =   R
                                                                                                     .
                                    i                       1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i

and task displacement for worker groups is given by

                                                      R
                                                     gi -d ln sL                   L
                                                               i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - )  (d ln wi - d ln Ri )
 d ln disp
      g       =        i
                       g    d ln disp
                                 gi     =        i
                                                 g    R                                                              .
                  iI                        iI       i                      1 + ( - 1)  sL i  i



   Our final Proposition derives a version of our measure of task displacement that allows for
ripple effects. Equation (16) corresponds to the special case of this formula when there are no
                       L   K
changes in markups and i = i .

Proposition B-10 Suppose that Assumptions 2 holds. In the absence of productivity deepening
or factor-augmenting technologies affecting the labor share, task displacement can be computed as

                            R
                           gi -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                                     i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
 d ln disp
      g       =        i
                       g    R
             iI            i                                 1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i
              R
             gi           -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                                 i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
 d ln disp
      gi   =  R
                                                                                                           .
             i                                           1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i

Moreover, total task displacement taking place in industry i is given by

                                        -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                                               i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
d ln disp
     i    =        g
                   i  d ln disp
                           gi =                                                                                          .
              iI                                                       1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i

Proof. Proposition B-7 implies that

d ln sL                            L       R            L         L                    L         K
      i = -d ln µi - (1 + ( - 1)  si  i )  i  i + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri ,


which gives

                    -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                           i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
             i =                                                                                     .
                                               (1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i )  i
                                                                         R




                                                                B-17
   Following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition B-8, we get

                           -1
                  Dgi g (x) dx
    d ln disp
         gi     =
                  Tgi g (x)-1 dx
                             -1             -1
                    Rgi g (x) dx Dgi g (x) dx
                =                 
                    Tgi g (x)-1 dx Rgi g (x)-1 dx
                  R
                = gi  i
                    R
                    gi  -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                               i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
                =   R
                                                                                                         .
                    i                                  1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i

and task displacement for worker groups is given by

 d ln disp
      g    =        i
                    g  d ln disp
                            gi
               iI
                         R
                    i
                         gi  -d ln sL                   L         L                    L         K
                                    i - d ln µi + (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln wi - (1 - si )  (1 - i )  d ln Ri
          =         g    R
                                                                                                              .
               iI        i                                  1 + ( - 1)  sLi  i




Empirical implementation and bounding exercise

The empirical implementation of our measures of task displacement in Propositions B-8 and
B-9 is straightforward. However, the formulas in Proposition B-10 depend on two elasticities of
              K     L
substitution, i and i , which may differ due to the fact that we have different types of workers,
and that when wages rise in one industry, we may be capturing the substitution of different worker
groups for capital in marginal tasks. When implementing these formulas, we will assume that
K   L
i = i , and use empirical estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor
at the industry level, i , to discipline their common value. This is motivated by the fact that
empirical estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor are also estimating
                                                     L
some combination of the group-specific elasticities, gi 's.
   In addition, when computing task displacement, we will use empirical estimates of d ln wi and
d ln Ri from the BLS, which account for changes in wages, the quality of workers, and quality-
adjusted prices of capital used in an industry. We note also that, although our model has common
wages for a given skill across industries, the expressions in Propositions B-9 and B-10 apply
without modification to the case in which wages are industry-specific. In addition, our formula
is not affected by factor-neutral improvements in TFP in industry i, since these do not affect an
industry's labor share.
   While our formulas incorporate the effects of changes in factor prices, they miss the contribu-
tion of general factor-augmenting technologies. Now we provide upper bounds on the effects of
this type of technological change on our estimates of task displacement, which will reveal that this
type of technological change tends to have a very small effect on our inferred task displacement


                                                       B-18
measure.
   We focus on our measures in Proposition B-10 obtained for  = 0.5 and i ranging from
0.8 to 1.2 (these technologies do not affect our measures if i = 1). In particular, for i < 1,
the contribution of factor-augmenting technologies to the change in the labor share is between
-sK
  i  (1 - i )  d ln A   i   (where d ln A   i   is a weighted average of d ln Agi across workers) and sK
                                                                                                       i 
(1 - i )  d ln Aki . Moreover, assuming no technological regress, we have that the total increase in
                                                  ~L
(gross output) TFP in industry i must exceed both s                 ~K
                                                    i  d ln ALi and s                        ~L
                                                                     i  d ln Aki , where now si and
~K
s i denote the share of labor and capital in gross output (an application of Hulten's theorem). As
a result, we can bound the contribution of factor-augmenting technologies to lie in the interval

                                sK
                                 i                          sKi
                            -    L
                                    ( 1 - i )  d ln TFP i ,      (1 - i )  d ln TFPi .
                                s
                                ~i                          ~K
                                                            s i

Likewise, for i > 1, the contribution of factor-augmenting technologies to the change in the labor
share is between -sK                         K
                   i  (i - 1)  d ln Aki and si  (i - 1)  d ln A i , which we can bound by


                                sKi                           sK
                                                               i
                            -        (  i - 1 )  d ln TFP i ,     (i - 1)  d ln TFPi .
                                ~K
                                s i                           s
                                                              ~L
                                                               i

   Figure B-4 presents our measures of task displacement across industries and worker groups
using equation (16) for i = 0.8 and for i = 1.2, depicting the bounds on the contribution of
factor-augmenting technologies using the whiskers. When constructing these bounds, we assume
that industries with declining TFP between 1987 and 2016, experienced no factor-augmenting
improvements. Except for a handful of IT-intensive industries with vast increases in TFP (elec-
tronics, computers, and communications), our bounds exclude anything other than very small
effects of factor-augmenting technologies on the decline in labor shares and our task displacement
measure. This is because these technologies have limited distributional effects but generate large
TFP gains. Through the lens of our model, and given the pervasive lack of productivity growth
observed across industries, these technologies cannot play a key role in explaining the decline in
the labor share.




                                                       B-19
                               Appendix B-4       Data Appendix

Industry data: Our main source of industry-level data are the BEA Integrated industry ac-
counts for 1987­2016. These data contain information on industry value added, labor compensa-
tion, industry prices and factor prices for 61 NAICS industries. We aggregated these data to the
49 industries used in our analysis, which we could track consistently both in the BEA and the
worker-level data from the 1980 US Census. Finally, when computing changes in industry's labor
shares, we winsorized labor shares in value added at 20% to reduce noise in our measures of task
displacement coming from industries with low and volatile labor shares.
   Besides the BEA data, we also used data from the BLS multifactor productivity tables for
1987­2016. These data are also available for 61 NAICS industries which we aggregated to the 49
industries used in our analysis.
   We complement the industry data with proxies for the adoption of automation technologies
across industries. First, we use the measure of adjusted penetration of robots from Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2020), which is available for 1993­2014. These measure is constructed using data from
the International Federation of Robotics, and is defined for each industry i as

              1 5 robotse,i,2014 - robotse,i,1993                               robotse,i,1993
     APRi =                                       - output growthe,i,2004-1993                 ,
              5 e=1            e,i,1993                                            e,i,1993


where the right-hand side is computed as an average among five European countries, e, leading
the US in the adoption of industrial robots (see Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020, for details). These
measure is available for all of our manufacturing industries, but has a coarser resolution outside
of manufacturing.
   Finally, we also use the share of software and specialized machinery in value added from the
BLS multifactor productivity tables. In particular, we use the detailed capital tables from the
BLS, which provide the compensation for different assets (computed as the user cost of each asset
multiplied by its stock). For software, we add custom-made software or software developed in
house--which are more relevant for automation than pre-packaged software like Stata or Word.
For specialized machinery, we add metalworking machinery (typically numerically controlled ma-
chines capable of automatically producing a pre-specified task), agricultural machinery other than
tractors, specialized machinery used in the service sector, specialized machinery used in industry
applications (which should also include industrial robots), construction machinery, and material
handling equipment used in industrial applications. Although not all software and dedicated
machinery necessarily involve the automation of tasks previously performed by labor, the com-
ponent of these measures associated with significant declines in the labor share helps isolate the
automation component.
   For offshoring, we use a measure from Feenstra and Hanson (1999) recently updated by Wright
(2014) for 1990­2007. This measure captures changes in the share of imported intermediates across
industries, and is only available for the manufacturing sector. When using it, we set it to zero


                                                B-20
outside of manufacturing.
   When using these proxies of automation and offshoring, we rescale the coefficients on our
reduced-form estimates by the first-stage relationship between each of these variables and task
displacement at the industry level reported in Panel B of Table A-1.
   Turning to our proxies for changes in market structure, we use changes in sales concentration
and several estimates of markups aggregated at the industry level. Our data for sales concentration
comes from the Census Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB) and is only available for 1997­2016.
Using these data, we computed the tail index of the sales distribution for all the industries in our
sample. The SUSB data can also be used to compute tail indices for the employment distribution
going back to 1992. Using this alternative proxy of concentration available over a longer period
didn't alter our findings.
   For markups, we provide three different estimates.
   First, we compute markups in a given industry using an accounting approach, which measures
markups by the ratio of output to costs:

                                               gross outputi
                                   µi =                            .
                                          Ri Ki + Variable inputsi

This approach requires constant returns to scale and assumes there are no adjustment costs.
This approach also requires a measurement of the unobserved user cost of capital Ri . We follow
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018) and compute Ri using a user-cost formula accounting for
changes in taxes. We do this using data on capital stocks and prices from NIPA's Fixed Asset
Tables. We also set the internal rate of return to 6% and keep it constant over time. As shown
in Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013), the alternative approach of using bond rates to proxy for
firms' and investors' internal rates of return yields large, volatile, and unreasonable estimates of
aggregate markups. More relevant for our exercise is the fact that different values of the internal
rate of return do not affect the variation in relative trends in markups across industries.
   Second, we compute the change in markups by looking at the percent decline in the share of
materials in gross output. That is:

                                  ln µi = - ln share materialsi .

This approach assumes that the share of materials in total costs is constant, and that a decline
in the share of materials thus reveals higher markups. We use the BEA data described above
to measure the share of materials in gross output. Outside of manufacturing, we focus on the
share of materials and intermediate services, since raw materials play a smaller role in the service
sector.
   Finally, we compute markups using a production function approach as in De Loecker, Eeckhout




                                                 B-21
and Unger (2020). In this approach, markups are computed for firms in industry i as

                                         elasticity variable inputsi,f
                                µi,f =                                   .
                                           share variable inputsi,f

The share of variable inputs is typically observed from the data while the elasticity of output
to variable input has to be estimated. Following De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger (2020), we
estimate these markups using Compustat data, but deviate from their approach in two important
aspects. First, when aggregating markups at the industry level, we use an harmonic sales-weighted
mean, rather than a sales-weighted mean. As shown in Hubmer and Restrepo (2021), this is the
relevant notion of an aggregate markup that matters for industry factor shares. Second, and
following Hubmer and Restrepo (2021), we allow the production function to vary flexibly over
time, by firm, and by firm-size quintile within each industry, which accounts for the fact that the
adoption of automation technologies typically concentrates among large firms (see also Acemoglu,
Lelarge and Restrepo, 2020).


Census data      We use the 1980 US Census to measure group-level outcomes and specialization
patterns by industry and routine occupations. In addition, we also use the 2000 US Census to
measure group-level outcomes for the year 2000. Finally, and to maximize our sample size, we
use data from the pooled 2014­2018 American Community Survey to measure outcomes around
the year 2016.
   To measure real hourly wages we follow standard cleaning procedures (see for example Ace-
moglu and Autor, 2011). First, the wage data are top coded. To deal with this, we replace top
coded observations by 1.5 times the value of the top code. Second, we convert hourly wages
to 2007 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditure deflator from the BEA. Third, we
winsorized real hourly wages from below at 2 dollars per years and from above at 180 dollars per
year.


Regional variation     Our estimates in Section 4.7 also exploit variation in specialization patterns
across regions. In particular, we use two different groupings. First, we look at workers in 300
different demographic groups across 9 Census regions. To maintain a reasonable cell size, in
this exercise we define demographic groups by gender, education, age (now defined by 16­30
years of age, 31­50 years, and 51­65 years) and race. Second, we look at workers in 54 different
demographic groups across 722 commuting zones (see David, Dorn and Hanson, 2013, for a
description of commuting zones). To maintain a reasonable cell size, in this exercise we define
demographic groups by gender, education (completed college and less than completed college),
age (now defined by 16­30 years of age, 31­50 years, and 51­65 years), and race (Whites, Blacks,
and others).




                                                  B-22
Routine occupations       Following Acemoglu and Autor (2011), we use ON ET to define routine
jobs. In particular, for each Census occupation o, we compute a routine index given by

    routine indexo = routine manual inputo + routine cognitive inputo - average task inputo .

Here, routine manual inputo denotes the intensity of routine manual tasks in occupation o, the
term routine cognitive inputo denotes the intensity of routine cognitive tasks, and the term
average task inputo denotes the average task intensity (capturing the extent to which workers
also conduct manual and analytical tasks). As is common practice in the literature, we define an
occupation as routine if it is the top 33% of the routine index distribution.
   Table A-10 explores the robustness of our results to using different thresholds and alternative
formulations of the routine index. In particular, in Panel A we define an occupation as routine if
it is the top 40% of the routine index distribution, and In Panel B we use an alternative index of
the form

               routine indexo = routine manual inputo + routine cognitive inputo .

   Panels C­E probed the robustness of our results to using Webb (2020) indices of suitability
for automation via robots and software and a combination of both of them. These measures
provide a ranking of occupations depending on their suitability for automation, and we define an
occupation as routine if it lies in the top 33% of each measure.


Other covariates      Table 5 uses additional covariates. These include industries exposure to
rising Chinese imports for 1990­2011, which we obtained from Acemoglu et al. (2016); the decline
in the unionization rates by industry, which we computed for 1984­2016 using union membership
by industry from the CPS; and industry-level changes in the quantity of capital per worker and
TFP from the BEA Integrated Industry Accounts.




                                               B-23
                                                                                                                                               -20   -10   0   10   20   30


                                                                                                                                    Mining
                                                                                                                     Transportation by rail
                                                                                                                            Legal services
                                                                                                                            Primary metals
                                                                                                                  Transportation pipelines
                                                                                                                            Motor vehicles
                                                                                                                     Transportation by air
                                                                                                            Nonmetallic mineral products
                                                                                                                       Computer services
                                                                                                              Computers and electronics




       grated Industry Accounts.
                                                                                                                        Chemical products
                                                                                                            Petroleum and coal products
                                                                                                                   Printing and publishing
                                                                                                                              Construction
                                                                                                                          Accommodation
                                                                                                                  Transportation by water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Appendix B-5




                                                                                                                                Wholesale
                                                                                                                                     Retail
                                                                                                                   Transportation by truck
                                                                                                                                                                              Labor share decline (in p.p.), 1987-2016




                                                                                                                     Educational services
                                                                                                                                 Furniture
                                                                                                                                Machinery
                                                                                                          Other transportation equipment
                                                                                                                          Communications




B-24
                                                                                                                      Food manufacturing
                                                                                                             Plastic and rubber products
                                                                                                                   Ambulatory health care
                                                                                                                  Transportation of transit
                                                                                                                                   Textiles
                                                                                                                   Finance and insurance
                                                                                                                           Paper products
                                                                                                                           Wood products
                                                                                                            Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                               Restaurants
                                                                                                                                Appliances
                                                                                                                                 Hospitals
                                                                                                      Transportation services and support
                                                                                                                            Metal products
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Additional Figures and Tables




                                                                                                                    Oil and gas extraction
                                                                                                                               Real estate
                                                                                                                     Professional services
                                                                                                                         Social assistance
                                                                                                               Warehousing and storage
                                                                                                                   Administrative services
                                                                                                                                   Utilities
                                                                                                                         Personal services
                                                                                                                                Recreation
                                                                                                                   Agriculture and farming
                                                                                                                      Apparel and Leather
       Figure B-1: Labor share decline for 1987­2016 across industries from the 1987­2016 BEA Inte-
        A. Industry labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016                                     B. Industry labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016                                C. Industry labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016

 60




                                                                                       60




                                                                                                                                                                        60
 50




                                                                                       50




                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                             Chemicals
 40




                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                               Metals                      Motor vehicles
 30




                                                                                       30




                                                                                                                                                                        30
          Comp. services                                                                                                                                       Metals                                                       Metals
                                                                                                                                          Motor vehicles                                                                                     Motor vehicles
 20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                        20
          Retail                                                                                                       Chemicals      Comp. services                                                                  Comp. services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chemicals
                                                             Plastics
                                                                                                                                   Retail
                                                                                                                                   Plastics                                                          Retail             Plastics
 10




                                                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                        10
          Restaurants
                                                                                                                  Restaurants                                                            Restaurants
          Prof. services                                                                                              Prof. services                                                       Prof. services
 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
 -10




                                                                                       -10




                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                                                                    Agriculture                                                                  Agriculture
                                                                                                        Apparel                                                                     Apparel
              AgricultureApparel
 -20




                                                                                       -20




                                                                                                                                                                        -20
        0                  1              2                  3                 4              -5                       0                        5                 10                 0                     20                      40               60
                   Log of one plus adjusted penetration                                                           Change in share of software                                                         Component driven
                                 of robots                                                                        and specialized equipment                                                            by automation



Figure B-2: Relationship between automation technologies and labor share declines across in-
dustries. Note that the vertical axis provides the decline in industry's labor share from 1987 to
2016 (given by minus their change).


        A. Percent change routine wages, 1980-2016                                            B. Percent change routine hours, 1980-2016                                       C. Percent change routine employment, 1980-2016
 300




                                                                                       300




                                                                                                                                                                        300
 200




                                                                                       200




                                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                   Restaurants                                                                        Restaurants
 100




                                                                                       100




                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                               Prof. services         Comp. services
                                                                 Comp. services                                                                                                                                  Prof. services         Comp. services
                                            Restaurants                                                                                                                                                                       Retail
                                       Prof. services                                                                                        Retail
                                                                                                            Agriculture                                                                      Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Motor vehicles
                                                                                                                                         Plastics Chemicals
 0




                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                        0



                                                                                                                                                      Motor vehicles                                                       Plastics Chemicals
                                                    Retail
                     Agriculture
                                                             Chemicals
                                                Plastics                                                                                                      Metals                                                                            Metals
 -100




                                                                                       -100




                                                                                                                                                                        -100




                                                                      Motor vehicles


                                                                          Metals                       Apparel                                                                           Apparel
 -200




                                                                                       -200




                                                                                                                                                                        -200




                Apparel
        -20          -10           0           10                20            30             -20           -10            0            10            20          30           -20           -10            0             10            20          30
                   Labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016                                                  Labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016                                            Labor share decline (p.p.), 1987-2016



Figure B-3: Relationship between labor share declines and reductions in the demand for routine
jobs across industries. See text for variable definitions.




                                                                                                                           B-25
                                                                                                                                          -.4   -.2   0   .2   .4   .6   .8                                                                                                                  -.4   -.2   0   .2   .4   .6   .8


                                                                                                                               Mining                                                                                                                                             Mining
                                                                                                             Transportation pipelines                                                                                                                                 Chemical products
                                                                                                       Petroleum and coal products                                                                                                                                      Communications
                                                                                                                Transportation by rail                                                                                                                          Transportation pipelines
                                                                                                                       Primary metals                                                                                                                     Petroleum and coal products
                                                                                                                   Chemical products                                                                                                                               Transportation by rail
                                                                                                                       Motor vehicles                                                                                                                              Transportation by air
                                                                                                                Transportation by air                                                                                                                                     Motor vehicles
                                                                                                                       Legal services                                                                                                                                     Primary metals
                                                                                                       Nonmetallic mineral products                                                                                                                                       Legal services
                                                                                                             Transportation by water                                                                                                                        Computers and electronics
                                                                                                                 Food manufacturing                                                                                                                              Printing and publishing
                                                                                                         Computers and electronics                                                                                                                                   Computer services
                                                                                                                     Accommodation                                                                                                                        Nonmetallic mineral products
                                                                                                                           Wholesale                                                                                                                                          Wholesale
                                                                                                                  Computer services                                                                                                                                     Accommodation
                                                                                                              Printing and publishing                                                                                                                            Finance and insurance
                                                                                                                     Communications                                                                                                                     Other transportation equipment
                                                                                                             Transportation of transit                                                                                                                              Food manufacturing
                                                                                                                         Construction                                                                                                                                              Retail




       (bottom panel) described in Appendix B-3.
                                                                                                     Other transportation equipment                                                                                                                        Plastic and rubber products
                                                                                                                                Retail                                                                                                                                        Machinery
                                                                                                        Plastic and rubber products                                                                                                                                      Paper products
                                                                                                              Transportation by truck                                                                                                                                       Construction




B-26
                                                                                                                           Machinery                                                                                                                                           Furniture
                                                                                                                Educational services                                                                                                                             Transportation by truck
                                                                                                                            Furniture                                                                                                                           Transportation by water
                                                                                                                      Paper products                                                                                                                                             Textiles
                                                                                                               Oil and gas extraction                                                                                                                              Educational services
                                                                                                              Ambulatory health care                                                                                                                                          Appliances
                                                                                                                              Textiles                                                                                                                          Transportation of transit
                                                                                                                       Wood products                                                                                                                      Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                              Task displacement (%), 1987-2016, elasticity of substitution of 1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Task displacement (%), 1987-2016, elasticity of substitution of 0.8




                                                                                                 Transportation services and support                                                                                                                                     Wood products
                                                                                                                          Restaurants                                                                                                                            Ambulatory health care
                                                                                                       Miscellaneous manufacturing                                                                                                                                        Metal products
                                                                                                              Finance and insurance                                                                                                                                Professional services
                                                                                                                            Hospitals                                                                                                                                          Hospitals
                                                                                                                           Appliances                                                                                                                                        Restaurants
                                                                                                                       Metal products                                                                                                                             Oil and gas extraction
                                                                                                                          Real estate                                                                                                               Transportation services and support
                                                                                                          Warehousing and storage                                                                                                                                Administrative services
                                                                                                                Professional services                                                                                                                                            Utilities
                                                                                                                    Social assistance                                                                                                                                        Real estate
                                                                                                              Administrative services                                                                                                                                  Social assistance
                                                                                                                    Personal services                                                                                                                        Warehousing and storage
                                                                                                                              Utilities                                                                                                                                Personal services
                                                                                                                           Recreation                                                                                                                               Apparel and Leather
                                                                                                              Agriculture and farming                                                                                                                                         Recreation
                                                                                                                 Apparel and Leather                                                                                                                             Agriculture and farming




       Figure B-4: Bounds on measures of task displacement for i = 0.8 (top panel) and i = 1.2
                   Table B-1: Relationship between task displacement and the decline of routine jobs across industries.

                                                            OLS Estimates                                                           IV Estimates
                                                                                    Change in log                                                          Change in log
                                    Change in log           Change in log                                  Change in log           Change in log
                                                                                    employment in                                                          employment in
        Dependent variable:        wages in routine        hours in routine                               wages in routine        hours in routine
                                                                                     routine jobs                                                           routine jobs
                                    jobs 1980­2016          jobs 1980­2016                                 jobs 1980­2016          jobs 1980­2016
                                                                                      1980­2016                                                              1980­2016
                                            (1)                    (2)                   (3)                       (4)                    (5)                   (6)


                                                                               Panel A: Labor share declines, 1987­2016
                                           -2.981                 -2.715               -2.735             -4.427                         -3.275                  -3.135
        Labor share decline
                                          (1.187)                (1.152)              (1.150)            (1.471)                        (1.292)                 (1.288)
        R-squared                           0.12                   0.12                 0.12                0.09                          0.11                     0.12
        First-stage F                                                                                      32.92                          32.92                   32.92
        Observations                        48                      48                   48                  48                            48                       48

                                                                                 Panel B: Task displacement, 1987­2016
                                           -2.113                 -1.910                -1.931             -2.403                        -1.778                  -1.702
        Task displacement
B-27




                                          (0.537)                (0.518)               (0.517)            (0.744)                       (0.673)                 (0.674)
        R-squared                           0.21                   0.20                  0.20                0.20                         0.20                     0.20
        First-stage F                                                                                       37.47                         37.47                   37.47
        Observations                        48                      48                    48                  48                           48                       48

                                                            Panel C: Task displacement with elasticity of substitution 0.8, 1987­2016
                                           -2.250                -2.092             -2.129             -2.559               -1.893                               -1.812
        Task displacement
                                          (0.470)               (0.469)            (0.464)            (0.777)              (0.698)                              (0.693)
        R-squared                           0.26                  0.26               0.27                0.25                0.25                                  0.26
        First-stage F                                                                                   27.63                27.63                                27.63
        Observations                        48                     48                 48                  48                  48                                    48

                                                            Panel D: Task displacement with elasticity of substitution 1.2, 1987­2016
                                           -1.641                -1.423             -1.426             -2.266               -1.676                               -1.604
        Task displacement
                                          (0.518)               (0.498)            (0.501)            (0.732)              (0.660)                              (0.664)
        R-squared                           0.14                  0.12               0.12                0.12                0.11                                  0.12
        First-stage F                                                                                   42.39                42.39                                42.39
        Observations                        48                     48                 48                  48                  48                                    48

       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the demand for routine jobs across industries (Transportation pipelines are
       excluded due to lack of ACS data). The dependent variable is indicated at the column headers. Columns 1­3 provide OLS estimates, and columns 4­6 instrument task
       displacement (or the decline in the labor share) using our index of automation. In Panel A, the explanatory variable is the decline in the labor share from 1987­2016. In
       Panel B, the explanatory variable is the task displacement measure from equation (12) computed at the industry level (or equivalently, the percent decline in the labor
       share). In Panel C, the explanatory variable is the task displacement measure from footnote 15 for  = 0.8 at the industry level. In Panel D, the explanatory variable is
       the task displacement measure from footnote 15 for  = 1.2 at the industry level. All regressions are weighted by the share of industry value added in 1987. Standard
       errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
                             Table B-2: Task displacement and hours per worker and unemployment rates, 1980-2016.

                                                                             Dependent variable: Labor market outcomes 1980­2016
                                                                           OLS Estimates                              IV Estimates
                                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)


                                                                                                 Panel A. Unemployment rate
                                                              0.113               0.171              0.024         0.120                       0.183                0.018
        Task displacement
                                                             (0.019)             (0.044)            (0.097)       (0.021)                     (0.049)              (0.107)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                                   0.18                 0.27                 0.04               0.19                 0.29                 0.03
        - educational dummies                                                      0.00                -0.01                                   -0.00                -0.02
        R-squared                                             0.18                 0.28                 0.29               0.18                 0.28                 0.29
        First-stage F                                                                                                    3246.45              785.80               156.33
        Observations                                           500                 500                 500                 500                  500                  500
B-28




                                                                                               Panel B. log hours per worker
                                                              -0.862              -0.581            0.790           -0.896                     -0.611               0.693
        Task displacement
                                                             (0.180)             (0.292)           (0.619)         (0.186)                    (0.299)              (0.665)

        Share variance explained by:
        - task displacement                                   0.31                 0.21                -0.28               0.32                0.22                 -0.25
        - educational dummies                                                      0.13                -0.01                                   0.11                 -0.03
        R-squared                                             0.31                 0.47                 0.50               0.31                0.47                  0.50
        First-stage F                                                                                                    3246.45              785.80               156.33
        Observations                                           500                 500                 500                 500                 500                   500


        Covariates:
        Industry shifters, manufacturing share,
                                                                                                                                                                     
        education and gender dummies
        Exposure to labor share declines and
                                                                                                                                                                     
        relative specialization in routine jobs
       Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and labor market outcomes for 500 demographic groups, defined by gender, education,
       age, race, and native/immigrant status. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the change in the unemployment rate from 1980 to 2016. In Panel B, the dependent variable
       is the percent change in hours per worker from 1980 to 2016. Columns 1­3 report OLS estimates. Columns 4­6 report IV estimates using our index of automation to
       instrument task displacement. Besides the covariates reported in the table, columns 2­3 and 5­6 control for industry shifters, baseline wage shares in manufacturing,
       and education and gender dummies. Columns 3 and 6 control for relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines. When
       using our index of automation as an instrument, we report first-stage F statistics that are adjusted for the degrees of freedom lost in the construction of the index. All
       regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.
    Table B-3: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages, 1980-2007.

                                                          Dependent variables:
                                               Change in wages and wage declines, 1980­2007
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                     Panel A. Change in real wages 1980­2007
                                            -1.777             -1.371         -0.920          -0.333
 Task displacement
                                           (0.110)            (0.136)        (0.179)         (0.558)
                                                                0.322          0.505           0.492
 Industry shifters
                                                              (0.088)        (0.143)         (0.208)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                             -0.784
 decline                                                                                     (0.832)
 Relative specialization in routine                                                           -0.085
 jobs                                                                                        (0.075)

 Share variance explained by task
                                             0.69               0.53              0.36               0.13
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.69               0.74              0.82               0.83
 Observations                                500                500               500                500

                                                     Panel B. Real wage declines, 1980­2007
                                            -0.467            -0.486         -0.488                  -0.896
 Task displacement
                                           (0.057)           (0.070)        (0.098)                 (0.182)
                                                              -0.016          0.137                   0.121
 Industry shifters
                                                             (0.019)        (0.078)                 (0.088)
 Exposure to industry labor share                                                                     0.618
 decline                                                                                            (0.233)
 Relative specialization in routine                                                                   0.056
 jobs                                                                                               (0.015)

 Share variance explained by task
                                             0.65               0.68              0.68               1.26
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.65               0.66              0.77               0.79
 Observations                                500                500               500                500

 Other covariates:
 Manufacturing share, and
                                                                                                      
 education and gender dummies

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups, defined by gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. In Panel A,
the dependent variable is the change in real wages for each group from 1980 to 2007. In Panel B, the dependent
variable is given by the negative component of real wage changes from 1980 to 2007, defined by the minimum of the
observed wage change and zero. Besides the covariates reported in the table, columns 3 and 4 control for baseline
wage shares in manufacturing and education and gender dummies. All regressions are weighted by the share of
hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.




                                                       B-29
Table B-4: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--alternative price
adjustments for task displacement.

                                              Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                 Panel A. Task displacement for  = 1 and i = 0.8
                                            -1.349            -1.016          -1.188            -2.050
 Task displacement
                                           (0.118)           (0.152)         (0.173)           (0.381)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.57                0.43               0.51                0.87
 displacement
 R-squared                                  0.57               0.65            0.84              0.84
 Observations                               500                500             500               500
                                                 Panel B. Task displacement for  = 1 and i = 1.2
                                            -1.729            -1.527          -1.263            -0.734
 Task displacement
                                           (0.086)           (0.152)         (0.175)           (0.541)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.71                0.63               0.52                0.30
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.71              0.73             0.83              0.83
 Observations                                500               500              500               500
                                                 Panel C. Task displacement for  = 0.5 and i = 0.8
                                            -1.220            -0.924           -1.074            -1.858
 Task displacement
                                           (0.104)           (0.136)          (0.156)           (0.347)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.58                0.44               0.51                0.88
 displacement
 R-squared                                  0.58               0.65            0.84              0.84
 Observations                               500                500             500               500
                                                 Panel D. Task displacement for  = 0.5 and i = 1
                                            -1.436            -1.192          -1.172            -1.468
 Task displacement
                                           (0.083)           (0.141)         (0.168)           (0.402)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.67                0.56               0.55                0.69
 displacement
 R-squared                                   0.67              0.70             0.84              0.84
 Observations                                500               500              500               500
                                                 Panel E. Task displacement for  = 0.5 and i = 1.2
                                            -1.545            -1.362           -1.125            -0.631
 Task displacement
                                           (0.077)           (0.135)          (0.156)           (0.487)

 Share variance explained by task
                                            0.71                0.63               0.52                0.29
 displacement
 R-squared                                  0.71                0.73               0.83                0.83
 Observations                               500                 500                500                 500

 Covariates:
 Industry shifters                                                                                      
 Manufacturing share, gender and
                                                                                                        
 education dummies
 Exposure to labor share declines
 and relative specialization in                                                                         
 routine jobs

Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups using different price adjustments in our measurement of task displacement. The
general formula for task displacement is given in equation (16). Our baseline measure sets  = i = 1. The panels
in this table use different combinations of  and  . Besides the covariates reported in the table, column 2 controls
for industry shifters, column 3 controls for each group's baseline wage share in manufacturing and dummies for
education level and gender, and column 4 control for relative specialization in routine jobs and groups' exposure
to industry labor share declines. All regressions are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.

                                                      B-30
Table B-5: Task displacement and changes in real hourly wages--alternative la-
bor share measures.

                                                  Dependent variable: Change in real wages 1980­2016
                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)


                                                             Panel A. Excluding commodities
                                                -1.675            -1.323          -1.394                  -2.144
 Task displacement
                                               (0.120)           (0.174)         (0.201)                 (0.456)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                 0.63               0.50               0.52               0.80
 displacement
 R-squared                                       0.63               0.67               0.83               0.84
 Observations                                    500                500                500                500

                                                         Panel B. Winsorized labor share changes
                                                -1.592             -1.312          -1.345                 -1.891
 Task displacement
                                               (0.098)            (0.165)         (0.195)                (0.444)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                 0.66               0.54               0.56               0.78
 displacement
 R-squared                                       0.66               0.69               0.84               0.84
 Observations                                    500                500                500                500

                                                 Panel C. Excluding industries with rising labor shares
                                                -1.491           -1.250           -1.322            -1.959
 Task displacement
                                               (0.090)          (0.163)          (0.196)           (0.419)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                 0.66               0.55               0.58               0.86
 displacement
 R-squared                                       0.66               0.68               0.84               0.84
 Observations                                    500                500                500                500

                                                           Panel D. Gross labor share changes
                                                -1.393            -1.113           -0.909                 -1.190
 Task displacement
                                               (0.082)           (0.105)          (0.126)                (0.310)

 Share variance explained by task
                                                 0.66               0.53               0.43               0.57
 displacement
 R-squared                                       0.66               0.74               0.83               0.83
 Observations                                    500                500                500                500

 Covariates:
 Industry shifters                                                                                         
 Manufacturing share, gender and
                                                                                                           
 education dummies
 Exposure to labor share declines and
                                                                                                           
 relative specialization in routine jobs


Notes: This table presents estimates of the relationship between task displacement and the change in real wages
across 500 demographic groups using different measures of the labor share decline. These groups are defined by
gender, education, age, race, and native/immigrant status. The dependent variable is the change in real wages from
1980 to 2016. In Panel A, we exclude sectors producing commodities. In Panel B, we winsorized the observed labor
share changes at the 5th and 95th percentiles when constructing the task displacement measure. In Panel C, we
exclude industries with rising labor shares. In Panel D, we use the percent decline in the labor share of gross output
to construct our measure, which also accounts for substitution of labor for intermediates. Besides the covariates
reported in the table, column 2 controls for industry shifters, column 3 controls for each group's baseline wage share
in manufacturing and dummies for education level and gender, and column 4 control for relative specialization in
routine jobs and groups' exposure to industry labor share declines. All regressions are weighted by the share of
hours worked by each group in 1980. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are reported in parentheses.




                                                         B-31
                   Table B-6: Alternative estimates of the propagation matrix.

                                                       Dependent variable: Change in wages 1980­2016
                                                  GMM estimates                     GMM using automation index IVs
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)                   (4)                 (5)       (6)


                                                                   Panel A. Decay parameter  = 1.
                                         0.875          0.872            0.806          0.867                     0.860     0.786
Own effect,  
                                        (0.049)        (0.052)          (0.054)        (0.050)                   (0.052)   (0.055)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.646          0.631            0.496          0.661                     0.647     0.526
occupational similarity                 (0.175)        (0.181)          (0.184)        (0.175)                   (0.182)   (0.184)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.241          0.245            0.553          0.237                     0.238     0.547
industry similarity                     (0.192)        (0.192)          (0.210)        (0.192)                   (0.193)   (0.210)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.194          0.194            0.186          0.194                     0.194     0.182
education­age groups                    (0.023)        (0.023)          (0.023)        (0.024)                   (0.023)   (0.023)

Observations                             500            500              500                   500                500       500

                                                                   Panel B. Decay parameter  = 5.
                                         0.910          0.900            0.849          0.904                     0.888     0.828
Own effect,  
                                        (0.046)        (0.049)          (0.052)        (0.047)                   (0.050)   (0.053)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.250          0.244            0.233          0.250                     0.244     0.238
occupational similarity                 (0.048)        (0.050)          (0.050)        (0.049)                   (0.050)   (0.050)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.184          0.182            0.236          0.191                     0.187     0.242
industry similarity                     (0.060)        (0.059)          (0.062)        (0.060)                   (0.059)   (0.062)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.160          0.160            0.152          0.159                     0.160     0.149
education­age groups                    (0.025)        (0.025)          (0.025)        (0.025)                   (0.025)   (0.025)

Observations                             500            500              500                   500                500       500

                                                        Panel C. Decay parameter  = 2 and setting i = 0.8.
                                         0.682          0.668          0.615          0.706          0.692                  0.639
Own effect,  
                                        (0.040)        (0.042)        (0.045)        (0.042)        (0.043)                (0.046)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.509          0.477          0.426          0.537          0.519                  0.475
occupational similarity                 (0.079)        (0.082)        (0.084)        (0.079)        (0.083)                (0.084)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.080          0.083          0.216          0.076          0.077                  0.200
industry similarity                     (0.096)        (0.096)        (0.104)        (0.096)        (0.096)                (0.104)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.198          0.197          0.189          0.182          0.182                  0.171
education­age groups                    (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)                (0.022)

Observations                             500            500              500                   500                500       500

                                                        Panel D. Decay parameter  = 2 and setting i = 1.2.
                                         1.045          1.038          0.949          1.121          1.125                  1.022
Own effect,  
                                        (0.058)        (0.061)        (0.064)        (0.061)        (0.064)                (0.067)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.195          0.184          0.130          0.081          0.084                  0.057
occupational similarity                 (0.104)        (0.107)        (0.106)        (0.106)        (0.108)                (0.107)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.391          0.391          0.592          0.460          0.461                  0.627
industry similarity                     (0.123)        (0.123)        (0.130)        (0.124)        (0.124)                (0.130)
Contribution of ripple effects via       0.152          0.153          0.141          0.169          0.169                  0.156
education­age groups                    (0.028)        (0.028)        (0.027)        (0.028)        (0.028)                (0.027)

Observations                             500            500              500                   500                500       500

Covariates:
Industry shifters                                                                                                            
Manufacturing share                                                                                                          

Notes: This table presents estimates of the propagation matrix using the parametrization in equation (17). Ripple
effects are parametrized as functions of the similarity of groups in terms of their 1980 occupational distribution,
industry distribution, and education×age groups. Panels A and B vary the tuning parameter used to compute the
ripple effects. Panel C uses our measure of task displacement from equation (16) setting  = 0.5 and i = 0.8.
Panel D uses our measure of task displacement from equation (16) setting  = 0.5 and i = 1.2. The table reports
our estimates of the common diagonal term  and a summary measure of the strength of ripple effects operating
through each of these dimensions, defined by

                                                                   n  1                                   L
                               Contribution of ripple effectsn =                          f (dn
                                                                                              gg  )  sg  sg  ,
                                                                                                      L
                                                                     sL        g   g  g                     

which equals the average sum of the off diagonal terms of the propagation matrix explained by each dimension of
similarity. Estimates and standard errors are obtained via GMM. Columns 1­3 provide GMM estimates using our
measure of task displacement to construct the instruments used in the moment conditions. Columns 4­6 provide
GMM estimates using our index of automation to construct the instruments used in the moment conditions. All
models are weighted by the share of hours worked by each group in 1980.
                                                                 B-32
