                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONS

                                          Eric Alston
                                         Lee J. Alston
                                       Bernardo Mueller

                                      Working Paper 28927
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28927


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




For comments, we thank the participants at: the Ostrom Workshop; the CU Boulder Cross
Campus Entrepreneurship Research Group; the Applied Microeconomics Group at Carnegie
Mellon University; A Conference on Long-Term Development in Latin America and Beyond
organized by Uniandes-LSE-Stanford; Harvard Reading Group on Political Economy; the 2019
SIOE Conference, Vancouver School of Economics (UBC), Texas Tech University, Krister
Andersson, Robert Gibbons, Kevin Greir, Michael Haupert, Richard Langlois, Gary Libecap,
Victor Menaldo, Benjamin Powell, Julio Ramos, Jared Rubin, Edson Severnini, Ken Shadlen,
Ken Shepsle, Brian Silver, Gustavo Torrens, Francisco Trebbi, Chuck Trzcinka and an
anonymous referee. We thank Julio Ramos and Jonathan Espinosa for research assistance and
Patty Lezotte for editing. No funding for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eric C. Alston, Lee J. Alston, and Bernardo Mueller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Leadership and Organizations
Eric Alston, Lee J. Alston, and Bernardo Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 28927
June 2021
JEL No. L22,M12,M5

                                         ABSTRACT

To understand leadership, it is necessary to understand the purpose of an organization.
Organizations are hierarchies with leaders at the top. Why do we have leaders instead of an
algorithm making decisions? The theory of the firm recognizes benefits to centralizing authority
but these organizational benefits from hierarchy have not been clearly separated from the specific
contributions of leaders. Leadership is the ability to successfully manage transaction costs of an
organization. Prominent amongst organizational transaction costs are agency and coordination
costs. The balance between these two types of costs depends on the purpose of the organization.
We hypothesize that changing leaders is likely to have a larger effect within organizations with
relatively lower scope or scale of purpose because of the way in which decision rights tend to be
relatively concentrated in such organizations. We test our hypotheses with data on NFL coaches,
and deans of business and law schools.

Eric C. Alston                                  Bernardo Mueller
University of Colorado at Boulder               Department of Economics
Division of Finance                             University of Brasilia
995 Regent Dr., UCB 457,                        Brazil
Boulder, CO 80309                               bmueller@unb.br
eric.alston@colorado.edu

Lee J. Alston
Department of Economics
Wylie Hall
Indiana University
100 South Woodlawn Avenue
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
ljalston@iu.edu




A replication files is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28927
                                                                                                       1


                              LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONS

I. INTRODUCTION
       All organizations are hierarchies from sports teams, to churches, to universities, to firms

to government. 1 Hierarchies exist to reduce the costs associated with collective decision making.

What is the role of the leaders who sit atop the hierarchy? How do the leadership roles vary

across leaders, e.g., coaches, pastors, deans, and presidents? The concept of leadership presents a

puzzle for economists similar to that addressed by Coase (1937): in a world of zero transaction

costs, there would be no need for leadership within any organization. In this world, the individual

exercising centralized decision rights would make the right decisions because they would know

every possible decision ex ante and weighing them against all possible decisions would be

costless. This is a world where an algorithm could make all decisions.

           However, in a world of downstream uncertainty and positive transaction costs, a

hierarchy significantly reduces transaction costs to collective decision-making, though it raises

other transaction costs of coordination and agency. Because of these costs, hierarchical decision-

making alone does not ensure optimal or even second-best decision-making. If it did, there

would be no need for the astronomical salaries of many CEOs, coaches, and other leaders. While

theories of the firm have identified the value of centralization of decision rights within a

hierarchy, characterizations of leadership have conflated centralization of authority with exercise

of that authority. Similarly, for political organizations, if all citizens needed were to define the

"right" hierarchy, there would not be so much competition for heads of state in democracies,

given that citizens are the principals. Largely because of downstream-unanticipated

contingencies, and the agency and coordination costs that arise from pursuit of collective action



1
    Of course, there are some exceptions to the rule but they are few.
                                                                                                                 2


in response to these contingencies: leadership matters. We consider a leader to be anyone who

sits atop a subunit of or the entirety of an organizational hierarchy.

        Because of contractual incompleteness, leadership entails successfully overcoming

agency and coordination costs to secure (capture) de facto property rights to decisions. Agency

and coordination costs are not the only transaction costs confronting leaders but these two long-

identified types of costs to collective action lead to testable hypotheses with respect to their

relative importance within a given organization. Agency costs arise in cases where a principal

cannot perfectly observe the agent, and, if the agent takes an action outside the scope of their

decision rights and is observed this would subject them to discipline or termination. In contrast,

coordination costs arise where a member of an organization takes an action within the scope of

their decision rights for which they could not be disciplined or terminated. As a result, other

members of the organization must use persuasion, agenda control or other mechanisms to change

the decision of the actor. We call these actions coordination costs.

        Put differently, a given leader can motivate (agency costs) and/or persuade (coordination

costs) the members of their organizations to undertake costly actions to achieve the

organization's purpose. The balance of these agency and coordination costs vary in a predictable

way depending on the organization and its purpose. For this reason, to understand leadership, we

first need to understand how hierarchies vary across organizations. We define leadership as: 1)

the ability to coordinate a coalition in the face of downstream-unanticipated events; and 2) the

ability to motivate beyond incentive compatible contracting. Moving in the preferred direction of

those exercising leadership will be consistent with the purpose of the organization.2




2
 For now, we abstract from the agency problems between owners and leaders, e.g. citizens and their elected leaders
or shareholders and CEOs.
                                                                                                                     3


         Individuals form organizations for different reasons. This results in organizations whose

purposes vary dramatically from one another. The purposes of government organizations differ

from churches, which differ from firms, which differ from universities, which differ from sports

teams and so forth. Consider business schools and sports teams; both seek to improve or

maintain their ranking but the nature of what it takes to accomplish this varies significantly.

While organizational hierarchy defines the decision rights allocated to each node in the

hierarchy, this hierarchy itself varies considerably because of the varying purpose of the

organization. Organizations whose purpose is of greater scope or scale have a greater

deconcentration of decision rights in both a de jure and de facto sense. 3 This changes the nature

of what is required to be a successful leader: as an organization's scale or scope of purpose

increases, the challenge a leader faces increasingly involves economization over coordination

costs as opposed to just managing agency costs.

         We proceed with a discussion of organizational hierarchies because it is central to

understanding how leadership skills need to vary depending on the balance of agency and

coordination costs present within a given organization. We then move to our theory of leadership

within and across organizations. Within a given type of organization, to the extent that leadership

matters, a change in leadership should have an observable effect on outcomes, apart from the

other factors influencing observed outcomes for a given organization. As between organizational

types, the narrower the scope of an organization's purpose and the smaller the scale of the

organization's purpose the more concentrated decision rights will be and the more likely a leader

can sway outcomes. In the context of leadership change as between different types of


3
 We take the purpose of an organization as fixed. For this reason, we use deconcentration instead of delegation
because the nature of what we are describing is typically not within a leader's ability to change. An important aspect
of leadership, and firm adaptation more generally, is the extent of delegation of decision rights, which is within the
choice set of a given leader.
                                                                                                                     4


organizations, an organization with more concentrated decision rights is more likely to

experience greater magnitude and variance of outcomes in the case of changes of leadership. To

test our hypotheses, we use data from two different sets of organizations: NFL teams and deans

of top ranked business and law schools in the U.S. Our selection of sports teams and deans of

professional schools rests on a measurable output measure, wins/losses and rankings. Sports

teams also have a narrower purpose than professional schools and our theory suggests changes in

leaders should matter more for sports teams. Our results indicate that changing NFL coaches

matters and matters more than changing Deans of Business and Law schools. This is consistent

with professional schools having a wider scope of purpose than NFL teams.

         II.      ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF ORGANIZATIONAL HIERARCHIES

         We disentangle two separate (but closely related in practice) questions: how much of

what we call leadership are the benefits of centralization of authority, and how much are the

benefits of choices or coordinated decisions made through the individual exercise of authority?

Leadership's ubiquity indicates that it serves an important economic function, just as Coase

(1937) argued the existence of the firm suggested a fundamental economizing function compared

to the market. Because we live in a non-ergodic world (North 2005), perfectly defining all

downstream decision-making is impossible. As Williamson (1974; 2010) asserts; all contracts

are incomplete. Because no hierarchy can ever fully contractually specify the decision and action

space of an organization's members, there remains an undefined space of decision/action within

which leadership operates. This means that the benefits of hierarchy within organizations are

distinct from the question of what makes for effective leadership holding hierarchy constant. We

have gained much from understanding the organization of the firm using property rights 4 and


4
 The literature closest to discussing the firm from a property-rights perspective started with Alchian and Demsetz
(1972), although it followed from earlier work by Penrose (2009 (1959)) and Chandler (1990 (1962)) in that they
                                                                                                                        5


transaction costs. 5 The central insight from firm theory is that there are transaction costs of using

the market and transaction costs of using the firm, which jointly determine the firm market

boundary. In this same tradition, our analysis of organizations, both public and private, provides

the insight that the relative internal transaction costs to an organization determine the boundary

between hierarchy and leadership. It is the incompleteness in contracts internal to the firm where

leadership plays a role. 6 Internal transaction costs occur in the space between the organization's

hierarchy (and associated authority) that can be defined in contracts and policy, and the action

space that can never be fully specified ex-ante. 7 By internal transaction costs we mean the

agency costs of sharing rents between a principal and agent, and the coordination costs necessary

to persuade others to your point of view. 8

         The wealth of scholarship in institutions and organizations has thus provided us with a

valuable toolkit by which to understand the space in which leadership operates (Gibbons and

Roberts 2013; Alston et. al., 2018). We cannot survey the full scope of institutional and




analyzed the allocation of decision rights as a function of a given firm's size without as directly likening these rights
to traditional property institutions. Barzel (1989) developed the property-rights view of contracting, which is an
umbrella over transaction costs. Cheung (1983), Alston and Gillespie (1989), and Allen (1991, 2000) further
clarified how not all margins of contracts can be perfectly specified and enforced, which means some margins are
open access over which people compete. We use this insight later to analyze property rights to decisions.
5
  Coase (1937) spawned a cottage industry in the determinants of the firm/market boundary. Oliver Williamson
(1983, 1985, 1996), among many others, explored not only the firm/market boundary but also the numerous
varieties of contracting within and between firms. A plethora of other scholars developed the literature on
transaction costs and their economizing role to explore the variety of contractual and organizational forms, e.g., spot
contracting, long-term contracting, franchises, multinational firms, tenancy inter alia. Following in the footsteps of
Coase (1937, 1960) and Williamson are Alston (1981), Alston and Higgs (1982), Joskow (1985), Masten (1988),
Alston and Gillespie (1989), Butler (1989), Libecap (1989), LaFontaine (1992), Ménard and Shirley (2005),
Gibbons and Roberts (2013), Ménard (2013), among many others.
6
  The literature on incomplete contracting is mostly about ownership structure and the firm/market boundary and is
relatively silent on leadership. For the formal literature on incomplete contracting and ownership see Grossman and
Hart (1983, 1986); Hart and Moore (1988, 1990, 1999, 2005, 2007); and Hart (1995, 2009).
7
  Transaction costs in the view of Barzel (1989), Allen (1991, 2000), and others are the costs that you incur to secure
your property rights. Alchian and Demsetz (1972) discuss the importance of residual claimancy and property rights
to decision making and monitoring in particular.
8
  These are by no means the universe of transaction costs internal to the firm but these costs have been well
identified in the extant literature as central to collective action and are by themselves sufficient to reach the testable
predictions we detail subsequently.
                                                                                                                       6


organizational economics literature relevant to our question of interest, and instead highlight the

overarching points from this literature that are central our model. First, the choice to form an

organization begets a hierarchy (meaning some centralization of authority) to facilitate collective

decision-making. 9 Next, the transaction costs unique to a given organization are a function of the

centralization or decentralization of decision rights within the organization, 10 and the specific

level of centralization has been determined to depend on contextual factors both endogenous 11

and exogenous 12 to firm organization. For our purposes here, this well-established finding

directly indicates that a given amount of decentralization of decision rights is outside the choice

set of organizational leadership. 13 The relevant transaction costs of collective action within an

organization include agency costs 14 and coordination costs. 15 An overbroad definition of agency



9
  There is a huge literature on collective-action problems within groups, starting with Buchanan and Tullock (1962)
and Olson (1965). Olson, and Buchanan & Tullock considered collective-action problems in the context of public
organizations, although much of their insights were generalizable to organizations more broadly, whether public or
private. Ostrom (1990) is also seminal here and spawned both theoretical and empirical contributions (see Ostrom
2010 for many references). The literature in Public Administration pays close attention to hierarchies and
management within hierarchies, but it does not systematically consider the role of leadership/management holding
constant hierarchies through the lens of transaction cost economics. For some of the classic sources, see Thompson
(1967), Mintzberg (1983), and O'Toole and Meier (1999).
10
   One important way in which organizations vary is the extent of centralization of authority (Sah and Stiglitz 1985).
Private firms are typically much more centralized than governments, although the latter can vary significantly as to
the extent of centralization of authority, a well-developed distinction we exploit later in our analysis (Tsebelis 2002).
Spontaneous developed organizations tend to be hierarchically flatter (Hayek, 1973).
11
   A sales agent is more likely to be delegated more decision rights in contexts where these agents are more
experienced, when there is less uncertainty surrounding outcomes, and when customer valuations are more variable
(Lo et al 2016). A CEO is more likely to delegate decision rights relative to mergers and acquisitions than other
areas of firm decision making (Graham et al 2015). A firm that delegated greater decision rights during the Great
Recession subsequently had better outcomes than similarly situated firms that did not do so (Aghion et al 2017).
12
   The allocation of decision rights within an organizational hierarchy can be a direct function of the organization's
size (Graham et al 2015), industry (Prendergast 2002; Marin and Verdier 2014; Meagher and Wait 2014; Dobrajska
et al 2015), competition (Bloom et al 2010), and location (Bloom et al 2012).
13
   We term the decentralization of decision rights that is due to factors exogenous to organizational leadership
decisions "deconcentration", and the decentralization that is part of leadership's strategy to be "delegation".
14
   The early literature on the firm led to the very large literature on principal/agent incentive compatible contracting
(Grossman and Hart (1983), Milgrom (1988), Sappington (1991), Dixit (1997), Holmstrom (1999), Laffont and
Martimort (2002), inter alia).
15
   William Riker seminally characterized policy-making as a coordinative art, which required specific techniques to
overcome the costs of collective action in contexts where decisions require the voluntary assent of other powerful
group members (1986). Subsequently, this insight was formalized in a comparative sense to describe political
systems that varied as to the extent to which definition and implementation of policy faced greater or fewer veto
players (Tsebelis 1996).
                                                                                                                        7


costs could include all costs associated with the divergence of organization members' actions

from the preferences of those with authority within the organization. 16 Therefore, a specific

balance of agency and coordination costs is what a leader must confront to achieve the

organization's purpose. 17 Finally, an organization's purpose itself greatly defines the specific

balance of transaction costs that a given leader faces, amongst which coordination and agency

costs are central.

         Certainly, authors before us have spilled plenty of ink on leadership as centralized

authority, 18 but we take a different tack. We wish to understand not only why there is

centralization of leadership within an organization but also why it varies across organizations.

The scope of purpose of an organization, i.e., how many goals it wishes to accomplish or the

complexity of the purpose, will determine in part the centralization of leadership. The scale of an

organization's purpose (the number of individuals it hopes to reach with its output) also

determines the size of the organization (how many people are in the organization) which in turn



16
   A simple illustration suffices to make our argument: consider a partnership between two investors who each
contribute identically to start the partnership. As in all organizations confronting uncertainty as to how to act
optimally in a dynamic and uncertain world, there are likely to be disagreements between the partners about the
optimal choice to make in each situation, including who should contribute costly effort for the ongoing good of the
partnership. From the perspective of each disagreeing partner, the other's less-preferable choice is a form of cost
associated with the choice to act collectively. But to resolve such an argument, the means either partner can employ
to convince the other to act in accordance with their preferred outcome is significantly different than the means a
partner can employ to get an administrative assistant to work harder when the partner is absent from the office.
While agency and coordination costs both derive from the problems associated with individual contributions to a
group good, their resolution is sufficiently distinct that we label them separately, especially due to their implications
for the optimal choices of those exercising authority in a given organizational hierarchy.
17
   Central to our distinction between agency and coordination costs is the threat of discipline or removal from the
organization; an agency cost occurs where an agent whose effort is imperfectly observable hedges between exerting
costly effort and the risk of punishment for exerting too little effort (in such a way that is eventually revealed). In
contrast, a coordination cost occurs in contexts where one organization member cannot discipline or terminate the
other member who they want to exert costly effort (or agree to a specific decision); the former member must instead
convince the latter to exert effort voluntarily (or assent to the decision) because they lack the threat of termination
that is present in agency cost contexts.
18
   There is a voluminous body of biographies on leadership, but they are not generalizable. There is also
considerable work by political scientists (Ahlquist and Levi 2011). Ahlquist and Levi also pose several of the
questions on which we shed light: how do you distinguish the position of authority and the power therein conveyed
from the individual exercising the authority?
                                                                                                                      8


influences spatial and hierarchical separation between the organization's members. Both these

factors influence the level and balance of agency and coordination costs the leader faces in

pursuit of the organization's purpose.

         III.     OUR THEORY OF LEADERSHIP

         Leadership's ubiquitous role in private and public organizations indicates changes in

leadership should have an observable effect on outcomes. We define leadership as better

achieving an organization's purpose through economizing over a balance of specific transaction

costs (agency and coordination) created by a given organizational hierarchy that is itself defined

by the organization's purpose. As the purpose of an organization varies, a leader faces a differing

balance of agency and coordination costs. 19 Leadership is a scarce factor of production that

cannot be competed away, i.e., leaders who effectively exercise their decision rights receive

rents.

         To illustrate the role of leadership in organizational hierarchies, consider the stylized

organization in Figure I. An organization's purpose results in a specific level of deconcentration

of decision rights to different members of an organization. Scholars of transaction-cost

economics analyzed the question of where the boundary lies between the organization and

markets. For example, transaction costs explain why the specific organization with N members

and functions arose. Similarly, principal-agent theory has focused on the impact on

organizational structure of asymmetric information that arises from deconcentration. In the

literature in organizational economics, relational contracting, relying on trust and long-term



19
  The traits of leadership that best solve an agency problem are not necessarily the same traits most needed to solve
a coordination problem. Most biographies rely on individual traits to explain leadership, but this is specific to the
person or situation for which those specific traits are relevant. Moreover, identification of such traits, beyond being
highly context-specific, is infrequently tied to the wealth of organizational scholarship that has emerged in
economics. We are presently engaged in computational text analysis of biographies of leaders across a range of
organizations to unearth if and how traits vary across organizations.
                                                                                                                      9


contracts help to mitigate monitoring (Gibbons and Roberts 2013). In Figure 1, the leader is an

agent of the organization and at the same time a principal of the other members. 20

                                    Figure 1 - Leadership in organizations




The solid portions of the double lines represent the effort levels and decision rights that can be

predicted and contracted. For the solid portion of the lines, it does not matter who oversees

implementation as the actions are predetermined. We represent the unanticipated contingencies

that cannot be codified with the dashed portion of the lines. For effort, there are agency costs.

For decisions, there are coordination costs. The double and single lines are always at least

slightly dashed in practice due to incomplete contracting. Because of this, there is always some

scope for the person in charge to influence how the organization will respond. Leaders motivate,


20
  We do not address the agency costs that an organization creates when it chooses a leader. A minimum assumption
our theory requires is that a given organization's choice of leader is sufficiently successful in picking an individual
who wants to achieve the organization's purpose or alternatively the leader is the sole residual claimant of the
organization.
                                                                                                                     10


monitor (to reduce shirking), persuade, control the agenda, and make effective side-payments to

capture decision rights, inter alia.

         On the decision margin some leaders can better coordinate decision making to move

decisions closer to their preferred option. 21 Leaders may move preferred points of other members

of the organization. These actions are theoretically distinct from the actions that reduce agency

costs. The decision-margin refers to the issue of tasks deconcentrated from the organization to

leaders, and from these down the line. It is not possible to foresee all the decisions that the

person in charge of each node in its structure must make, and many downstream decisions

involve other actors than the leader so coordination is paramount; the organization cannot

contract ex ante for all the contingencies.

         Strategy in the face of contingencies is therefore also an integral aspect of leadership.

Strategy entails a plan on how best to achieve the organization's purpose in ongoing periods and

leadership is the exercise of decision rights needed to actualize this plan in the face of

downstream contingencies. 22 Therefore, effective strategy of necessity includes the ability to

manage the coordination and agency costs that pursuit of the organization's purpose entails, but

this very purpose defines the specific balance of those costs that the leader faces. Effective

strategy very much matters for a leader, which is what we deem effective exercise of the specific

set of decision rights a leader commands and coordinates.




21
   See Appendix 1 for a spatial model in which preferences or ideal points of the members are endogenous to the
actions of a leader. This spatial model displays the tradeoff between coordination and agency costs that a leader
faces in a relationship with a single member of the organization subsidiary to them. However, group decision-
making contexts can be also modelled spatially as long as there is a chair of the group who has some agenda control.
22
   Almost all organizations have a written or assumed "strategic plan" that is executed by those in leadership
positions (as defined by the allocation of decision rights). Yet in most cases there are contingencies that obviate, at
least partially, the execution of the plan. Put differently, no strategy can articulate all downstream outcomes relevant
to its effective execution ­ this is another expression of the notion of incomplete contracting.
                                                                                                    11


       The solid portion of the single line represents the incentive compatible contracting over

effort, such as monitoring or paying the agent more to increase the expected cost of discipline or

termination. The dotted part of the line represents potential rents for the exercise of leadership, if

she can elicit effort beyond contractual terms, e.g., coaches or relational contracting.

       In Figure 1, L is the principal to other members of an organization. The greater are the

dashed part of the lines, the more it allows the members at those nodes to make (at least partially

unobservable) decisions over unforeseen contingencies, which would appear to indicate a

reduction in the extent of leadership exercised by L. But, perhaps counterintuitively, it is this

conjugation of multiple members of the organization enabled to make uncoordinated decisions

that creates a situation where a leader can potentially make the most difference. Successful

leadership entails: coordinating the actions of the members of the organization to achieve the

outcomes that best fulfil the purpose of the organization; and motivating better than one's

competitors to solve non-contractible principal agent problems. In the following subsections, we

spell out the implications illustrated in the diagram in detail. We conclude this section by

identifying the initial testable implications of our theory.

A. Leadership as Minimizing Agency and Coordination Costs to Achieve Organization's Purpose

       When we say leader, we mean an individual who is at the top of a given organization, or

unit of organizational hierarchy. A manager can exercise some measure of leadership just as can

a president or a CEO. In organizations, leadership is nested with ultimate authority (and

responsibility) in the hands of the leader at the top of the hierarchy in the organization: "the buck

stops here," though for practical purposes the buck may well stop at lower levels in the

hierarchy. The CEO or president is the most salient leader, but at every layer of an organization's

hierarchy at which decision rights are (partially) centralized, the lack of perfect definition of
                                                                                                                   12


these rights creates the possibility for the exercise of leadership vis-à-vis nodes at lower levels in

the organization's hierarchy (Aghion and Tirole 1997; Baker et al 1999; Aghion et al 2013). A

leader generally retains residual claimancy over the actions undertaken by the organization in

pursuit of achieving its purpose. 23 In sum, leaders have the most skin in the game and are

responsible for the actions of those beneath them.

         Organizations have widely different purposes. Firms maximize profits. 24 Sports teams

maximize wins, as well as care about profits. Some organizations have more complex purposes,

e.g., universities or governments. Leadership, in terms of de jure hierarchical control, is

endogenous to organizational form. In some organizations where the residual claimancy is clear,

leadership will be vertical with few veto players. In other organizations with less clear residual

claimancy to the objectives, leadership will be flatter with actors competing to determine policy

via decision rights. Due to the organizational benefits of hierarchy, there will always be some

measure of centralization of authority in organizations above a certain size: chairs of committees,

or majority or minority leaders in Congress, for example. Autocracies centralize leadership to a

high degree, though even dictators need to sleep at night. As such, there will still be veto players,

or, more broadly, those with significant ability to influence the success or failure of a given

leader's decisions and their subsequent implementation.

         Within any hierarchy, there are returns or rents to individual skills of leadership, which

explains the high salaries of CEOs and football coaches, and other leaders. The leadership skills

needed vary, depending on the objectives required to best achieve the purpose of the




23
   For now, we are abstracting from the issue of whether the leader's objectives align perfectly with the purpose of
the organization. Dealing with agency costs on the part of the leader herself is a function of institutional design in
terms of leadership selection, compensation, punishment, and retention, which is a largely different question than the
one we analyze.
24
   Firms also have other components in their purpose, especially varying across profit and non-profit.
                                                                                                                     13


organization. The narrower the purpose of an organization, the more the issue becomes one of

solving a principal-agent problem. As the objectives of an organization become more complex,

the more de facto residual claimancy will depend upon the voluntary support of powerful

members of the organization. Whose position will sway others at the table is a function of a

given individual's ability to coordinate the voluntary exercise of decision rights that reside with

others. Think King Arthur and the roundtable versus a head coach of a college basketball team.

Leadership necessarily involves more coordination in roundtable contexts.

         For our purposes, an organization has a larger scope of purpose when it seeks to have a

greater number of outcomes or seeks to influence a given number of individuals in a larger

number of ways. Similarly, we say an organization has a larger scale of purpose when it tries to

influence a larger number of individuals with the organization's activities, e.g., a family firm in a

small town versus a multinational firm like Toyota. 25

         Holding constant the scope of organizational purpose, as an organization's purpose

increases in scale, governance becomes more costly, which in general will lead to less

concentration in decision rights. We posit that increased scale will lead to an additive increase in

agency costs but a multiplicative increase in coordination costs because of having to coordinate

more individuals. 26 Holding constant the scale of an organization's purpose, an increase in the




25
   Having more members is a consequence of choice of purpose. Greater scale does not equal greater members
necessarily; it depends on the capital to labor ratio but, in general, the greater the number of individuals that an
organization seeks to reach with its output, the greater the number of members required in the organization.
26
   Agency costs have observable economies of scale in mechanism design and monitoring. Incentive-compatible
contracting, once devised for a specific employee, is likely to readily map to other similar contracts. The costs of
directly monitoring productivity (e.g., monitoring software or automated logs of computer activity more generally)
are low and falling rapidly given technological change. In contrast, deconcentrated decision rights by their very
definition involve highly specific areas of substantive expertise and output that make them less likely to be tractable
to linear, let alone diminishing, marginal costs per additional member of the organization. Furthermore, contexts of
group decision-making (committees, councils, etc.) are more common as decision rights are deconcentrated and
becoming increasingly coequal among group members, additionally raising the marginal costs of increased
coordination.
                                                                                                                    14


scope of the organization's purpose also makes governance more costly and leads to

deconcentration of decision rights. Increased scope leads to greater coordination costs relative to

agency costs because of the multiplicative nature of coordination costs. In both cases,

governance becomes more difficult because of the increase in agency and coordination costs

associated with the organization's hierarchy, and number of members.

         When fit between objective functions of the organization's members is tight, e.g., a

football team, the problem becomes one of maximizing output under those objective functions.

This is the classic problem of minimizing agency costs. When the fit between objective functions

of the organization's members is weak, the problem becomes one of coordinating output under a

diversity of objective functions in a way that sufficiently satisfies everyone's objective function.

Coordination costs thus loom larger when individuals with some degree of decision rights may

disagree on the weighting of the outcomes or the best means to achieve those outcomes.

         As decision rights are deconcentrated to a subsidiary member of an organization, this is

typically accompanied by increased compensation intended to mitigate the increased agency

costs that would otherwise arise ­ thus, as decision rights are deconcentrated, agency costs fall in

proportion to coordination costs per unit of organizational output. 27 This result derives directly

from the distinction we draw between agency and coordination costs, where coordination costs

arise where a member of the organization cannot be ordered to do something (due to the lack of

threat of discipline or termination), and instead must voluntarily exert effort. While certain types

of agency costs may increase with deconcentration of decision rights, our argument is that




27
   There is theoretical and empirical support for the phenomenon of incentives tracking delegation of decision rights
within an organizational hierarchy. In one study, discretion over pricing choices on the part of sales agents was
accompanied by greater incentives tied to sales (Lo et al 2016). Relatedly, greater deconcentration of decision rights
as a function of output uncertainty has been tied to compensation being linked directly to this output (Prendergast
2002). A substitute or complement to increased compensation is relational contracting (Lo and Rantakari 2018).
                                                                                                                   15


coordination costs are strictly increasing with respect to this deconcentration. 28 As an

organization grows in scale, the ability of its agents to make their own decisions, at a minimum

in a de facto sense, increases as well. As an organization's purpose increases in scope, this

requires specific individuals or units tasked with specializing in the more variegated outputs

associated with achievement of the organization's purpose. At some point, no central authority

can have the expertise and monitoring capability to retain all decision rights surrounding the

creation of the numerous outputs the greater scope of organizational purpose entails.

     B. Organizational Purposes as Made Up of One or More Objectives

         A leader is more effective when they are more successful at achieving an organization's

purpose. To say that an organization has a purpose does not contradict methodological

individualism. The distinction between organizations and markets is team production. Ex-ante

individuals buy into a set of rules governing decisions with respect to production and

distribution, though as emphasized earlier, contracts are always incomplete. 29 It is in this sense

that we define the purpose of an organization. The greater the scope of an organization's

purpose, the greater the number of objectives to achieve that purpose, e.g., a university's

educational mission is complex.30 This implies a large organization with a large hierarchy, both

of which increase the decentralization of de facto control over the objectives required to achieve




28
   An agency cost tends to surround the ultimate threat of disciplining or terminating an employee for failure to act
when required, or when acting in a way that is at odds with the decisions of the employee's superiors. A professor
who refuses to meet with donors cannot be fired for this refusal (provided it is within the scope of their decision
rights as allocated within the organization's hierarchy). An employee who refuses to do something their superior
tells them to do can classically be fired (provided the employee does not have the decision rights necessary to refuse
a request from a superior).
29
   Vanberg (1992) defines this approach to organization as a constitutional system, akin to citizens in country or
faculty at a university.
30
   Another way to think of this is that as an organization's scope of purpose increases, the complexity of decisions
surrounding optimal production and output decisions increases, which increases the intensity of information
processing. Intensity of information processing in organizational decisionmaking has been linked to greater
deconcentration of decision rights within an organization's hierarchy (Dobrajska et al 2015).
                                                                                                     16


an organization's purpose (Chandler 1990; Penrose 2009). For example, universities' purpose

consists of educating students, promoting research, and engaging in outreach. There are

numerous actors: staff, deans, students, faculty (with and without tenure), provosts, and

presidents. However, not all increases in organizational size result from scope of purpose; an

organization can also seek to influence greater or fewer numbers of individuals with its output. A

single restaurant seeks to provide food to its customers just as does a national restaurant chain,

but a chain has a much larger scale of its purpose. Greater scale brings with it both decision costs

associated with time and place as well as agency costs from spatial separation. Franchising is a

way to decentralize decisions and reduce agency costs. Increased scope and/or scale of

organizational purpose increases outputs. Increased outputs increase an organization's size in

most instances. Increased size increases the number of individuals involved (and, typically, the

associated levels of organizational hierarchy). The increased numerical and hierarchical margins

lead to increases in undefined decision rights, which results in greater deconcentration in de facto

control. Greater deconcentration in de facto control means a larger number of veto players,

which means coordination becomes more important. By veto players, we mean members of an

organization who have a say in the decision-making process even though they may not be able to

exercise a complete veto. For example, a president in the U.S. may veto legislation, but Congress

can overrule his veto through a two-thirds majority vote.

       At its simplest, relying on another individual to achieve an objective of the organization

creates coordination and principal-agent costs. Agency and coordination costs create a margin of

de facto control for a subsidiary member of the organization, a decision space defined by the

areas of divergence of objectives between superior and subsidiary members. It simply costs too

much for leaders to exercise decisions over every margin of subsidiary members' behavior. The
                                                                                                    17


deconcentration of de facto control defined by the margins left to the agents may reflect de jure

organizational policies that in turn suggests a greater number of institutionally defined veto

players, especially to the extent de facto control solidifies over time.

   C. An Organization with Greater or Fewer Objectives to Its Purpose

An organization's purpose determines the context in which leadership operates, and accordingly,

the type of leadership required to be effective. One important margin by which variance in

organizational purpose can affect the role for leadership is the implications the purpose has for

the objective functions of individual members of the organization.

       An organization can vary with the extent to which the members of the organization's

objective functions vary from one another. Ceteris paribus, a business or law school would like

to maximize its ranking, but this ranking is a composite of the faculty's research output, the

quality of students attracted as a function of faculty, and curricular quality, inter alia. The extent

to which any faculty member cares about a specific course or research objective varies

significantly. In contrast, a sports team's ranking is a function of how many games it wins. Even

if a coach and a superstar player do not see eye to eye about important choices in team strategy

or composition, they both care deeply about winning games. This is an example of how a sports

team is composed of individuals whose objective functions vary less than many other

organizational contexts. Each output of a member of a sports team aligns well with the singular

purpose of winning games. In contrast, the output of members of a law school or business school

is not tied to a singular objective, even if all members agree that increasing school ranking is

important. The context of business and law schools is one where a greater number of objectives

associated with the organization's purpose creates a greater deconcentration of de facto and de
                                                                                                              18


jure decision rights (Graham et al 2015). The quintessential example of an organization with a

high degree of variance of objective functions among members is that of public organizations.

        The extent to which an organization best achieves its purpose through an organizational

hierarchy composed of subunits devoted to the pursuit of greater or fewer objectives directly

determines the nature of leadership that is most likely to best achieve the organization's purpose,

e.g., GDP per capita, lower income inequality, profits, winning a game, a battle, or producing

innovative research. The broader the scope of the purpose an organization seeks, the greater the

need for specialization within the organization to pursue the different objectives required to

achieve this purpose (Hart and Moore 2005). Similarly, the larger the organization, the greater

the delegation of day-to-day decision control to subunits. In each case, leadership faces a higher

number of veto players in terms of those whose assent to policy decisions is necessary.

        Put differently, greater scope of organizational purpose (and greater organizational size)

results in more deconcentrated residual claimancy to de facto property rights to control over

organizational outputs. When residual claimancy is more deconcentrated, leadership involves

coordinating output among units that have more autonomy as to the acceptance and

implementation of policy. In these contexts, minimization of coordination costs becomes more

important for successful leadership, which entails persuasion, agenda control, or side-payments.

Alternatively, when residual claimancy is more concentrated, leadership involves inducing the

greatest effort toward a narrower organizational purpose, i.e., minimizing agency costs.

     D. Policy Change and Implementation with More or Less Veto Players

        An important effect of the scope of organizational purpose on leadership is the extent to

which a given leader faces veto players in realizing policy change and implementation. 31 This


31
  See Appendix 1 for a spatial model showing the roles of agenda control, side-payments and persuasion (changing
the preferences or ideal points of the actors by providing information not held by one of the actors.).
                                                                                                                  19


has two testable implications: (1) in organizational contexts with a greater number of veto

players, the organization is likely to be less sensitive to changes in leadership; and (2) the

characteristics or traits required for successful leadership are different depending on whether the

organizational context involves leadership resolving coordination or principal-agent problems. 32

Political systems with more veto players require a greater level of consensus outcomes, even if

not unanimity, and accordingly display less rapid and extreme policy changes (Tsebelis 1995;

Acemoglu et al. 2003). Coordination-intensive leadership contexts should display less variance

when it comes to changes in leadership. For example, our theory predicts that the average change

in a coach on a sports team is more likely to shift outcomes in either direction to a greater

magnitude than a change in business or law school leadership.




32
  In this article we only test hypothesis 1, but we are working on hypothesis two using computational text analysis
on biographies of leaders.
                                                                                                                   20


             E. Statement of Theory and Testable Implications

         Holding hierarchy constant, more members of the organization mean greater dispersion

of actual decision-making due to coordination and agency costs. 33 Holding membership constant,

more layers of hierarchy also create more coordination and agency costs between numerous

principals and agents. There is therefore a trade-off between coordination and agency costs.

Deconcentration is typically accompanied by a greater share of the returns to an individual's

labor ­ high powered incentives, e.g., bond traders. As the returns to an individual's effort

increase, agency costs fall. So, the more an individual fully benefits from the exertion of costly

effort, the more they do not need to be motivated ­ in contrast, their voluntary effort needs to be

coordinated in the face of downstream contingencies.

         Both factors, hierarchy and members, are likely to increase as the scope or scale of an

organization's purpose increases. We define agency costs as arising due to imperfect incentive

alignment and costly monitoring. By coordination costs, we mean the costs of convincing others

with some degree of veto power to go along with the leader's proposals. 34 Agency and

coordination costs unique to a given organization's purpose act as important constraints on




33
   Holding hierarchy constant is an important assumption for our analysis. An objection to this assumption could be
understood as a generalized version of the Riker objection (Shepsle 2006): when analyzing a given political system,
how reasonable is it to assume that the constitutional rules are fixed when by their own definition they can be
changed according to a known process? Generalized for our context, the objection would suggest that leaders can
change the allocation of decision rights within a given organizational hierarchy. This is observably true, but we
argue the hierarchical rules are only incrementally up for grabs for most leaders entering an organizational context
with a purpose defined prior to their assuming the role of leader. Our empirical tests are limited to these contexts ­
neither deans nor NFL coaches can radically alter the hierarchical structure of the organizations that they assume
control over. Of course, new leaders at times reorganize decision rights within an organization's hierarchy, either by
consolidating or delegating them. Nonetheless, there are firm bounds on the extent to which they can do this, bounds
which we argue are determined by the organization's overarching purpose. Thus, some extent of change in the
organization's structure is well within the command of a given leader, despite that leader being constrained in
important ways by the organization's purpose as to the ultimate extent to which they consolidate or delegate
decision rights as compared to what the previous leader saw as optimal.
34
   Hart and Moore (2005) focused on how an increased need for specialization in production requires more
coordination for successful realization of the organization's output. Our intuition surrounding greater levels of
coordination costs follows directly from this insight.
                                                                                                                    21


leadership (de facto and de jure organizational structure matter for leadership). As the

deconcentration of decision rights increases, coordination costs increase relative to agency costs.

         Our theory results in the hypothesis that the lower the scope and/or magnitude of an

organization's purpose, the greater the variance in organizational outcomes that will be observed

when leadership changes. 35 To test this hypothesis, we examine the impact of win/loss records

when coaches change for NFL teams versus changing deans at top Business and Law Schools in

the U.S. We chose professional sports and professional schools because there are measurable

outcome measures: win/loss records and rankings of professional schools.

         In our initial tests, this results in discrete predictions for both sports teams and

professional graduate schools. In the case of changes in coaches for sports teams, we expect

more negative and positive changes in ranking; greater magnitude of change where it occurs;

swifter rate of change where it occurs; and fewer null results. In contrast, for business schools

and law schools, we expect fewer positive and negative changes in ranking; lower magnitude of

change; slower rate of change where it occurs; and more null results.

         Our predictions pertain to other organizations as well. Changing the leader in

organizations with a greater scope of purpose and more veto players will have less of an impact

than in organizations with a more singular purpose. For example, this suggests that changing

leadership in advanced democracies, ceteris paribus, will have less impact on outcomes than it

would in developing countries or authoritarian governments. On the other hand, where the




35
  In political systems with a greater number of veto players, policy change is likely to occur less frequently and
display a lower magnitude of change when it does occur (Tsebelis 1995) Tsebelis' thesis regarding the potential for
policy change focuses on the number of individual political actors that can veto a potential change, the extent to
which these players' visions of policy change are congruent, and the amount of internal cohesion within each veto
player's political party or interest group. For the purposes of our analysis here, a greater number of veto players is
equivalent to a greater deconcentration of decision rights, or put differently, a greater number of members of an
organization who can shape outcomes surrounding a given decision.
                                                                                                                  22


purpose of an organization has fewer objectives, e.g., firms, we would expect a greater impact

from changing a CEO.

        IV.      LEADERSHIP CHANGES IN THE NFL AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS

We provide a distinct test of the effects of changes in leadership in NFL teams versus deans of

business and law schools. Coaches arguably perform many of the tasks associated with

leadership as do deans of professional schools. Most studies have failed to find much of a role

played by coaches on team outcomes. Berry and Fowler (2019) reviewed the extant literature on

leaders in sports and show that the general conclusion is that coaches, while necessary for a

team, are largely interchangeable. 36 In more recent work, the same authors find that leadership

and its impact vary across organizations (Berry and Fowler 2021), a comparative approach for

which we provide theoretical and empirical support here. They find the biggest impact in high

profile collegiate sports followed by professional sports, as well as a significant impact of

gubernatorial and mayoral changes across states and cities over time. In contrast, they do not find

an impact of a CEO on firm performance, which may reflect the increasing scale and scope of

publicly traded firms in our modern globalized era.

        Our test compares the effect of changes of leadership between organizational contexts:

business and law schools as compared to NFL teams. We chose these cases because of their clear

variance in concentration of decision rights, as well as both NFL coaches and deans having

regularly observed and quantified outcomes; win/loss records for coaches and rankings for deans

of Business and Law Schools as tied to discrete outcomes for each. For changes in deans relative



36
   Leadership succession is a prominent question in the sports analytics literature, intended to identify whether
performance after a coach change improves significantly. However, the extent to which the studies result in a
consistent finding suggests coach changes either have no effect, or a marginally negative one (Berry and Fowler
2019: 2). Similarly, The Economist (2019) presented an analysis of the contributions of coaches and players in five
big European soccer leagues (2004­2018) and concluded that once-successful coaches' "early wins owed more to
players and luck than to their own wizardry."
                                                                                                                  23


to changes in NFL coaches, we find evidence supportive of our hypothesis that as an

organization's purpose increases in scale and scope, the effect of changes in leadership

moderates. Leadership matters, but the extent to which it matters depends on an organization's

purpose. 37

         Our test relies on changes in rankings for NFL teams compared to changes in rankings of

business and law schools. 38 First, we provide a graphical visualization of the data that

simultaneously captures three related effects: mean reversion, the "Ashenfelter dip" and the

impact of changes of coaches and deans. We then explore these effects econometrically. This is

followed by a Bertrand and Schoar (2003) test on coach/dean fixed effects, which is possible

because several of the coaches and deans moved from one school/team to at least another in our

sample allowing us to measure their effects independently of school or team effects. 39

         In Figures 2, 3, and 4 we plot the data for each of the contexts. The horizontal axis

measures the team/schools' standing in the ranking at the end of the previous period, and the

vertical axis measures the change in ranking during the current period under the influence of a



37
   Our findings are consistent with those of Berry and Fowler (2021). They do not have an ex-ante prediction of the
impact of leaders but ex-post they posit that sports teams have a clear objective and better alignment of goals
between players and coaches than is the case of government where the objectives are more varied, and the
participants can disagree on importance of objectives. Our analysis is necessarily more targeted because our theory,
grounded in the allocation of decision rights within an organization's hierarchy, leads to the specific and testable
predictions we pursue here.
38
   Our approach assumes rough uniformity of the size of the set of competitors that any given school faces. Once an
individual is selected for a deanship, their scope of improvement is most realistically within a certain set of
competitors, but whether the school the dean is assuming leadership of is ranked number 5 or number 25, our
approach assumes the relevant competitive set is sufficiently similar in size to facilitate numerical comparison in
rank changes as generally indicative of the scope of change possible to a given leader. Given this assumption,
though, there is analytical value in comparing outcomes from leaders placed into competitive sets within the same
broader field ­ did each successfully command the comparatively greater or lower set of resources within their
organizations to facilitate the maximal extent of movement possible within their relevant competitive set? One set of
underlying faculty, inherited upon appointment (or set of players upon taking the coach position), necessarily places
a given leader within a specific competitive bucket (or defines the relevant set of sufficiently-adjacent competitors
which could be unique to each school or team). Our empirical identification depends on the assumption that the
scope of ranking improvement available to a newly entering dean or coach is roughly the same in expectation.
39
   In the NFL data 37% of the coaches coached more than one team in the sample, while the equivalent measure for
Law schools was 7%, and for Business schools was 4%.
                                                                                                                     24


new coach or dean when a change has taken place. 40 For professional schools one might expect

that a change in the rankings after a Dean change would take 3-5 years instead of 1 year. We

performed the same tested with a 3-year lag and the results are qualitatively the same for law and

business schools. Each point on the scatter plot is a team-season or school-year pair. The

negative slant of the scatter points gives a visual representation of mean reversion.

Teams/schools on the right side of the plot were well-placed last season so they cannot increase

significantly in the rank this season. The best that the number one team/school last season can do

in this season is to have a zero change in rank, so the upper hemisphere of the graph is

mathematically off limits for that team in the next season. 41

         In addition, the team-season or school-year pair in which there has been a change in

coach/dean is represented as a circle instead of an x. This means that a change in coach/dean that

has had a great impact appears as a circle that is vertically distant (positively or negatively) from

the zero rank-change line. To classify the extent of impact of a change of coach/dean, we shaded

the region that holds changes within plus or minus one standard deviation of the mean rank

change, which is zero.

         Besides mean reversion, the context of team and school rankings is also subject to a

related but subtly different effect known as the Ashenfelter dip. This effect, named after labor

economist Orley Ashenfelter, refers to the fact that the teams and schools that choose to change

coaches/deans usually do so when they are underperforming (Ashenfelter and Card, 1985;

Heckman and Smith, 1999). A two-way fixed effect regression of a dummy indicating


40
   The rank in the previous period is such that the best position is number 1 and larger numbers represent a fall in the
ranking. The direction of the axis is reversed so that better performance increases towards the right. The change in
rank measured in the vertical axis is coded so that an improvement in the rank is a positive number and a fall is a
negative number.
41
   The NFL graph is more defined because an NFL team cannot fall more than 33 rank positions as those are all the
teams in the ranking. But a school can fall more than 33 or 36 positions (which are the sizes of our samples for
business and law schools) as there are hundreds of other schools that are not in our sample.
                                                                                                                    25


coach/dean change on lagged rank change indicates that in all three contexts a one position fall in

rank in the previous year is associated with a 1% greater chance of changing coach/dean. 42 In

conjunction with mean reversion, this means that any subsequent improvement might be due to

either or both the coach/dean change and/or the mean reversion, making identification of

leadership effects tricky. 43 While mean reversion occurs even without coach/dean changes, the

Ashenfelter dip requires both mean reversion and the change in leadership. This effect is harder

to see in the graphs but will be explored econometrically below.

         NFL teams exhibit greater changes in rank than business schools, which in turn vary

more than law schools, as seen by the greater vertical spread of the points (the standard deviation

of rank change is 10.57, 5.44 and 2.63 for NFL, business schools and law schools, respectively).

Second, NFL teams tend to change coaches more frequently when they are low in rank (circles

are concentrated towards the left) whereas the dean changes are more evenly spaced across the

spectrum (the percentage of coach/dean changes for the teams/schools in the lower (worse) half

of each sample is 72%, 44% and 53% for the NFL, business schools and law schools,

respectively). Having Dean changes at the right end of the spectrum may be a result of increased

competition with one's peers in the top schools, e.g., the top 5 law schools or top 10 business

schools compete amongst themselves and not with schools in the left-hand part of the

distribution. 44 Third, for all three domains there are more positive rank changes on changing a

coach or a dean than negative effects (higher percentage of circles above versus below the zero-

change line; 61%, 55% and 54% respectively). Finally, the impact of coach/dean changes is



42
   For NFL, business schools and law schools respectively, estimated coefficients (p-values) are -0.06 (0.00), -0.04
(0.64) and -0.08 (0.061).
43
   Several papers that seek to test for the impact of coach changes have noted the existence of the Ashenfelter dip in
sport team management (Paola and Scoppa, 2012; Bryson et al., 2021; Argentieri, Canova and Manera, 2019).
44
   Dean changes at the top schools do not affect rankings much which could be "Red Queen" effect, i.e., you must
run fast to stay in the same place.
                                                                                                                26


stronger for the NFL ­ where 35% of the coach changes are associated with extreme rank

changes (outside of shaded area) - than it is for business and law schools ­ where that number is

25% and 28%.

                 Figure 2 - NFL football, 1990­2018: Coach changes and ranking*




*
 NFL team standings for the 1990 to 2018 seasons (https://www.nfl.com/standings). The data is yearly, and we use
all teams in the NFL. The data set consists of 898 observations. Team-year pairs that include coach changes shown
as circles and those that do not as x. The grey band is centered at the mean rank change, zero, and contains all
changes within one standard deviation above and below, leaving out the extreme value rank changes. Percentages
refer to proportion of total number of coach changes in each band.
                                                                                                                 27


        Figure 3 - US business schools, 1988­2017: Changes in dean and ranking**




**
   Businessweek magazine has ranked business schools biannually from 1988 to 2016, and yearly since 2017
(https://www.bloomberg.com/business-schools/). We used the top 35 schools in 2017, which resulted in a data set of
426 observations. School-year pairs that include dean changes shown as circles and those that do not as x. The grey
band is centered at the mean rank change, zero, and contains all changes within one standard deviation above and
below, leaving out the extreme value rank changes. Percentages refer to proportion of total number of coach changes
in each band.
                 Figure 4 - US law schools, 1987­2018: Changes in dean and ranking***




***
   Data from U.S. News & World Report ranking (https://7sage.com/top-law-school-rankings/). This is a yearly
ranking from 1987 to 2019. We used the top 25 schools in 2017, and when available extended it to the top 36
schools. School-year pairs that include dean changes shown as circles and those that do not as x. The grey band is
centered at the mean rank change, zero, and contains all changes within one standard deviation above and below,
leaving out the extreme value rank changes. Percentages refer to proportion of total number of dean changes in each
band.
                                                                                                                    28


        In Table 1 we test for the differential impact of coach changes compared to dean changes,

while controlling for mean reversion and the Ashenfelter dip. The dependent variable in each

column is the change in rank from the last year to the current year. We control for mean

reversion through the team/school's rank in the previous year, which captures any convergence

effects. The impact of a coach or dean change is captured by a dummy for the years when the

change happened. This dummy compares the rank change in the years where there was a coach

change with those where there was not. But years in which there was no change in coach or dean

is a broad category as it compares each team or school with all other teams or schools. It would

also be useful to compare the team's or school's rank change given a coach or dean change to

what would have happened to that same team/school if there had been no change in leadership.

This counterfactual is unobservable, but we approximate it by assuming that the rank change had

the coach/dean change not occurred would have been the same as it was in the previous year,

which is the performance that most proximally prompted the leadership change. Although

imperfect, it is a decent approximation because it is the team or school configuration which best

mimics the current membership of the team/school including the actual coach/dean.

        To measure the extent of the Ashenfelter dip we add a dummy for those years where the

team/school suffered their worst rank change performance. 45 This has the effect of measuring the

performance of a placebo coach/dean that assumes leadership at a point where the Ashenfelter

dip is the strongest, as by definition the rank change in the next year, which we call the

Ashenfelter rebound, will be highest. We can then compare this effect to the impact of actual

coach/dean changes.




45
  To approximate the frequency of actual coach and dean changes we simulated two coach changes for each team
and school, except for those schools that had a short series in our data, in which only one change was simulated.
                                                                                                                            29


                 Table 1 - Dean/coach changes, mean reversion and Ashenfelter dip
                                                             [1]           [2]            [3]
                             Dep. variable: Change in
                                                            NFL         Business         Law
                                   rank t-1 to t
                                                                         School        School
                           Rank (t-1)                      0.695***     0.473***       0.357***
                                                           (21.17)       (6.61)         (6.61)

                           Change of leader (t)           -2.480***      0.036          0.212
                           Positive rank change            (-4.50)       (0.07)         (0.90)

                           Counterfactual: no change of   -5.886***     -0.912**        -0.432*
                           leader (t-1)                   (-10.89)       (2.02)         (-1.65)

                           Placebo change of leader       -13.521***    -7.926***      -3.529***
                           (Ashenfelter dip (t))           (-21.80)      (-8.33)        (-7.41)

                           Placebo change of leader         1.859        1.955*         0.595**
                           (Ashenfelter Rebound (t+1))      (1.38)       (1.77)         (2.19)

                           Observations                      831          393            808
                           Teams/Schools                      33          33             36
                           Years                          1990-2017    1988-2017      1987-2019
                           Team/School fixed effects         Yes          Yes            Yes
                           Year fixed effects                Yes          Yes            Yes
                           within R2                         0.57
                           between R2                        0.01
                           overall R2                        0.42
                           Prob.>F                          0.0000

     Notes: Estimated with one single panel with fixed effects and year effects and explanatory variables interacted with
     dummies for NFL, business schools and law schools. The data include 33 NFL teams from 1990 to 2017, 33 business
     schools from 1988 to 2017, and 36 law schools from 1987 to 2019 (all panels are unbalanced). Rankt-1 measures the
     team's/school's position at the end of the previous ranking (NFL = 1 year, schools usually 2 years) and controls for mean
     reversion. The treatment variable is Change of Dean/Coach, a dummy variable that indicates years in which a new
     dean/coach stepped into office. The counterfactual to the change in leader is a dummy for the year prior to the change. The
     placebo leader change is a dummy equal to one in the year in which the school/team had its worse rank change. The
     Ashenfelter rebound is a dummy equal to one in the year following the worst rank change.

       Table 1 shows the results, controlling for both team/school fixed effects as well as year

fixed effects. The estimated coefficients for lagged rank are positive and highly significant,

indicating that there is in fact strong mean reversion. If a team/school had been one rank worse

(that is, a higher position in the rank) it would, all else equal, have improved 0.70, 0.47 and 0.36

more positions, respectively for the given NFL team, business school and law school.

       The treatment effect is captured by the dummy for the actual change in coach or dean.

This effect is negative and significant for coaches but not statistically different than zero for

deans. To understand this result it is necessary to consider what this dummy is comparing. The

estimated coefficient of -2.48 in column 1 tells us that when coaches were changed the teams fell

on average -2.48 positions in the rank. Coach changes can have both positive and negative
                                                                                                     30


effects in different cases, and the fact that the average is negative is likely because many teams

that changed coaches were likely to keep falling in the rank under a new coach. But the relevant

counterfactual is what the team's performance would have been had they not chosen to change

their coach at that point in time. We approximate this counterfactual assuming the team would

perform similarly to what they did in the previous year, still under the same coach. Though some

players and other circumstances may have changed, this is partially accounted for by the year

fixed effect. For the NFL this counterfactual has an estimated coefficient of -5.89 positions. That

is, by changing the coach they avoided falling 5.89 positions and fell only 2.5. Similarly,

business school dean changes avoided a counterfactual average drop of 0.91 positions and law

school dean changes a drop of 0.43.

       The placebo coach change is a dummy for those years right after the teams/schools had

their greatest drops in rank (worsening their standings). It is as if the coach/dean had just been

changed at that low point and by design will necessarily improve things. This is what is known

as the Ashenfelter dip. The results show that at this point the NFL, business schools and laws

schools would be 13.5, 7.9 and 3.5 rank positions lower on average, all else constant. But what

interests us is the coefficient for the rebound that comes after the dip, which serves as a measure

of how strong this effect is in that subsequent year. Though all three coefficients are positive,

they are only statistically significant for business schools and law schools. For the NFL the

rebound coefficient is positive but not statistically significant at standard levels of confidence. To

interpret these results bear in mind that this is where the rebound would be expected to be

strongest. The fact that the NFL did not experience a rebound even when it should be easiest to

detect suggests that the estimated treatment effect for coach changes were real and not an artifact

of the Ashenfelter dip. For business and law school deans, however, we had found no statistically
                                                                                                    31


significant treatment effect and even those effects we found were smaller than the corresponding

Ashenfelter rebound.

       The general conclusion from the estimations in Table 1 is that coaches have a distinct

impact on the performance of their organization compared to deans. Also, we found that deans of

business schools have greater impact than those at law schools where rankings seem more stable

through time, irrespective of changes in leadership.

       Because the preceding tests involved some approximations, it is useful to get at the issue

of measuring leadership impacts through a distinct methodological approach to see if the results

are robust. A well-established way of assessing the effect of leaders in organizations is through

the Bertrand and Schoar (2003) test that adds leader fixed effects to a regression that explains a

feature of the performance of organizations. We show the results for the NFL, Business school

and Law school data in Table 2 below. The second column shows the adjusted-R2 of the

regression of rank change on the previous year's rank, organization fixed effects, year fixed

effects, and in the case of the schools, a gender dummy and an Ivy school dummy. Standard

errors are clustered by school/team. The third column shows the adjusted-R2 of the same

regression with the addition of the leader fixed effects. The last column shows the F-test for the

hypothesis that the leader dummies are jointly not significantly different from zero.
                                                                                                                      32


         Table 2 ­ Dean and NFL Coaches effects on rank changes.
                                    Adj.-R2 no leader    Adj.-R2 with leader       N        F-test on fixed
                                      fixed effects      fixed effects                          effects
         NFL coaches                      0.36                   0.46             863           168.08
                                                                                             (<.0001, 32)
         Business school deans             0.21                  0.36             426           83.07
                                                                                             (<.0001, 32)
         Law school deans                  0.19                  0.36             844           7740.6
                                                                                             (<.0001, 35)
Notes: Adjusted R2s obtained from a fixed effect panel regression of year-on-year rank changes for schools and
teams with standard errors clustered at team/school level. The dean regressions include a gender dummy and an Ivy
school dummy. The regressions include the lag of the rank, team/school fixed effects and year fixed effects. F-test
reports the joint significance of the coach/dean fixed effects. Shown are the value of the F-statistic, the p-value, and
the number of constraints.

         The results in Table 2 show that in all three organizations the addition of fixed effects for

coaches/deans has a sizeable effect on the adjusted R2s. The adjusted R2 penalizes the addition of

new variables that do not improve on the existing model so the inclusion of the leader fixed

effects only increases the adjusted R2 if leaders effectively contribute to explaining the

variability in rank changes. In addition, in all three cases the F-tests on the leader fixed effects

are all jointly significant at the 1% level. These results are strong evidence that, at least in our

chosen organizational contexts, leaders matter.

         Measuring the impact of coaches and deans is fraught with statistical issues.

Nevertheless, we have controlled for mean reversion, the Ashenfelter dip, as well as for team and

leader fixed effects to find evidence that individuals can make a difference in some

organizational contexts much more than others. In addition, we found a stronger association

between coach changes and performance in NFL teams than in professional schools, which

corresponds to our theoretical prediction surrounding variance in organizational contexts.

         V.       CONCLUSION

         The study of leadership goes back to at least Aristotle and Plato. The role of individuals

in shaping organizational outcomes across societies and historical periods is one as old as

recorded history. Indeed, many of the instances of success that we see ­ coaches, prime
                                                                                                   33


ministers, generals, CEOs, and so forth ­ involved an intrinsic role for leadership that is not

simply a case of great individuals making history. Leading scholars, e.g., Machiavelli, Weber

and Burns, understood this, but many works attribute too much to the individual, without

understanding the organization and hierarchy in which actions take place. We need a way to

distinguish between the well-understood benefits of hierarchical decision-making and the (more

or less) effective choices made when exercising or coordinating the decision rights defined by a

particular organizational hierarchy.

       Our analysis provides a rigorous examination of the interplay between organizations and

leadership. Our logic begins by recognizing that scholars of institutions and organizations have

long considered the importance of hierarchy for the ability of groups to decide collectively upon

a course of action. Delegated decision-making and rules about making rules both require some

measure of centralization of authority in the hierarchy of public and private organizations.

Centralization of authority enables organizations to increase in size and function at higher levels,

which means that many institutional design questions in organizational behavior surround the

appropriate allocation of decision rights to each node in each organizational hierarchy, and how

to appropriately check and balance the power of these decision rights. However, an organization

that perfectly defines and enforces decision rights and constraints would have no need to be

concerned with the specific individual that makes decisions within the constraints defined by the

formal organizational structure. Indeed, in principle, an algorithm could do the job. Nonetheless,

the importance of executive searches and heated elections for public office indicate that leaders

play a critical role in determining outcomes for a given organization.

       This same importance poses an equally critical theoretical question: what role does a

leader provide in terms of their exercise of decision rights defined by a given organization's
                                                                                                    34


hierarchy? Relatedly, how can interested scholars identify the effects of leadership, when

outcomes are simultaneously determined by several factors: mean reversion; the organization's

hierarchy; and the specific members of the organization at a given time?

       Our theory gets at these questions through defining leadership as on a continuum in a

comparative organizational sense. At one end of the continuum, we have a person in authority, a

leader, with well-defined and enforced decision-making rights, along with rights of residual

claimancy. The leader is the de jure residual claimant to policies/profits, but there are transaction

costs with motivating agents to work in the interest of the principal (leader). The leader's

problem in these situations is to motivate those underneath her. The motivation entails the well-

known agency costs associated with organizations. In economics, there are scores of articles

addressing the issue through incentive compatible contracting. At the other end of the spectrum

are organizations in which the leader holds some decision-making rights, but decisions are by no

means unilateral. These are organizations, whose purpose, through increasing hierarchical levels

and organizational membership, strictly increases coordination costs as compared to agency

costs. In these situations, more deconcentrated decision rights result in a greater dispersion of

residual claimancy to decisions. Leaders at this end of the continuum need to coordinate others

over policy. We argue that the type of leadership traits needed along this continuum varies with

the degree of de jure and de facto residual claimancy that the leader possesses, a question we

approach with more specificity in our ongoing work on the topic.

       Most existing theories in economics about incentives in firms (and other organizations)

pose the issue as a principal-agent problem, though this is less the case in organizational

economics where coordination plays a key role. In cases where rights to decision-making within

the organization are more deconcentrated, the problem is more one of coordination than in
                                                                                                   35


contexts with more concentrated decision rights. In many situations, residual claimancy to policy

choices within organizations creates a role for leadership that is more akin to economizing over

coordination costs than it is economizing over agency costs.

       Which types of organizational structures determine how much of each aspect of

leadership is required for success? In cases with less concentrated decision rights, a leader is

someone who can overcome the coordination problems associated with de facto authority

diffused across individuals with different objectives. Examples are numerous, but we test for the

role of individual business and law school deans in our empirical test. In other cases, with a

narrow and tightly defined structure of accountability, a leader is instead someone who can

resolve the principal-agent problems associated with group leadership on behalf of a different

individual or group. Examples here include military generals, CEOs, and sports coaches, the

latter of which we consider directly in our empirical test.

       Our examination of the complex relationship between hierarchical decision-making and

the exercise of leadership follows in the long-standing scholarly interest in questions of

organizational structure and behavior. We define leadership as an underappreciated internal

boundary of the firm, a boundary which varies in predictable ways depending on the scope and

scale of an organization's purpose. More specifically, as the scale and/or scope of purpose

increases, this results in less concentration of decision rights within the organizational hierarchy,

which in turn implies less variance from leadership changes due to the increased prevalence of

coordination costs as compared to agency costs. In our empirical test, we provide results

consistent with this hypothesis, showing considerably less variation in outcomes when leadership

changes in professional graduate schools as compared to NFL teams.
                                         REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen, "Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic
      Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1) (2003), 49­
      123.
Aghion, P, Bloom, N. and J.V. Reenen, "Incomplete contracts and the internal organization of firms," The
       Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 30(1) (2014), i37-i63.
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Lucking, B., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J., "Turbulence, firm decentralization
       and growth in bad time," NBER Working Paper No. w23354, 2017.
Aghion, P. and Tirole, J., "Formal and real authority in organizations," Journal of Political Economy,
       105(1) (1997), 1-29.
Ahlquist, J. S., and M. Levi, "Leadership: What It Means, What It Does, and What We Want to Know
       About It." American Review of Political Science, 14 (2011), 1­24.
Alchian, A. A., and H. Demsetz, "Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization," American
       Economic Review, 62(5) (1972), 777­795.
Allen, D. W., "What are Transaction Costs?" Research in Law and Economics, 14 (1991), 1­18.
------, "Transaction Costs," in Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, B. Bouckaert and G. De Geest,
       eds. (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2000).
Alston, L.J., "Tenure Choice in Southern Agriculture, 1930­1960," Explorations in Economic History,
        18(3) July (1981), 211­32.
Alston, L.J. and W. Gillespie, "Resource Coordination and Transaction Costs: A Framework for
    Analyzing the Firm/Market Boundary," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 11(2)
    (1989) 191­212.
Alston, L.J. and R. Higgs, "Contractual Mix in Southern Agriculture since the Civil War: Facts,
    Hypotheses, and Tests," Journal of Economic History, 42(2) June (1982), 327­53.
Alston, E., L. J. Alston, B. Mueller, and T. Nonnenmacher, "Case Studies of Critical Transitions." in
        Institutional and Organizational Analysis: Concepts and Applications (New Approaches to
        Economic and Social History, pp. 319­346). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Alston, L. J., and W. Gillespie, "Resource Coordination and Transaction Costs: A Framework for
        Analyzing the Firm/Market Boundary." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 11(2)
        (1989), 191­212.
Alston, L. J., and R. Higgs, "Contractual Mix in Southern Agriculture since the Civil War: Facts,
        Hypotheses, and Tests." The Journal of Economic History, 42(2) (1982), 327­353.
Alston, L.J., and B. Mueller, "Pork for Policy: Executive and Legislative Exchange in Brazil," Journal of
        Law, Economics, and Organization 22(1) Spring (2006), 87­114.
Argentieri, Alessandro, Luciano Canova, and Matteo Manera. "Coaches on fire or firing the coach?
Evidence of the impact of coach changes on team performance from Italian Serie A." (2019).
Ashenfelter, Orley, and David Card, "Using the longitudinal structure of earnings to estimate the effect of
       training programs." Review of Economics and Statistics 67(4), (1985), 648­60.
Baker, G., Gibbons, R. and Murphy, K.J., "Informal authority in organizations," Journal of Law,
        Economics, and organization, 15(1) (1999), 56-73.
Barron, A. T. J., J. Huang, R. Spang, and S. DeDeo, "Individuals, Institutions, and Innovation in the
        Debates of the French Revolution." PNAS, 115(18) (2018), 4607­4612.
Barzel, Y., Economic Analysis of Property Rights (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Beatty, R. P., and E. J. Zajac, "CEO Change and Firm Performance in Large Corporations: Succession
        Effects and Management Effects," Strategic Management Journal, 8 (1987) 305­317.
Berry, C. R., and A. Fowler. "How Much Do Coaches Matter?" Paper presented at the Sports Analytic
        Conference, MIT Sloan, Boston, MA, March 1­2, (2019).
        http://www.sloansportsconference.com/content/howmuch-do-coaches-matter/.
Berry, C. R., and A. Fowler. "Leadership or luck: Randomization inference for leadership effects in
        politics, business or sports. Science Advanvces 20 (4), (2021): 1-17.
Bertrand, M., and A. Schoar. "Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm policies." The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4) (2003):1169-1208.
Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J., "Does product market competition lead firms to decentralize?"
       American Economic Review, 100(2) (2010), 434-38.
Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J., "The organization of firms across countries," The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 127(4) (2012), 1663-1705.
Bryson, Alex, et al. "Special ones? The effect of head coaches on football team performance."
        (2021).Buchanan, J., and G. Tullock, The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of
        Constitutional Democracy, (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962).
Burns, J. M., Roosevelt: The Lion and the Fox (1882­1940), (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
        1956).
------, Roosevelt: The Soldier of Freedom, (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1970).
------, Transforming Leadership, (New York: Grove Press, 2004).
Butler, Henry, "Contractual Theory of the Corporation," George Mason University Law Review, 11(4)
        (1989).
Caro, R. A., The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Path to Power, (New York: Random House, 1981).
------, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Means of Ascent, (New York: Vintage Books, 1990).
------, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Master of the Senate, (New York: Vintage Books, 2002).
------, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Passage of Power. (New York: Knopf, 2012).
Chafetz, J., "Multiplicity in Federalism and the Separation of Powers," Yale Law Journal, 120 (5) (2011)
        1084-1129.
Chandler, A.D., Strategy and structure: Chapters in the history of the industrial enterprise (Vol. 120).
       (MIT press, 1990).
Chernow, R., Alexander Hamilton, (New York: Penguin Press, 2004).

Cheung, S. "The Contractual Nature of the Firm," Journal of Law and Economics, 26(1) (1983), 1­21.
Coase, R. H. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica, 4(16) (1937), 386­405.
------, "The Problem of Social Cost," Journal of Law and Economics, 3(October) (1960), 1­44.
Collins, J., Turning Goals into Results: The Power of Catalytic Mechanisms. (Boston, MA: Harvard
         Business School, 1999).
------, Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don't, (New York:
       HarperCollins, 2001).
------, How The Mighty Fall: And Why Some Companies Never Give In, (New York: HarperCollins,
       2009).
------, Great by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck--Why Some Thrive Despite Them All, (New
       York: HarperCollins, 2011).
Collins, J. C., and W. C. Lazier, Beyond Entrepreneurship: Turning Your Business into an Enduring
         Great Company, (Paramus, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992).
Collins, J. C., and J. I. Porras, Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies, (New York:
         HarperCollins, 1994).
Dixit, A. K., "Power of Incentives in Private versus Public Organizations," American Economic Review,
        87(2) (1997), 378­382.
Dobrajska, Magdalena, Stephan Billinger, and Samina Karim. "Delegation within hierarchies: How
information processing and knowledge characteristics influence the allocation of formal and real decision
authority." Organization Science 26, no. 3 (2015): 687-704.
Dobson, S., and J. Goddard, The Economics of Football, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Ellis, J., The Quartet: Orchestrating the Second American Revolution, 1783­1789, (New York: Knopf,
          2015).
Gibbons, R., and R. Henderson. "What Do Managers Do? Exploring Persistent Performance Differences
       among Seemingly Similar Enterprises,". in Handbook of Organizational Economics, R. Gibbons
       and J. Roberts, eds., Chapter 17, (Princeton University Press, 2013).
Gibbons, R., and J. Roberts, eds. The Handbook of Organizational Economics, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University Press, 2013).
Graham, J.R., Harvey, C.R. and Puri, M., "Capital allocation and delegation of decision-making authority
      within firms," Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3), (2015), 449-470.
Greif, A.and J. Rubin. "Political Legitimacy and the Institutional Foundations of
        Constitutional Government: The Case of England." Working Paper June 2020.
Grossman, S. J., and O. Hart, "An Analysis of the Principal Agent Problem," Econometrica, 51(1) (1983),
      7­45.
Grossman, S. J., and O. Hart, "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral
      Integration," Journal of Political Economy, 94(4) August (1986), 691-719.
Grusky, O., "Administrative Succession in Formal Organizations," Social Forces, 39(2) (1960), 105­115.
------, "Managerial Succession and Organizational Effectiveness," American Journal of Sociology, 69
       (1963), 21­31.
Hart, O. D., Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
Hart. O.D., "Hold-up, Asset Ownership, and Reference Points," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1)
        February (2009), 267­300.
Hart. O.D. and J. Moore, "Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation" Econometrica, 56(4) July (1988),
        755-785.
Hart. O.D. and J. Moore, "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm," Journal of Political Economy,
        Vol. 98(6) (1990), 1119-1158.
Hart. O.D. and J. Moore, "Foundations of Incomplete Contracts." Review of Economic Studies, 66(1)
        (1999), 115-38.
Hart. O.D. and J. Moore, "On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination Versus Specialization," Journal of
        Political Economy, 113(4) (2005), 675-702.
Hart. O.D. and J. Moore, "Contracts as Reference Points," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1)
        February (2008), 1-48.
Hayek, F.A., "Cosmos and Taxis" in Law, Legislation and Liberty. (University of Chicago Press, 1973).
Heckman, J. J., & Smith, J. A., "The preprogramme earnings dip and the determinants of participation in
      a social programme. Implications for simple programme evaluation strategies." The Economic
      Journal, 109(457), (1999), 313-348.
Helper, S., and R. Henderson, "Management Practices, Relational Contracts and Decline of General
        Motors," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(1) (2014), 49­72.
Hermansson, Tomas. "Sacked in the morning? The effect of within-season coach replacement in Swedish
football." (2020).
Holmstrom, B., "Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective." The Review of Economic
       Studies, 66(1) (1999), 169­182.
Jensen, M.C and W.H. Meckling, "Specific and General Knowledge and Organizational Structure."
        in Foundations of Organizational Strategy. (Harvard University Press, 1998).
Jones, B. F., and B. A. Olken, "Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth since World War
        II." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3) August (2005), 835­864.
------, "Hit or Miss? The Effect of Assassinations on Institutions and War." American Journal of
       Macroeconomics, 1(2) (2009), 55­87.
Joskow, P. L., "Vertical Integration and Long-Term Contracts: The Case of Coal-Burning Electric
       Generating Plants." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 1(1) (1985), 33­80.
Laffont, J., and D. Martimort, The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent Model. (Princeton, NJ:
        Princeton University Press, 2002).
Lafontaine, F., "Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results." The RAND Journal of
        Economics, 23(2) (1992), 263­283.
Langlois, R., "Personal Capitalism as Charismatic Authority: The Organizational Economics of a
       Weberian Concept." Industrial and Corporate Change, 7(1) (1998), 195-213.
League Manager Association. End of Season Manager Statistics. Research and Reports. 2017.
       http://www.leaguemanagers.com/documents/55/LMA_End_of_Season_Report_and_Statistics_20
       16-17.pdf.
Libecap, G. D., Contracting for Property Rights. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Lo, D., Dessein, W., Ghosh, M. and Lafontaine, F., "Price delegation and performance pay: Evidence
        from industrial sales forces," The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 32(3) (2016),
        508-544.
Lo, Desmond, and Rantakari, H. "Effort and Compensation in Relational Contracts." (2018).
Machiavelli, N., The Prince and the Discourses. (New York: Modern Library, ([1532] 1950).
Marin, D. and Verdier, T., "Corporate hierarchies and international trade: Theory and evidence," Journal
       of International Economics, 94(2) (2014), 295-310.
Masten, S. E., "A Legal Basis for the Firm." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 4(1) (1988),
       181­198.
Meagher, K.J. and Wait, A., "Delegation of decisions about change in organizations: the roles of
      competition, trade, uncertainty, and scale," The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization,
      30(4) (2014), 709-733.
Medina, L.F., A Unified Theory of Collective Action and Social Change. (Ann Arbor: University of
       Michigan Press, 2007).
Ménard, C., "Hybrid Modes of Organization: Alliances, Joint Ventures, Networks and other Strange
       Animals," in The Handbook of Organizational Economics, R. Gibbons and J. Roberts eds., 1066­
       1108. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
Ménard, C., and M. M. Shirley, eds.. Handbook of New Institutional Economics. (New York: Springer,
       2005).
Milgrom, P. R., "Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Efficient Organization Design."
       Journal of Political Economy, 96(1) (1988), 42­60.
Mintzberg, H. Structure in Fives: Designing Effective Organizations. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
       Hall, 1983).
Myerson, R., "Learning from Schelling's 'Strategy of Conflict'," Journal of Economic Literature 47(4)
(2009), 1109-1125.
North, D. C., Understanding the Process of Economic Change. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
        Press, 2005).
Olson, M., The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. (Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press, 1965).
Ostrom, E., Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. (New York:
       Cambridge University Press, 1990).
------, "Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems."
       American Economic Review, 100(3) (2010), 641­672.
O'Toole, L. J., Jr., and K. J. Meier, "Modeling the Impact of Public Management: Implications of
       Structural Context." Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 9(4) (1999), 505­26.
Paola, Maria De, and Vincenzo Scoppa. "The effects of managerial turnover: evidence from coach
dismissals in Italian soccer teams." Journal of Sports Economics 13.2 (2012): 152-168.
Prendergast, C., "The tenuous trade-off between risk and incentives," Journal of political Economy,
       110(5) (2002), 1071-1102.
Penrose, E., The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. (Oxford University Press, 2009).
Radner, R. "Hierarchy: The economics of managing," Journal of economic literature, 30, No. 3 (1992):
       1382-1415.
Riker, W. H., The Art of Political Manipulation. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986).
Rivkin, S.G., Hanushek, E.A. and Kain, J.F. "Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement."
        Econometrica, 73 (2005): 417-458.
Sappington, D. E. M., "Incentives in Principal-Agent Relationships." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       5(2) (1991), 45­66.
Sah, R.K., and J.E. Stiglitz. "Human fallibility and economic organization." The American Economic
       Review, 75, no. 2 (1985), 292-297.
Schelling, T. C., The Strategy of Conflict. (Oxford, England: Harvard University Press, 1960).
Shepsle, K. A., "Old questions and new answers about institutions: the Riker objection revisited," in The
        Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, D. Wittman and B. Weingast eds., (Oxford University
        Press, 2008).
The Economist. "Managers in Football: Not So Special." (2019) January 19.

Tirole, J., "Hierarchies and Bureaucracies: On the Role of Collusion in Organizations." Journal of Law,
         Economics and Organizations, 2 Fall (1986), 181-214.
Thompson, D. F., "Political Representation." In International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral
      Sciences, N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2001).
Thompson, J. D., Organizations in Action. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).
Tsebelis, G., "Decision Making in Political Systems: Veto Players in Presidentialism, Parliamentarism,
        Multicameralism and Multipartyism." British Journal of Political Science, 25(3) (1995), 289­
        325.
Tsebelis, G., Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work. (Princeton University Press, 2002).
Vanberg, Victor J., "Organizations as Constitutional Systems." Constitutional Political Economy, 3(2)
       (1992), 223-253.
Vogel, E. F., Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China. (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2011).
Weber, M., Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. (New York: Bedminster Press,
       1968).
Weingast, B. and M. Moran., "Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional Control? Regulatory
      Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission." Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 91, No. 5
      October (1983), 765-800.

Weingast, B. and W. Marshall., "The Industrial Organization of Congress; or, Why Legislatures, Like
      Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 96, No. 1 February
      (1988), 132-163.
Williamson, O., Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, (New York: Free Press,
       1983).
------, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, (New York: Free Press, 1985).
------, The Mechanisms of Governance, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).
Wirtz, W. W., "Government by Private Groups." La. L. Rev., 13 (1952), 440­475.
Witt, U. 1998, "Imagination and leadership - The neglected dimension of an evolutionary theory of the
        firm." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 35 (1952), 161-177.
Witt, U., "Firms as Realizations of Entrepreneurial Visions." Journal of Management Studies, Vol 44 (7)
        (2007), 1125-1140.
                                                                                                    1


                                           Appendix 1
                                A Spatial Model of Leadership
Figure A1 provides a spatial analysis that further clarifies our concept of leadership and the ways
in which leaders address coordination costs. To circumvent or reduce coordination costs the
leader can use agenda control, side-payments and persuasion. More than two actors (e.g.,
committee decision-making) can also be modeled spatially, though the set of potential outcomes
becomes larger and depends on the specific decision rights and decision rules across actors.
Coordination costs would be compounded given the multiplicative nature of coordination costs.
To simplify we stick to two actors here. Suppose that the purpose of the organization and the
preferences of the players involve two dimensions. Points L and A1 indicate the preferred point of
two members. The initial status quo is at Q0 and the indifference curves for each player relative
to Q0 are shown. Each player would rather have the outcome changed from Q0 to any point
closer to his or her preferred point. In Context 1, where the parties end up depends on the context
and the rules of the game. Suppose L has full authority, that is, agenda control and veto power,
and there are no information asymmetries or other constraints. In this context, the outcome
should move from Q0 to L.

       Figure A1 ­ A Spatial Model of Leadership

                                                          Q0




                       A1                                          A1'
                                    CC'



                                              x            CC''

                                                                     L
                                                                                                        2


        In Context 2 if, instead, A1 also has veto power, so that she can block any change from Q0
that leaves her worse off, the outcome should move to some point on the contract curve cc'-cc",
because for every point not on that segment there is always a point on it that both sides prefer.
Which point will prevail depends on the details of the rules, the players and the context. If L is
endowed with sufficient powers, he can assure the outcome at point cc", the point on contract
curve cc'-cc" closest to L.
        Now consider Context 3, with information asymmetries and transaction costs. It may be
that A1 can enable a preferable outcome for herself on the contract curve, such as point x.
There are two classes of reasons why A1 could do this, despite L having greater authority and
formal powers. The first is the standard principal-agent reasoning based on the unobservability
and non-contractibility of effort, where the improved outcome for A1 relative to cc" is the
informational rent due to moral hazard and adverse selection. More importantly for our purposes,
A1 can also exploit her decision rights to pull the outcome closer to her ideal along the contract
curve. Decision rights arise because of the impossibility of pre-stating every future situation that
might arise and of contracting for the behavior of the agent in each case. Instead, some more
predictable events are specified and are assigned expected responses, but all other contingencies
are left to the agent's discretion. The greater that discretion, the greater the decision rights held
by the agent. If, in moving from Q0 to the contract curve such contingencies do arise, A1 can use
her decision rights to pull x closer to point A1.
        Consider Context 4 with the principal using side-payments to make A1 better off in some
dimension not shown in Figure A1. If we consider side-payments part of the formal powers of a
leader, then where is leadership in Figure A1? L possesses a series of formal powers ­ agenda,
veto, firing, inter alia. ­ that allow him to dictate his preferred point cc" on the contract curve
when there are no information asymmetries and transaction costs. These powers are what one
usually associates as part of leadership. These are, however, powers of the office and not of the
individual, so that any other person in that office with similar preferences would produce a
similar outcome. We are interested in characteristics of leadership beyond those defined by
formal powers. In Figure A1, we show that in the absence of complete information, A1 can
partially blunt those formal powers, so that in effect A1 also wields some leadership in the sense
of holding discretion to affect the outcome. The magnitude of that discretion depends on A1's
decision rights and private information.
                                                                                                       3


       We are more interested, however, in persuasion, a type of leadership that goes beyond the
strategic use of formal powers and the exploitation of decision rights and information
asymmetries described above - Context 4. We want to focus on transformational leadership
where individuals matter. This would arise, for example, if L is able to achieve an outcome
significantly closer to point L than x. There are at least two ways that he could do this. The first
is by persuasion, effectively changing A1's preferences or providing information such that A
would change his ideal point. A maximally effective and charismatic leader might be able to
change others' preferences to duplicate his own. However, even less than complete persuasion
can also be transformative. Suppose L is able to shift A1's preferences or ideal point along the
horizontal dimension to be the same as his own, without affecting preferences/ideal point on the
                                                          
vertical dimension. A1's preferred point would then be at 1 , which entails an outcome closer to
L than x.
       The second form of transformational leadership involves L achieving an outcome closer
than x, not by influencing preferences, but by bargaining, negotiation and using side-payments.
He could convince A1 to accept an outcome close to L instead of x by offering a compensating
side-payment in some third dimension (which would be drawn orthogonal to Figure A1). Side-
payments could be cash, as in many societies, or it could be a new bridge or road in the person's
district. The power to use side-payments will depend on the institutional context. Alston and
Mueller (2006) showed that the use of pork for policy changes in Brazil may make the executive,
members of Congress and society better off compared to a situation where side-payments are
illegal. Transformational leadership involves being able to envision such deals and to have the
credibility and commitment power to pull them off.
       A third expression of leadership is through heresthetics, that is, by manipulating the
political structure and the rules of the game (Riker, 1986). An example would be if there were
additional players in Figure A1, and L was able to impose new rules concerning the order and
circumstances in which each could exert voice, votes and vetoes, to favor some outcomes over
others. In short, some leaders have the leadership skills to change the institutionally defined rules
of the game.
