                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DOING MORE WITH LESS:
               PREDICTING PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER EFFECTIVENESS

                                           Janet Currie
                                         Jonathan Zhang

                                       Working Paper 28929
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28929


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We would like to thank Sarah Eichmeyer, Idamay Curtis, Alaina Mori, Karin Nelson, Ashok
Reddy, and Jodie Trafton for helpful comments. Jonathan Zhang is also an investigator and
contractor with the Veterans Health Administration Office of Mental Health and Suicide
Prevention. Representatives of the VHA have had an opportunity to comment on these findings.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Janet Currie and Jonathan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Doing More with Less: Predicting Primary Care Provider Effectiveness
Janet Currie and Jonathan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28929
June 2021
JEL No. I1,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses data from 802,777 veterans assigned to 7,548 primary care providers (PCPs)
within the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) to examine variations in the efficacy of
primary care providers (PCPs), their consequences for health outcomes, and their determinants.
Leveraging quasi-random assignment of veterans to PCPs, we measure PCP effectiveness along
three dimensions: the probability their patients have subsequent hospitalizations or emergency
department (ED) visits for mental health conditions, circulatory conditions, or a hospitalization
for ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSC). We find a significant range in these
effectiveness measures across PCPs. For example, a one standard deviation improvement in our
measure of mental health effectiveness predicts a 0.21 percentage point (3.8%) lower risk of
patient death over the next three years and 4.4% lower total costs. We also find moderate
correlations between the three metrics, indicating that doctors who are effective at treating one
type of condition also tend to be more effective in treating others. Our strongest conclusion is that
more effective PCPs do more with less: Their patients have fewer primary care visits, referrals to
specialists, lab panels or imaging tests. Effective PCPs are slightly more likely to comply with
guidelines for mental health screenings, and slightly less likely to comply with guidelines for
physical health screenings, but these differences in screening propensities are negligible in
magnitude.


Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Jonathan Zhang
Princeton University and
Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention,
Veterans Health Administration
jxzhang@princeton.edu
Critics of the U.S. health care system argue that the system provides too much high cost-low

value care, and not enough low cost-high value care, especially of the type that is often offered in

primary care settings (Chandra and Skinner, 2012). It has been suggested that providers should

be compensated on the basis of the value, rather than the quantity, of care they provide, where

high-value care is care that yields better health outcomes on average (Cutler, 2014; Lopez et al.

2020). These arguments beg several questions: Are some providers more effective than others in

promoting patient health and how can we measure that? Is provider effectiveness correlated

across different aspects of patient health or are some providers much better at some types of care

than others? And if some providers are generally more effective than others, what characteristics

of providers predict effectiveness?

       This paper investigates these questions using the unique setting of primary care providers

(PCPs) in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). The most important aspect of this setting

is that veterans who enter the system seeking primary care are assigned to PCPs in a quasi-

random, first-come, first-served basis which depends only on the patient's desired appointment

time and the PCP's availability. A second advantage is that the VHA was a pioneer in the use of

electronic medical records, so that we have detailed records of inpatient, outpatient, and

pharmaceutical claims including rich information about referrals, screenings, tests and labs

which will allow us to investigate possible reasons for variations in provider effectiveness. A

third advantage is that providers in the VHA system are salaried, so they have no financial

incentive to provide low-value care, such as excessive screening.

       Using data from 802,777 veterans assigned to 7,548 PCPs at 725 clinics we first ask

whether PCP assignment is predictive of future patient health outcomes including

hospitalizations and emergency department (ED) visits for mental health and circulatory



                                                 2
problems, two of the most common types of health problems in the VHA. We also look at

hospitalizations for ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSC), which are tracked by the VHA

itself.

          Past research provides considerable evidence of variations in provider effectiveness,

beginning with the literature on geographical variations in care (e.g. Cutler et al., 2019;

Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and Williams, 2016; Fisher et al. 2003a,b); continuing with studies of

quasi-random assignment in ambulance referrals and emergency departments (e.g. Doyle et al,

2011, 2015, forthcoming; Gowrisankaran, Joiner, and Leger, 2017; Van Parys, 2016); and

including attempts to quantify physician practice style and link it with patient outcomes (e.g.

Abaluck et al., 2020; Currie and MacLeod 2016, 2020; Currie, MacLeod, and Van Parys, 2016;

Epstein and Nicholson, 2009; Fadlon and Van Parys, 2020; Fletcher, Horwitz, and Bradley,

2014; Grytten and Sorensen, 2003, Simeonova, Skipper, and Thingholm 2021).

          Consistent with these studies we find a significant range in our effectiveness measures

across PCPs, and we find that patient outcomes differ significantly depending on the physician

they are assigned to. For example, a one standard deviation improvement in our measure of

mental health effectiveness predicts a 0.21 percentage point (3.8%) lower risk of patient death

over the next three years and 4.4% lower costs.

          Turning to the two more novel questions that we ask, we find that the three different

metrics we examine are strongly, though not perfectly, positively correlated with each other.

Correlations between any two of these measures vary from 0.35 to 0.40. Moreover, doctors who

are effective at preventing hospitalizations due to ambulatory care sensitive conditions are also

effective in preventing deaths from cancer, heart conditions, and possible suicides (external

causes of death measured by suicides plus overdoses, poisonings, and accidents). The one



                                                   3
exception to this generalization is that only mental health effectiveness predicts fewer patient

visits for mental health. These results suggest that it is unnecessary to measure effectiveness in

every possible dimension.

       Our strongest and most novel conclusion is that the most effective PCPs do more with

less: Their patients have fewer primary care visits, referrals to specialists, lab panels or imaging

tests. Effective PCPs are slightly more likely to comply with guidelines for mental health

screenings, and slightly less likely to comply with guidelines for physical health screenings, but

these differences in screening propensities are negligible in magnitude.

       We also find that older PCPs, those who see more patients per day, those who see more

new patients over the period we observe them, and especially those who take advantage of

options to coordinate care with mental health professionals tend to be more effective. Regarding

care coordination, PCPs in some facilities at the VHA have the option to call in mental health

professionals for immediate same-day patient consultations joint with the PCP rather than

referring them for later appointments. Conditional on these measures, part-time physicians also

tend to be more effective, which leads us to interpret part-time status as a marker for physicians

who devote some of their time to research. We also find some evidence that nurse

practitioners/physician assistants are more effective primary care providers than physicians in the

VHA.

       A few previous studies have shown results with a similar flavor: Currie and MacLeod

(2016) find that obstetricians with better diagnostic skills perform fewer C-sections on low-risk

women and have better patient outcomes and Chan, Gentzkow, and Yu (2019) find that

radiologists who are less skilled at diagnosing pneumonia compensate by treating marginal

patients more aggressively. In contrast to these two studies focusing on specialist's use of



                                                  4
particular procedures for specific conditions, we construct broader measures of effectiveness and

consider a wide range of health inputs and outputs.

           Our work may be more similar to Doyle, Ewer, and Wagner (2010) who compare

physicians from two different medical schools who were employed at the same Veterans Affairs

hospital. They find that physicians from the lower ranked school achieved similar patient

outcomes but at a higher cost because they ordered more tests and took longer to perform each

test. In contrast to their work, we do not use an external proxy for effectiveness (e.g., medical

school ranking) but propose ways to construct and validate effectiveness measures from within

the data.

           The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the VHA

setting and the data. Section 3 discusses our empirical strategy. Results appear in Section 4 and

conclusions are in Section 5.



2. Setting, Data, and Sample

2.1 Assignment of Veterans to PCPs

Veterans entering primary care in the VHA system are assigned to patient aligned care teams 1

that coordinate care. Teams are led by a PCP, who can be a physician, nurse practitioner, or

physician's assistant (all of whom have full diagnosing and prescribing authority in the VHA).

The PCPs are supported by an advanced nurse (e.g. a registered nurse care manager), a clinical

associate (e.g. a licensed practical nurse, licensed vocational nurse, or certified nursing assistant,

medical assistant, or health technician), and an administrative associate. Because the PCP is

responsible for the most advanced tasks such as diagnosing and prescribing, we use the term



1
    Referred to internally as PACT teams.

                                                  5
"PCP" to refer to the primary care team; however, it is important to note that these teams may be

differentially resourced and organized even within a given facility. We investigate team resource

and mental health embeddedness in section 4.3.

         Assignment to a PCP is based on geographic location, scheduling availability, and team

capacity. 2 Generally, the assignment is done after a veteran completes Form 1010-EZ to enroll in

VHA health benefits. See the appendix for the most recent Form 1010-EZ. The veteran lists

basic demographic information, military history, their preferred outpatient clinic, and whether

they would like to be contacted by the VA to set up their first appointment. If this last box is

checked--as it is on roughly three quarters of all 1010-EZ forms, then a scheduling administrator

contacts the veteran. At this point, the veteran explains the reason for their request and gives a

desired appointment date 3 and the administrator schedules an appointment. The scheduling

typically occurs within seven days after a request is made. Primary care appointments for new

patients are made based on which PCP is available on the desired date or on the earliest available

date thereafter. When the initial primary care visit takes place, the PCP is assigned to the veteran

and the relationship is entered into the system. 4 Veterans can choose to switch PCPs, but this is

not actively encouraged in the VHA and empirically we do not observe many switches in our

sample. Hence, we focus on the first PCP assigned in an "intent-to-treat" framework though we

also look at the length of a patient's relationship with the initial PCP as an outcome. In sum,




2
  Per an email exchange with the National VA Office of Primary Care: "New enrollee appointment requests are
reviewed for preferred clinic, panel capacity, and [scheduling] availability. If there is capacity and appointment
availability at the patient's preferred clinic, an appointment is scheduled and [the patient is assigned to a primary
care] team."
3
  The General Accountability Office (GAO) mandates that the VHA collects desired time to monitor wait times.
4
  Veterans who do not request an appointment on Form 1010-EZ when enrolling for health benefits get assigned to a
PCP at a later point in time, whenever they request their first primary care appointment. We exclude these veterans
from our analysis because we do not observe the appointment process where a patient gives their desired date.

                                                          6
new benefit enrollees seeking primary care services are quasi-randomly assigned to PCPs,

conditional on clinic and year by month.



2.2 Description of Data Sources

We analyze electronic health records data from the Veterans Health Administration's Corporate

Data Warehouse (CDW) between 2004 and the end of February 2020. The standard outpatient,

inpatient, and pharmacy data include fields such as hospital, patient, and physician identifiers,

diagnoses, procedures performed, origin of prescriptions, prescriber, visit times and dates, etc.

Form 1010-EZ and appointment data are available to identify when the patient first enrolled,

their preferred clinic, and desired appointment time, which can be linked to the visit with their

new PCP. Access to electronic health records gives us a deeper and more complete view of a

patient's health and medical care. For example, we observe referrals to specialists, physician

orders (e.g., orders for lab and imaging tests, vaccinations, prosthetics, etc.), patient surveys and

questionnaires (e.g., wellness and depression screens); lab and imaging results (e.g., hemoglobin

A1c levels which are used for diabetes screening, cancer staging results); vital signs (e.g., blood

pressure, body mass index); and receipt of patient education (e.g., interventions to promote

smoking cessation). 5




5
  Our main analysis focuses on care provided by the VA (i.e., VA medical clinics and community-based outpatient
clinics that are VA-staffed or contracted). For some years we also have VA data linked to Medicare claims (2011-
2016) and Medicaid (2011-2014). In addition, we observe some community non-VA care that is paid for by the VA
when the VA does not have capacity, or if the veteran lives sufficient far away from a VA clinic. Such care may
include emergency care, nursing homes, childbirth at private hospitals, and various types of specialty care. In
Appendix Table A1 we show that including the available Medicare, Medicaid and non-VA data on hospitalizations
and ED visits has little impact on our main findings.

                                                       7
         Finally, we have data on veteran deaths from the VHA Vital Status files through early

2020, and from the Center for Disease Control National Death Index (NDI) Plus files which

gives us both date and cause of death through the end of 2017. 6



2.3 Sample and Variable Construction

We analyze male veterans between the ages of 20 and 90 who enrolled in VA benefits and first

requested a primary care appointment between January 2005 and February 2017. Starting with

2005 gives us a one year "look back" window to see the patient's previous health history, while

ending in 2017 allows us to follow all patients for three years after enrolling in the VHA. We

focus on male veterans because female veterans are often assigned to Women's Health PACT

teams (Leung et al. 2020). Often there is only one such team in a given clinic so there is no

possibility of random assignment within a clinic and we have little power to conduct a within-

clinic analysis for female veterans.

         We begin with 1.02 million Form 1010-EZs representing new VHA enrollees who

a) requested a primary care appointment; b) submitted the form between January 2005 and the

end of February 2017; and c) had at least one completed appointment with a PCP. 7 We restrict

our attention to veterans seen at clinics with at least two PCPs in each year (which results in a

loss of 40,000 patients) and to PCPs with at least 20 new patients over our study period. The



6
  These data come from a variety of different sources, including the SSA Death master File, Medicare Vital Status
File, and internal VA records (e.g., inpatient deaths, deaths informed by family members, and National Cemetery
Administration records).
7
  We excluded patients whose first visits were connected to an application for disability compensation or a referral
to social work or occupational health. We also excluded patients whose first visit was not to a PCP but to a
specialist. The most common specialists for first visits were (in order of frequency): Audiologists, mental health,
dentists, optometrists, orthopedics, and ophthalmology. It is possible that some of these veterans have private health
insurance but rely on the VA to provide services that are not covered by their private plans such as optometry. The
fact that patients who need an immediate referral for mental health to see a specialist are not in our sample
strengthens the case that the remaining patients are quasi-randomly assigned.

                                                          8
purpose of this latter restriction is to focus on PCPs with enough patients that we can identify

variations in practice style. As discussed further below, we use Bayesian shrinkage methods to

compensate for the additional error involved in measuring practice style in doctors with few

patients. We lose 3,819 PCPs at this stage. The final baseline sample covers 802,777 veterans

who are assigned to 7,548 PCPs at 725 clinics.

        We measure PCP effectiveness in the three years following the veteran's initial

assignment using hospitalizations and emergency department (ED) visits for mental

health/substance abuse and circulatory conditions, and hospitalizations for ambulatory care

sensitive conditions. We chose these conditions not only because they are extremely common,

but because they arguably require different types of expertise.

        Mental health conditions are among the most common conditions affecting veterans with

over a quarter of primary care veterans have at least one diagnosis of depression, post-traumatic

stress disorder (PTSD), substance use disorder, anxiety disorder, or other serious mental illness

(Trivedi et al. 2015). Improving the quality of these services has been a VA focus in recent

years. 8 VHA guidelines for primary care now recommend annual mental health screenings for

depression, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and alcohol/substance abuse for all new

enrollees.

        Diseases of the circulatory system are also among the most common health issues among

veterans; veterans are twice as likely as non-veterans to have heart disease (Assari 2014). 9

Earlier and correct management of heart disease in a primary care setting is thought to lead to


8
  Mental health conditions include a wide range of diagnoses including, but not limited to, psychotic conditions,
psychoses and episodic mood episodes, depression, substance use disorders, and suicide attempts/ideation.
9
  This category includes International Classification of Disease (ICD-10) codes beginning with "I", including
rheumatic fever and heart diseases, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, pulmonary heart disease, cerebrovascular
diseases, and other diseases affecting the arteries, veins, and lymphatic vessels etc.

                                                         9
fewer hospitalizations and better patient health outcomes (Bottle et al., 2018; Anderson et al.,

2020).

         ACSC hospitalizations are hospitalizations due to conditions such as diabetes, asthma,

hypertension and pneumonia that can largely be avoided with timely, effective, and continued

primary care (Barker et al. 2017; Hodgson et al. 2019). Hospitalizations for ACSC are currently

tracked at the clinic and geographic region level by the VHA as an indicator of the quality of

care and as a cost driver. 10 They are not currently tracked at the level of the individual PCP.

         For all three metrics, we construct an indicator for whether the patient experiences the

adverse outcome within three years of requesting an initial PCP appointment. Because veterans

are quasi-randomly assigned to PCPs and PCPs are broadly responsible for managing a patient's

care, we interpret any significant differences in patient's propensity for subsequent adverse

events as an indicator of PCP effectiveness. The VHA also computes the average cost for each

patient in each fiscal year. 11 We study average costs both one year and three years after the initial

appointment request.

         As an early adopter of electronic health records, the VHA has rich data across multiple

sources which allows us to go beyond studying differences in outcomes to examine processes of

care. We study PCP adherence to VHA clinical guidelines on mental and physical health




10
   We construct ACSC hospitalizations using a VHA-modified version of the measure used by the Agency for
Health Care Research and Quality (AHRQ 2018). For instance, angina without procedure was dropped by AHRQ in
July 2016, but remains in the VHA version.
11
   This average cost is constructed using non-VHA relative value weights (a CMS resource-based relative value
scale) to distribute aggregate, national-level costs to each individual inpatient and outpatient encounter (Wagner et
al. 2003) and allow dollar-for-dollar comparisons of costs across geographic areas and clinics.

                                                         10
screenings. The VHA has clinical guidelines on mental health screenings, 12 colorectal cancer

(CRC), hepatitis C (HCV), HIV, influenza immunization, and tobacco use. Depending on the

specific screen, we use outpatient procedure codes, chemical labs, radiology tests, referrals, and

orderable request items to identify the performance of these screenings (e.g., the PCP can place

an order/request for a technician to conduct a blood test). All screening metrics are restricted to

suitable populations when necessary; for example, guidelines for CRC recommend annual fecal

occult blood testing for adults between ages of 50 and 75 but not for younger or older veterans.

We construct indicators for whether the veteran got each recommended screening in the first year

after the initial primary care appointment.

        Finally, we examine diabetes management and cancer staging. Appropriate diabetes

management can greatly improve health and reduce health care costs. Similarly, catching cancer

at an early stage improves the patient's prognosis and may offer less invasive treatment options.

For diabetes screening, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-

c) levels are obtained from the results of chemistry labs. In diabetics, HbA1c is considered

`controlled' if the average across all their tests in the first year following their first diabetes

diagnosis is below 8% and LDL-c levels are below 100mg/dL (The Guideline Advantage, 2013).

        For all our metrics, we do not require the screen or outcome to be linked to the PCP. The

VHA's primary care philosophy is one where the PCP team is responsible for coordinating a

patient's care which could well be rendered by other practitioners. Because of this, we adopt an

intent-to-treat research design as discussed further below.




12
 Specifically, for mental health VHA guidelines recommend all new patients receive a Patient Health
Questionnaire (PHQ; two item or nine item), Primary Care PTSD Screen for DSM-5 (PC-PTSD-5), and Alcohol
Use Disorders Identification Test-Concise (AUDIT-C).


                                                    11
3. Empirical Strategy

3.1 Constructing measures of PCP effectiveness

         Measures of PCP effectiveness are constructed using an empirical Bayes jackknifed

value-added measure (Kane and Staiger 2008, Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014, Jackson et

al. 2020). 13 This approach improves on using the raw probability that a doctor's patients

experience an adverse outcome calculated by leaving out the index patient. Instead, probabilities

are reweighted using the number of new patients assigned to each PCP each year. The

effectiveness measure is thus constructed as a weighted average of the residualized probabilities

that a PCP's patients suffer adverse outcomes where the weights depend on the number of

observations in each period.

         In order to calculate the yearly, residualized, leave-out jackknife effectiveness measure

for each PCP we first estimate the following equation for patient  , PCP , and year :

                        =  +  +  +  +  +                                                                          (1)

where  is an indicator variable for an ED or hospital encounter for mental health, circulatory

condition, or an ACSC within three years of assignment to a new PCP. This outcome variable is

regressed on indicators for year by month,  ; primary care clinic,  ; day of week of the

initial visit,  ; and bins for the number of days between the veteran's desired date for a first

appointment and the date of the actual appointment,  (0, 1-7 days, 8-14 days, 15-21

days, 22-30 days, 30-60, and 60+ days).

         We also include variables that are pre-determined as of baseline assignment to a PCP to

improve precision; these controls are not required for unbiased effectiveness measures. These



13
  The approach is also similar to studies using a "judge instrument" such as Doyle et al. 2015, Dobbie et al. 2018,
and Eichmeyer and Zhang 2021.

                                                         12
baseline controls,  include race (Asian/Pacific Islander, Black, Hispanic, White); five-year age

bins, marital status, enrollment priority groups; 14 indicators for being a beneficiary of Medicare

or Medicaid; whether the patient used the VHA in the previous year; whether they had any prior

year mental health, circulatory conditions, or ACSC hospitalizations; whether the veteran has

any service-connected disability or is considered unemployable; indicators for era of service (e.g.

Korean war, Vietnam war), and exposure to Agent Orange or radiation. Yearly jackknife PCP

propensities are calculated by averaging the residuals leaving out the own residual term

corresponding to patient  , PCP :  =   , where  denotes the set of patients
                                     


assigned to PCP  in year .

        The final step computes the empirical Bayes PCP effectiveness measure as a function of

the vector of yearly effectiveness measures for that PCP,  , and a vector of the number of


newly assigned veterans for each PCP,  :  = ( , 
                                                 ). Multiple years are used to improve

statistical power and the weights are determined semi-parametrically and estimated from the

data. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

                                 = 2017
                                   =2005   1 =  × 
                                                   +  ,                                                            (2)

where  denotes the number of new veterans assigned to PCP  in year . We create four bins

for the number of new patients seen: 0-9, 10-24, 25-50, and over 50 new veterans. Finally, we

take our fitted predicted values from equation (2),  , standardize the variable, and take its

negative to be able to interpret it as effectiveness (as opposed to being the propensity to have

patients experience adverse outcomes). We denote this effectiveness measure as:




14
 Priority for enrollment in VHA benefits depends on the veteran's income, disability status, and combat history.
We include an indicator for each group.

                                                        13
                                  = -( -  )/ .


       Empirically equation (2) places more weight on yearly jackknife probabilities that are

estimated with more precision and less weight on probabilities estimated with more noise. The

latter shrink towards zero, the expected value of  . Chetty et al. (2014) note that calculating

the probabilities over multiple years could allow for "drift," that is the idea that professionals

learn and change their behavior over time. However, here we calculate a single effectiveness

measure for each PCP; in the results reported below, we use measures for multiple years purely

to increase statistical power.

       We also constructed effectiveness measures over two mutually exclusive time periods for

each provider to account for provider learning and to check for the within-provider reliability of

our effectiveness measures. We constructed empirical Bayes shrinkage effectiveness measures

from Equations (1) ­ (4) for two time periods, 2005-2011 and 2012-2017, for PCPs who had at

least 20 new patients in each time period. This left us with 2,566 PCPs for whom we could

measure effectiveness in both periods. The correlation in 2005-2011 and 2012-2017 mental

health effectiveness across providers was 0.81; the correlation for circulatory conditions was

0.79; and the correlation for ACSC was lower at 0.49. This lower correlation across time periods

might reflect the effort the VHA has put into tracking and reducing ACSC.

       Figure 1 plots histograms for each of our raw PCP effectiveness measures before

standardization. The value of each measure represents the percent increase in the probability that

a PCP's patient visits an ED or hospital within three years, relative to all other providers,

conditional on the controls included in Equation (1). All three raw PCP effectiveness metrics are

symmetric around mean zero by construction. Circulatory conditions exhibit the largest variation

while ACSC exhibit the lowest. It is important to keep in mind that these measures capture

                                                  14
within-clinic, and within-year and month variation in PCP effectiveness. Hence, regional

differences in health or trends over time should not affect them.

       After standardization, PCPs with a one standard deviation (SD) higher mental health

effectiveness are 1.56 percentage points (pp) less likely to have their patients visit an ED or be

hospitalized for mental health, over a base of 4.97% (a 31% reduction). Similarly, a one SD

higher circulatory condition effectiveness PCP is 1.96pp less likely to have an adverse

circulatory outcome (over a base of 7.37%; a 27% reduction); a one SD higher ACSC

effectiveness PCP is 1.12pp less likely to have their patient be hospitalized for ACSC (over a

base of 2.52%; a 44% reduction). Regressions underlying these calculations are shown in Table

A3 and are based on Equation (3) below.

       PCP effectiveness is also positively correlated across the three conditions (Figure 2) with

Pearson correlation coefficients between any two measures varying from 0.35 to 0.40. This

degree of correlation suggests that while doctors who are more effective in one dimension tend

to be more effective in other dimensions, there are also significant differences in the degree of

effectiveness for the three types of conditions within doctors.

       Table 1 shows how the mean characteristics of veterans in our sample vary across PCPs

in different effectiveness bands. The first column shows means for the entire sample while

columns two through four show means for patients divided into terciles of provider effectiveness

for circulatory issues. Since the three PCP metrics are highly correlated, dividing the sample by

mental health or ACSC metrics yield similar patterns.

       The average veteran is a late-middle aged (55) white male; the sample is 74.3% non-

Hispanic White, 5.8% Hispanic, 13.2% Black, and 1.7% Asian/Pacific Islander. About 58% are

currently married. About 30% are on Medicare and 5.4% are on Medicaid at the time of



                                                 15
enrollment. Half have some form of service-connected disability. The average veteran's income

is $44,413 in 2019 dollars. For some veterans (13.2%), we observe their prior medical history if

they were previously treated at a VA hospital or emergency department without enrolling in VA

health benefits. Prior circulatory hospitalization or ED use was most common, followed by

mental health, and then an ACSC, but less than one percent of new enrollees had one of these

events. As alluded to earlier, patients do not often switch providers; the average PCP-patient

relationship over the three-year window in which we follow patients is 23 months (693 days).

Table 1 also includes some information about diagnosis at the veteran's first visit, which was not

included in Equation (1) as it may not be pre-determined.

       Looking across terciles of PCP circulatory care effectiveness measures (columns 2

through 4) supports the idea that patients are quasi-randomly assigned. There is little difference

in any of the measures across columns suggesting that veterans are distributed evenly across

terciles in terms of their demographics, service history, and medical conditions.

       Figure 3 provides another look at the assumption that veterans are randomly assigned to

PCPs of differing levels of effectiveness by showing a "balance" test. The figure is constructed

by first regressing the PCP effectiveness measures on clinic, year-month, day of week, and the

number of days between the veteran's desired date and the date their appointment was made and

then regressing the residuals from this first regression on all of the observable patient

characteristics. Note that the controls in equation (1) are not included in the minimal PCP

effectiveness measure plotted in this figure.

       The figure allows us to see whether, within a clinic, veterans who are assigned to PCPs

with higher levels of effectiveness differ in terms of observable variables such as demographics,

military service history, eligibility category, and prior year's medical history. An important



                                                 16
thing to determine is whether patients assigned to the more effective PCPs within a clinic appear

to be systematically healthier or less healthy than other patients. Although a few coefficients are

statistically significant (which is not surprising given our large sample size) there is little

indication that PCP effectiveness is systematically related to factors that would signal better or

worse patient health on average. 15 Furthermore, we control for prior patient health (MH,

circulatory condition, and ACSC) in all our specifications.

         In Appendix Table A1 we construct effectiveness measures and replicate our analyses on

a subsample of veterans who had no prior VHA utilization. Recall that there is no information

about health conditions on the intake form veterans complete. For the subset of patients in this

table, schedulers also have no possible access to any prior information about health problems

that might have been gleaned from VHA records. They could not have directed patients to

practitioners on the basis of information they did not have, so this exercise addresses remaining

concerns about the randomness of matching patients to PCPs. Our findings are robust.



3.2 Correlating PCP effectiveness with other measures of PCP practice variation and PCP

characteristics

         Equipped with these measures of PCP effectiveness, we first seek to validate them by

asking whether each individual effectiveness (i.e., mental health, circulatory, or ACSC) are

individually predictive of other patient outcomes of interest, notably mortality and health care

costs. Importantly, mortality and health care costs were not used to construct the metrics. We




15
  To the extent that certain prior characteristics are statistically significant, some are in the "opposite" direction
implying that sicker patients are assigned less effective doctors. Moreover, our final effectiveness measures control
for some of the variables.

                                                          17
estimate the effects of PCP effectiveness,  , on mortality and total costs for the 802,777 new

patients assigned to PCPs over the sample period:

                     =  +  +  +  +  +  +  .                                                       (3)

The parameter of interest,  , represents the impact of a standard deviation increase in one of our

measures of PCP effectiveness on a patient outcome (for example, death in the next three years).

Equation (3) includes the same controls as in equation (1).

       We next explore how these measures of PCP effectiveness are related to measure of

practice style. Do more effective physicians achieve better results by ordering more tests, by

making more referrals, or by encouraging more visits? Are they more likely to conduct

screenings as recommended by the VHA? These questions are explored using models similar to

Equation (3) but using alternative outcome measures.

       We also correlate PCP effectiveness with time-invariant provider characteristics such as

the demographics of the provider. Instead of patient-level regressions, these models focus on a

provider-level measure of effectiveness obtained by averaging the fitted values in equation (2)

across each PCPs' patients:  =   . We then estimate a regression of this provider-level

PCP effectiveness measure on a provider's own characteristics  , for 7,548 PCPs:

                                    =  +  +  +  .                                                 (4)

A fixed effect for the PCPs home clinic,  is included to ensure that we are identifying within-

clinic provider differences.



4. Results

       Table 2 explores the relationship between being assigned to a PCP with a one standard

deviation increment in PCP effectiveness, 3-year mortality, 1-year costs, and 3-year costs. Each


                                                18
element of the table corresponds to a separate regression and only the coefficient of interest,  , is

shown. The regressions are in the form of Equation (3) and the standard errors are clustered at

the PCP level.

       Table 2 shows that assignment to a PCP with a one standard deviation higher

effectiveness measure is associated with a reduction of 0.20 to 0.23 percentage points in the risk

of mortality in the next three years. Given the baseline 3-year mortality risk of 5.5%, this

estimate translates into a 3.6 to 4.2% reduction in mortality. Both 1 year and 3 year total costs

also fall by between 2.5 and 5.4% depending on the measure, with the largest reductions in total

costs being for PCPs who are relatively more effective than others within their clinics at

preventing ER visits and hospitalizations for circulatory conditions. The impact of high

spending PCPs on patient spending has been shown in prior research (Kwok 2019), but we

demonstrate that these effectiveness measures are also predictive of important patient outcomes

that were not used in their construction.

       Table 3 drills down on the mortality results by examining 3-year mortality by for the

largest cause of death categories. It is reasonable to assume, for example, that PCPs who are

effective in reducing ER visits and hospitalizations for circulatory conditions might be good at

helping patients avoid deaths due to heart conditions. It is unclear though whether they would

also be good at helping patients avoid deaths due to other common causes such as cancer. The

extent to which there are spillovers onto other causes of death depends on how correlated

effectiveness is across domains of care. Table 3 suggests that there are some spillovers, but that

these different measures also capture particular domains of expertise.

       For example, being assigned to a PCP with a one standard deviation higher measure of

mental health effectiveness is associated with reductions of 13.3% reduction in the probability of



                                                 19
death from suicide, and an 8.7% fall in the probability of death from external causes. This latter

category includes confirmed suicides as well as deaths from overdoses, poisonings, and

accidents, some of which may have been suicides. A one standard deviation improvement in

mental health effectiveness is also associated with a -0.050 percentage point reduction in the

probability of a cancer death, on a baseline of 1.48%, a 3.4% reduction. The estimates also

imply a 4.0% reduction in the probability of death from heart disease.

       Patients assigned to PCPs with a one standard deviation higher measure of circulatory

care effectiveness see similar reductions in the probability of death from cancer or heart disease,

but no reduction in the probability of death from suicide, and only a 4.0% reduction in the

probability of death from external causes. These results suggest that some PCPs who are

effective at caring for patients with circulatory conditions may lack expertise in caring for

patients with mental health risks.

       Patients whose PCPs are one standard deviation higher in terms of effectiveness in

preventing ambulatory care sensitive conditions achieve the largest reductions in deaths from

cancer (4.3%), and heart disease (4.5%), as well as a 6.3% reduction in external causes of death

over the next three years, though there is no statistically significant effect for confirmed suicides.

       None of the three measures predict reductions in deaths from lower respiratory conditions

or cerebrovascular events suggesting either that these deaths may be harder to prevent, or that

they represent another dimension of care effectiveness that may not be highly correlated with the

measures we examine.



4.1 Effects on use of care




                                                  20
       So far we have seen that patients of PCPs with higher effectiveness scores face a lower

risk of death and incur lower total costs over a one year or a three year horizon. How are these

positive results achieved? Is it the case, for example, that the patients consume more preventive

care and thus are spared expensive illnesses? These questions are explored in Tables 4 through

Table 6 which estimate models in the form of Equation (3), separately for each effectiveness

measure.

       Table 4 examines the relationship between PCP effectiveness and the number of medical

encounters in the first year after assignment to a PCP. The first column shows that a one

standard deviation in PCP effectiveness is associated with a reduction of 2 to 3% in the overall

number of medical encounters (e.g. a one standard deviation improvement in mental health

effectiveness reduces the total number of visits by 0.395 percentage points on a baseline of

13.4%). Some of this improvement is due to large reductions in the probability of any ED visits

or inpatient hospitalizations as shown in columns 4 and 5. However, since the effectiveness

measures were constructed with reference to ED visits and hospitalizations these significant

relationships are not surprising.

       What is more surprising is that there are reductions in the number of primary care visits

of 1.3 to 2.2%, as well as in reductions in the number of mental health visits. It is striking that

patients assigned to a PCP who is one standard more effective at treating mental health have

8.2% fewer mental health visits in the first year (a reduction of 0.106 on a baseline of 1.3 visits).

Hence, it does not seem to be the case that more effective doctors are providing more general

primary care or more mental health care. Column 6 shows that in the subset of patients over 65

who also qualify for Medicare (and for whom we have Medicare records) there are no




                                                 21
differences in the number of visits outside of the VA. Hence, the reduction in visits at the VHA

is not offset by increases in visits elsewhere.

        Table 5 examines referrals, laboratory tests, and imaging. Another way that a PCP might

achieve greater effectiveness is by referring patients to specialists when needed, or by conducting

more lab and imaging tests. Table 5 suggests however that more effective PCPs are less likely to

do any of these things.

        While some of the differences in referrals are quite small, a one standard deviation

increase in mental health effectiveness is estimated to reduce referrals for mental health by 3.0%

(0.63 on a baseline of 20.9%) and to reduce referrals to cardiology by 4.1% (0.29 on a baseline

of 7.0%). A one standard deviation increase in circulatory condition effectiveness reduces

referrals for mental health by 1.5% but reduces referrals to cardiology by 9.6% (0.67 on a

baseline of 7.0%). The measure of effectiveness at preventing hospitalizations for ambulatory

care sensitive conditions has little effect on referrals.

        However, all three measures of PCP effectiveness are negatively associated with ordering

laboratory panels, with reductions ranging from 1.5% for a one standard deviation increase in

mental health effectiveness to 3.2% for a one standard deviation increase in circulatory condition

effectiveness. Similarly, for imaging there are reductions of 2.0% (for mental health

effectiveness) to 4.0% (for circulatory condition effectiveness).

        Table 6 looks at whether PCPs who are more effective according to our measures are

more likely to follow VHA guidelines for screening veterans. For some types of screens,

compliance is already very high in the VHA, leaving little room for within-clinic variation across

PCPs. Panel A of Table 6 focuses on screenings for depression, PTSD, and substance use.

Compliance with all these screens varies from 94.2% to 96.9% for new enrollees, in keeping



                                                   22
with the strong emphasis the VHA places on mental health. Nevertheless, we do see some

statistically significant, albeit small positive relationships between PCP effectiveness for

circulatory conditions and ACSC and the probability of conducting these mental health

screenings. The magnitudes vary from increases of 0.11% to 0.29%.

       Panel B of Table 6 looks at whether patients received recommended screenings for

colorectal cancer, hepatitis C, HIV, and tobacco use, and whether they received immunizations

for influenza. Aside from screening for tobacco use, these physical health screenings have much

lower average compliance rates. While most of the estimated coefficients are not statistically

significant, those that are significant suggest a small negative relationship between PCP

effectiveness and these screenings. For example, a one standard deviation increase in

effectiveness for circulatory conditions is estimated to reduce the probability of screening for

hepatitis C by 1.9% (0.9 on a baseline of 47.3%) while a one standard deviation increase in

effectiveness for ACSC reduces it by 1.6%. A one standard deviation improvement in mental

health effectiveness reduces the probability of screening for HIV by 1.4%. The only positive and

significant coefficient in the table is for the effect of ACSC effectiveness on tobacco screening,

but the magnitude is very small: 0.11%.

       This section demonstrates that assignment to some PCPs generates better outcomes while

reducing the amount of care consumed along most dimensions.



4.3 Characteristics of effective PCPs and the patient-PCP match

       We have argued that some PCPs appear to be more effective than others working within

the same clinics in terms of avoiding negative health outcomes for their patients. How are our

measures of PCP effectiveness related to observable PCP characteristics? This question is



                                                 23
explored in Table 7 which shows estimates of Equation (4). Because we are looking at within-

clinic variations in PCP effectiveness, the PCPs home clinic,  , is included in the model to

ensure that we are identifying within-clinic variation.

           Unfortunately, we do not see information about the PCP's training, but we do know

whether they are a physician or not, their gender, and their age. Because age changes over time

and this is a PCP-level regression, we take the weighted average of the PCP's age at the time

each new patient is assigned. We can also generate information about the means of certain

practice characteristics from the data. Here we look at the number of patients they see per day,

the number of new patients they see per year, and whether they are a full time equivalent

(defined as seeing at least one patient on 250 days a year). While PCPs who work full-time may

amass more relevant experience, in the VHA many research faculty hold part-time appointments

so this flag may also be capturing that distinction.

           Table 7 suggests that physicians are slightly less effective (about 0.1 standard deviations)

than nurse practitioners and physician assistants in terms of avoiding ED visits and

hospitalizations.16 Effectiveness increases with age, number of patients per day and the number

of new patients per year. A one standard deviation increase in patients per day (4.25 patients) is

estimated to improve circulatory condition effectiveness and ACSC effectiveness by 0.068 and

0.11 of a standard deviation, respectively. A one standard deviation in new patients per year

(12.29 patients) would increase mental health, circulatory condition, and ACSC effectiveness by

0.17, 0.25, and 0.11 standard deviations, respectively. PCPs whose patients receive a larger

proportion of mental health visits within the embedded mental health team--settings where the

PCP is present with a licensed mental health specialist in the same clinic without needing a



16
     In Appendix Table A4 we find that our main results are robust to focusing only on physicians.

                                                           24
separate consultation 17--achieve higher effectiveness along all three dimensions. This measure

of greater care coordination may reconcile the mental health referral results from earlier.

Providers who spend more of their time at the VHA as part-time workers also have higher

effectiveness ratings. This may be because these PCPs are more likely to be researchers, training

residents, or in administrative leadership roles.

         Table 8 seeks to address the question of whether patients are aware of provider

effectiveness. As discussed above, patients are not encouraged to switch providers in the VHA,

and switching is relatively rare, however we do see variation in the length of time that a patient

stays with a particular PCP after their initial assignment. Column 1 shows that there is a small

positive relationship (a little over a week on a baseline of 693 days) between our measures of

PCP effectiveness and the length of a patient's relationship with that PCP. Some of this could be

mechanical since more effective PCPs were shown to reduce the patient's probability of death.

Column (2) shows that if we exclude patients who die within three years, we see a very similar

relationship between effectiveness and the length of the patient-PCP relationship.



5. Discussion

         In this paper we address the following questions in the unique context of the VHA: Are

some providers more effective than others in promoting patient health and how can we measure

that? Is provider effectiveness correlated across different aspects of patient health or are some




17
   Internally referred to in the VA as Primary Care-Mental Health Integration, PCMHI integrates mental health care
with the veterans' primary care team in the same primary care clinic, usually in the same day, to achieve patient-
centered mental health care coordination. This is in contrast to traditional referrals to separate mental health
specialist clinics for a future date. The independent variable is defined as the fraction of all outpatient mental health
visits that are integrated with primary care.

                                                           25
providers much better at some types of care than others? And if some providers are generally

more effective than others, what characteristics of providers predict effectiveness?

        These questions are hard to answer for the same reasons that make teacher "value-added"

measures controversial. Teacher value-added models seek to assess teacher effectiveness by

looking at student outcomes. Similarly, in health settings we may try to assess provider

effectiveness using patient outcomes. In most settings, patients sort non-randomly across

providers. If patients choose their providers, if sicker patients are referred to more experienced

providers, or if some patients do not have access to more skilled providers, then inferences based

on patient outcomes may be biased. Researchers typically try to solve this problem through risk

adjustment, that is by correcting for observable differences in patient mix. But there may be

important characteristics of patients that are observed by providers and not by the risk adjusters.

The VHA's system of quasi-randomly assigning patients to PCPs within a clinic provides a

solution to these problems.

        An alternative approach to measuring effectiveness in a health care setting focuses on

what the provider does rather than on patient outcomes. Effectiveness may be assessed using

checklists. But this can generate problems if some patients are more likely to demand certain

procedures (or shun them). A second problem with checklists is akin to the idea of "teaching to

the test." Providers may focus on "checking the boxes" and neglect other important aspects of

patient care. 18 Moreover, dealing with checklist can take time away from direct patient care and

communication between providers and patients.

        This paper focuses on measuring effectiveness using patient outcomes, leveraging the

unique quasi-random assignment of patients to PCPs in the VHA. Our results suggest the


18
 For example, Medicare's Physician Quality Reporting System included 194 separate quality metrics (Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services 2012).

                                                      26
following answers to the questions we posed: First, some PCPs are indeed more effective than

others. While we constructed our measures with reference to future ER visits and

hospitalizations, we were able to validate them by showing that our measures of PCP

effectiveness predicted future risk of death and future health care costs.

       Second, provider effectiveness is highly correlated across the three domains of

effectiveness we examine (mental health, circulatory conditions, and hospitalizations for

ambulatory care sensitive conditions), with correlations between any two of these measures

ranging from 0.35 to 0.40. These results suggest that it is not necessary to measure effectiveness

in every possible dimension. Perhaps the VHA's current practice of tracking the effectiveness of

clinics in terms of avoiding hospitalizations due to ambulatory care sensitive conditions could

potentially be extended to identify PCPs within clinics who are effective in helping patients to

avoid hospitalizations, ED visits, and ultimately mortality.

       Our third and most striking finding is that more effective PCPs do more with less.

Patients of these providers have fewer primary care visits, fewer referrals, fewer lab and imaging

tests, and even fewer preventive health screenings. Better communication between some PCPs

and their patients is one possible mechanism that might help to explain these results. For

example, Alsan, Garrick, and Graziani (2019) found that Black patients were more likely to

accept preventive services when they were matched with a Black doctor. Since in their setting

doctors of all races attempted to persuade patients to take up these services, the authors attributed

the higher take up when providers and patients were of the same race to better communication.

Koulayev, Simeonova, and Skipper (2016) and Simeonova, Skipper, and Thingholm (2021) find

that providers can improve medication adherence and these providers achieve better patient

outcomes. They attribute this to better communication quality.It is possible that some PCPs at the



                                                 27
VHA are able to allow patients to forego some visits, tests and referrals because better

communication with patients allows them to obtain the information they need and avoid ordering

unnecessary tests. Our finding that providers with better outcomes rely more on integrated

mental health providers than mental health specialist referrals also support the communication

and rapport hypothesis.

       Determining the reasons why some PCPs are able to do more with less is an important

avenue for future work. In the meantime, our results suggest that health administrators should be

cautious in seeking to eliminate "unnecessary" referrals and tests: Given variations in provider

effectiveness, some providers may need to use more resources to achieve the same patient health

outcomes.




                                                28
Figures and Tables




                     29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
Appendix Figures and Tables




Notes: Page 1 of Form 1010-EZ for enrollment in VA health benefits. This is the page with basic
demographics, military service information, and preferred clinic and whether the veteran would like to be
contacted for their first appointment (in red box).

                                                   40
Appendix Table A1




                    41
Appendix Table A2




                    42
Appendix Table A3: Effects of a One Standard Deviation Change in an Index on Mental Health,
Circulatory Condition and ACSC Measures




                                            43
Appendix Table A4




                    44
References

Abaluck, Jason, Leila Agha, David C. Chan, Daniel Singer, and Diana Zhu. 2020. "Fixing
Misallocation with Guidelines: Awareness vs. Adherence," NBER working paper 27467.

Anderson, Kim, Heather J. Ross, Peter C. Austin, Jiming Fang, and Douglas S. Lee. 2020.
"Health Care Use Before First Heart Failure Hospitalization: Identifying Opportunities to Pre-
Emptively Diagnose Impending Decompensation," Journal of American College of Cardiology:
Heart failure, 8 (12), 1024-1034.

Assari, Shervin. 2014. "Veterans and Risk of Heart Disease in the United States: A Cohort with
20 Years of Follow Up," International Journal of Preventive Medicine, 5 (6), 703-709.

Barker, Isaac, Adam Steventon, Sarah R. Deeny. 2017. "Association Between Continuity of Care
in General Practice and Hospital Admissions for Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions: Cross
Sectional Study of Routinely Collected, Person Level Data," British Medical Journal, 356:j84.

Bottle A, Kim D, Aylin P, et al. 2018. "Routes to diagnosis of heart failure: observational study
using linked data in England." Heart, 104: 600-605.

Chan, David C., Matthew Gentzkow and Chuan Yu. 2019. "Selection with Variation in
Diagnostic Skill: Evidence from Radiologists," NBER working paper #26467.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan Skinner. 2012. "Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth
in Health Care." Journal of Economic Literature, 50 (3): 645-80.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
I: Estimating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates." American Economic Review, 104 (9)
2593-2632.

Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2016. "Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision
Making, and Performance Among Physicians." Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1): 1­43.

Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley MacLeod. "Understanding Doctor Decision Making: The Case of
Depression Treatment," Econometrica, v. 88 #3, May 2020, 847-878.

Currie, Janet, W. Bentley MacLeod, and Jessica Van Parys. 2016. "Provider Practice Style and
Patient Health Outcomes: The Case of Heart Attacks." Journal of Health Economics,47: 64­80.

Cutler, David. The Quality Cure: How Focusing on Health Care Quality Can Save Your Life and
Lower Spending Too, University of California Press, 2014.

Cutler, David M., Jonathan S. Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019."Physician
Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care Spending."
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (1): 192­221.



                                                45
Dobbie, Will, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal S. Yang. 2018. "The Effects of Pretrial Detention on
Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges."
American Economic Review, 108, 201-240.
Doyle, Joseph J., S. M. Ewer, and T. H. Wagner (2010): "Returns to Physician Human Capital:
Evidence from Patients Randomized to Physician Teams," Journal of Health Economics, 29,
866­882.

Doyle, Joseph J. 2011. "Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Evidence from Health
Shocks to Patients Far from Home." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3 (3):
221­43.

Doyle, Joseph J., John A. Graves, and Jonathan Gruber. Forthcoming. "Evaluating Measures of
Hospital Quality: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns." Review of Economics and
Statistics.

Doyle, Joseph J., John A. Graves, Jonathan Gruber, and Samuel Kleiner. 2015. "Measuring
Returns to Hospital Care: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns." Journal of Political
Economy, 123 (1): 170­214.

Eichmeyer, Sarah and Jonathan Zhang. 2021. "Opioid Prescribing Variation in Emergency
Departments: Consequences for Patient Health." Working Paper.

Epstein, Andrew, and Sean Nicholson. 2009. "The Formation and Evolution of Physician
Treatment Styles: An Application to Cesarean Sections." Journal of Health Economics, 28:1126­
1140.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. "Sources of Geographic
Variation in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
131 (4): 1681­1726.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and
Etoile L. Pinder. 2003a. "The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending: The
Content, Quality, and Accessibility of Care. Part 1." Annals of Internal Medicine, 138 (4):273­
287.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and
Etoile L. Pinder. 2003b. "The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending: The
Content, Quality, and Accessibility of Care. Part 2." Annals of Internal Medicine, 138 (4):288­
298.

Fadlon, Itzik and Jessica Van Parys, 2020. "Primary care physician practice styles and patient
care: Evidence from physician exits in Medicare," Journal of Health Economics, vol 71.

Fletcher, Jason, Leora Horwitz, and Elizabeth Bradley. 2014. "Estimating the Value Added of
Attending Physicians on Patient Outcomes." NBER Working Paper No. 20534.



                                               46
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Keith Joiner, and Pierre-Thomas Leger. 2017. "Physician Practice
Style and Healthcare Costs: Evidence from Emergency Departments." NBER Working Paper
No. 24155.

Grytten, Jostein and Rune Sorensen. 2003. "Practice Variation and Physician-Specific Effects."
Journal of Health Economics, 22 (3): 403­418.

Hodgson, Karen, Sarah E. Deeny, and Adam Steventon, 2019. "Ambulatory Care-Sensitive
Conditions: Their Potential Uses and Limitations." BMJ Quality & Safety, 28: 429-433.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, Shanette C. Porter, John Q. Easton, Alyssa Blanchard, and Sebastián Kiguel.
2020. "School Effects on Socioemotional Development, School-Based Arrests, and Education
Attainment." American Economic Review: Insights, 2(4): 491-508.

Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas O. Staiger, 2008. "Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
Achievemen: An Experimental Evaluation." NBER Working Paper No. 14607

Koulayev, Sergei, Emilia Simeonova, and Niels Skipper, 2016. "Can Physicians Affect Patient
Adherence With Medication?" Health Economics, 26 (6), 779-794.

Kwok, Jennifer H., 2019. "How Do Primary Care Physicians Influence Healthcare? Evidence on
Practice Styles and Switching Costs from Medicare". Working paper.

Leung, Lucinda B., Lisa V. Rubenstein, Edward P. Post, et al. 2020. "Association of Veterans
Affairs Primary Care Mental Health Integration with Care Access Among Men and Women
Veterans." JAMA Network Open, 3 (10): e2020955.

Lopez, Marianne Hamilton, Gregory W. Daniel, Nicholas C. Fiore, Aparna Higgins, and Mark
B. McClellan. "Paying for Value from Costly Medical Technologies: A Framework for Applying
Value-Based Payment Reforms," Health Affairs, June 2020, 39:6, 1018-.

Molitor, David, 2017. "The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist
Migration," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10, 326­356

The Guideline Advantage, 2013. "The Guideline Advantage Fact Sheet"
https://www.heart.org/idc/groups/heart-
public/@wcm/@mwa/documents/downloadable/ucm_459320.pdf Accessed September 16, 2020.

Simeonova, Emlia, Niels Skipper, and Peter Thingholm. 2021. "Physician Health Management
Skills and Patient Outcomes." Working paper.

Trivedi, Ranak B., Edward P. Post, Haili Sun, Andrew Pomerantz, et al. 2015. "Prevalence,
Comorbidity, and Prognosis of Mental Health Among US Veterans." American Journal of Public
Health, 105 (12): 2564-2569.




                                              47
Van Parys, Jessica. 2016. "Variation in Physician Practice Styles Within and Across Emergency
Departments." PloS one, 11(8).

Wagner, Todd H., Shuo Chen, and Paul G. Barnett. 2003. "Using Average Cost-Methods to
Estimate Encounter-Level Costs for Medical-Surgical Stays in the VA." Medical Care Research
Review. 60: 3 Suppl., 15S-36S.




                                             48
