                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE INTERGENERATIONAL MORTALITY TRADEOFF OF COVID-19 LOCKDOWN
                             POLICIES

                                            Lin Ma
                                          Gil Shapira
                                       Damien de Walque
                                         Quy-Toan Do
                                         Jed Friedman
                                      Andrei A. Levchenko

                                       Working Paper 28925
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28925


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We are grateful to Mohamed Abdel Jelil, Jishnu Das, Shanta Devarajan, Xavier Devictor,
Rema Hanna, Aaditya Mattoo, Mushfiq Mobarak and Nina Yamanis for helpful comments.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the
views of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or thegovernments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lin Ma, Gil Shapira, Damien de Walque, Quy-Toan Do, Jed Friedman, and Andrei A.
Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Intergenerational Mortality Tradeoff of COVID-19 Lockdown Policies
Lin Ma, Gil Shapira, Damien de Walque, Quy-Toan Do, Jed Friedman, and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 28925
June 2021
JEL No. I15,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

In lower-income countries, the economic contractions that accompany lockdowns to contain the
spread of COVID-19 can increase child mortality, counteracting the mortality reductions achieved
by the lockdown. To formalize and quantify this effect, we build a macro-susceptible-infected-
recovered model that features heterogeneous agents and a country-group-specific relationship
between economic downturns and child mortality, and calibrate it to data for 85 countries across
all income levels. We find that in low-income countries, a lockdown can potentially lead to 1.76
children's lives lost due to the economic contraction per COVID-19 fatality averted. The ratio
stands at 0.59 and 0.06 in lower-middle and upper-middle income countries, respectively. As a
result, in some countries lockdowns actually can produce net increases in mortality. The
optimal lockdowns are shorter and milder in poorer countries than in rich ones, and never produce
a net mortality increase.

Lin Ma                                         Quy-Toan Do
AS2 #05-19                                     The World Bank
National University of Singapore               1818 H Street NW
Singapore                                      Washington, DC 20433
ecsml@nus.edu.sg                               qdo@worldbank.org

Gil Shapira                                    Jed Friedman
The World Bank                                 The World Bank
1818 H street, NW                              1818 H street, NW
Washington, DC 20433                           Washington, DC 20433
gshapira@worldbank.org                         jfriedman@worldbank.org

Damien de Walque                               Andrei A. Levchenko
The World Bank                                 Department of Economics
Development Research Group                     University of Michigan
1818 H Street, NW                              611 Tappan Street
Washington, DC 20433                           Ann Arbor, MI 48109
ddewalque@worldbank.org                        and CEPR
                                               and also NBER
                                               alev@umich.edu
1         Introduction
Governments across the world introduced unprecedented lockdown policies in an attempt to
contain the spread of COVID-19. Unsurprisingly, a debate soon erupted on what type of
lockdowns were warranted and whether the benefits of such policies justify the accompany-
ing dramatic economic contractions. Embracing utilitarianism, economists, among others,
focused on the tradeoff between the lives saved by a lockdown and its economic costs (Hall
et al., 2020; Kim and Loayza, 2021). On the other hand, both proponents of deontologi-
cal ethics and critics of the statistical value of life recused a policy analytic approach that
involves the monetary valuation of life (Singer and Plant, 2020; Viscusi and Aldy, 2003;
Slovic and Peters, 2006). This paper casts a new light on this debate by bringing to light an
intergenerational mortality tradeoff inherent to pandemic mitigation as the disease and the
lockdown policies affect the mortality of younger and older individuals differentially.
        In the early days of the pandemic, evidence emerged that the COVID-19 mortality risk
increases substantially with age (Verity et al., 2020). Heterogeneous age profiles of mortality
risk are in fact common in epidemics, and were also present in the 1918-1919 influenza
pandemic and in two recent emergent diseases ­ Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
and Ebola ­ which induced sustained pandemic concern in the global community.1 On the
other hand, previous research has shown that infant and child mortality in low- and middle-
income countries is counter-cyclical (Pritchett and Summers, 1996; Bhalotra, 2010; Baird
et al., 2011; Cruces et al., 2012; Friedman and Schady, 2013). This implies that lockdown
policies in developing countries can lead to an increase in infant and child mortality due
to the consequent economic contraction. Thus, pandemic mitigation policies in low-income
settings not only forgo economic well-being to save lives but also embed a tradeoff between
one life and another.
        This paper quantitatively evaluates this tradeoff in a Susceptible-Infected-Recovered
    1
    The 1918-19 influenza pandemic was characterized by an age shift with most excess deaths occurring
among young adults (ages 15-44) and fewer excess deaths occurring among those over 65 (Olson et al., 2005;
Andreasen et al., 2008). The Ebola case fatality rates for young children under 5 and for elders over 75
are both approximately 80 percent higher than for prime-age adults (Garske et al., 2017). During the 2003
SARS outbreak, the case fatality rate was estimated to be an order of magnitude higher for patients in China
over 60 years of age than those under 40 years (25 percent vs 2 percent) (Jia et al., 2009). A similar age
gradient was observed in Hong Kong during the same outbreak (Karlberg et al., 2004).



                                                     1
(SIR)-macro model (e.g. Eichenbaum et al., 2020) augmented with two main features. First,
a lockdown can potentially increase child mortality by inducing an economic contraction.
The main innovation of our paper is to model and quantify this effect. We estimate country-
group-specific semi-elasticities of child mortality with respect to aggregate income by ap-
plying the methodology of Baird et al. (2011) to microdata from 83 countries, and use the
resulting estimates in our quantitative model. Second, to capture the key mechanism we
relax the representative agent assumption of most SIR-macro models and allow for several
types of agents that differ by age. Our economy comprises of young, adult, and elderly
members (as in Acemoglu et al., 2020).
   Infection is assumed to spread through work, consumption-related activities, and com-
munity and intra-household interactions. Adults are the only ones supplying labor, trading
consumption off against the risk to themselves and their relatives of contracting COVID-19.
A decentralized equilibrium is characterized by excess supply of labor since individuals do
not internalize the social cost of being infected, which consists of an increased probability
of infection for all susceptible individuals as well as a higher infection fatality rate due to
limited hospital capacity. A lockdown, which we model as an income tax, reduces labor sup-
ply in order to reduce COVID-19 transmission. A lockdown can lower mortality by either
containing the virus or by "flattening the curve," that is slowing the virus' spread such that
demand for COVID-19 treatment does not exceed the health systems' capacity. However,
the reduction in labor supply and consequent consumption losses increase child mortality in
low- and middle-income country settings.
   We calibrate the model to 85 countries across all income groups to quantify the tradeoff
between the expected number of COVID-19-related deaths averted by lockdowns and the
number of lives lost to the resulting economic contractions. The COVID-19-related processes
in the model are calibrated based on early data reported in the health literature, country-
specific epidemiological projections (Walker et al., 2020), and patterns of social contacts in
developing and developed countries. Implicitly, the analysis adopts the information set at the
disposal of policymakers towards the start of the pandemic as countries initially formulated
policy responses, before the emergence of possibly more infectious viral lineages (Davies et
al., 2021).


                                              2
       Low-, middle-, and high-income countries differ along several relevant dimensions. First,
economic contractions raise child mortality in poorer countries, but not in rich ones. We
estimate that a percent decrease in per capita GDP can increase under-5 mortality by up to
0.15 deaths per 1,000 children in the poorest countries. Second, the demographic composition
of poorer countries features a larger ratio of young children to old people. Since the survival
of the former is put at risk by an economic downturn while the latter are most vulnerable
to dying from COVID-19, a lockdown in lower-income countries leads to more recession-
induced deaths per COVID-19 fatality averted, ceteris paribus. Third, a smaller share of
social contacts are in the context of work or consumption in developing countries compared
to developed ones. The preponderance of community-related transmission in low-income
countries renders government-mandated lockdowns comparatively less effective at reducing
the spread of infections. Finally, low health care capacity in poorer countries lowers the
efficacy of a lockdown at "flattening the curve" as hospitals are quickly overwhelmed. The
average number of hospital beds per capita in high-income countries is seven times higher
than in low-income countries.2
       To highlight the heterogeneity in outcomes, we subject each of the 85 countries in our
sample to a uniform reference lockdown that lasts 7 weeks. We compare the economic
and mortality outcomes in the reference lockdown to a scenario without any government
intervention. The duration and the strength of the reference lockdown is chosen based on
experiences in seven European countries in the start of the pandemic (Flaxman et al., 2020).3
       Our main quantitative result is that there is substantial variation in health outcomes
across countries following the reference lockdown. In our model, the lockdown led to an
average of 1.76 child deaths for every COVID-19 fatality averted in low-income countries.
   2
     The average number of hospital beds per 1,000 people was 0.8 and 5.7 in low- and high-income countries
respectively in 2006, the last year for which the World Development Indicators data allow the comparison.
   3
     We take the perspective of the initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic when governments were first
confronted with designing pandemic responses in the absence of effective vaccines or therapeutics. We
implement only non-pharmaceutical interventions because in the event of a new but similar pandemic, the
same tradeoffs will be relevant as new vaccines and/or therapeutics would most likely not be immediately
available. According to the Oxford Blavatnik COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, every single one of
the 175 countries that it covers imposed at least some lockdown policy. Lockdown severity was remarkably
similar across countries at different levels of development. On a scale of 0 to 100, the mean Oxford­Blavatnik
lockdown stringency index was 79 in the low-income countries, and 78 in the high-income countries. (These
averages are as of April 2020, the most globally synchronized phase of the lockdown. We use the World
Bank classification of countries into income groups.)


                                                      3
The ratio falls to .59 and .06 in the case of lower-middle and upper-middle income countries,
respectively. (By assumption, there is no mortality tradeoff in high-income countries.) As
a result, lockdowns lower the total mortality by 6.2 percent in the richest countries, but
raise total mortality by 2.6 percent in the poorest ones. The main country characteristics
driving the heterogeneity in health outcomes are (i) the semi-elasticities of child mortality
with respect to GDP and (ii) demography, as poorer countries are also younger countries.
      Finally, we consider a utilitarian approach to setting lockdown policies, in which the
social planner trades off averted deaths from COVID-19 averted against loss of life due to
reduced GDP and the loss of consumption. The optimal lockdown varies across countries,
as marginal costs and benefits are heterogeneous. Poor countries with younger populations
generally impose shorter and milder lockdowns, as the governments internalize the impacts on
child mortality. Thus, the optimal lockdown significantly reduces the share of the population
infected in the rich countries but not in the poor countries. In the end, the child mortality
impact is smaller as well: among the poorest countries, the optimal lockdown would lead to
only 0.32 child deaths for every COVID-19 fatality averted.
      Our paper complements the burgeoning body of work on the macroeconomic impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic (see, among others, Atkeson, 2020; Alvarez et al., 2020; Barrot
et al., 2020; Baqaee and Farhi, 2020a,b; Bonadio et al., 2020; Glover et al., 2020; Kaplan
et al., 2020; Krueger et al., 2020). Most closely related are Eichenbaum et al. (2020), who
develop an SIR-macro model, and Acemoglu et al. (2020), who model population hetero-
geneity by age. We customize these macro frameworks to developing countries. Our analysis
shares the developing country focus with Alon et al. (2020), Barnett-Howell and Mobarak
(2020), Loayza (2020), or Ravallion (2020b) who also point out differences between rich and
poor countries in the benefits and costs of a lockdown and ultimately come to the same
conclusion that the tradeoffs are different and country-specific. Our analysis highlights and
more importantly quantifies a distinct mechanism, whereby a lockdown potentially increases
child mortality in poorer countries.4 Other work that has surmised the potential toll for
infant and child health as a consequence of the COVID19 pandemic includes Roberton et al.
  4
    One underlying mechanism by which a lockdown increases child mortality is through deteriorating food
security and was posited by Ravallion (2020a).



                                                   4
(2020), who use a health care seeking and supply model, and posit reductions in care seeking
and available quality of care. In contrast, our approach uses the historical record of past
contractions to calibrate the under-5 mortality semi-elasticity with respect to the economic
shock.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the quantitative frame-
work. In section 3, we discuss the data used to calibrate the model. The results are presented
in section 4. Section 5 concludes. The Appendix contains additional details on theory and
quantification.



2     Quantitative Framework
In this section, we build a macro-SIR model along the lines of Eichenbaum et al. (2020)
with the added feature that households comprise several members in different age groups
(Acemoglu et al., 2020). Our key innovations are (i) to model income shocks as a source
of mortality not related to COVID-19; and (ii) to calibrate the model to 85 countries with
different underlying characteristics.


2.1      Economic Environment

We consider a discrete and infinite time horizon model, t = 0, 1, · · · , , and a continuum of
households indexed by j  [0, 1]. The measure of households is normalized to 1 in the initial
period. Households are formed by individuals differentiated by age group m  {1, 2, 3} to
which they belong. Type m = 1 individuals are children ages 0-14, type m = 2 are working
prime-age adults ages 15-59 and m = 3 household members are the elderly aged 60 and over.
            m                                                         3   m
Denote by       the mass of individuals of age group m so that        m=1     = 1. We omit country
indices in the model exposition to streamline notation, but in the quantitative analysis the
model is implemented on a large sample of countries with country-specific parameter values.
    Household j evaluates its lifetime utility according to:

                                            
                                     Uj =          t u(¯
                                                       cjt , njt ),                            (1)
                                            t=0




                                                   5
where   (0, 1) is the discount factor and u(·) is the instantaneous utility function, which
takes the form

                                                             
                                        u(¯             ¯jt - n2
                                          cjt , njt ) = c         ,                                      (2)
                                                             2 jt

where c
      ¯jt is aggregate consumption of household j in period t and njt is the amount of labor
it supplies, while  drives the disutility of supplying labor.
       Household consumption c
                             ¯jt aggregates individual consumption cjt (m) of all members of
the household:
                                                                         
                                              3                          -1
                                                                   -1
                                                  m
                                    c
                                    ¯jt =             (cjt (m))               ,                          (3)
                                            m=1


where  is the elasticity of substitution.


COVID-19 SIR states COVID-19 related health status is relevant for both disease trans-
mission and economic behavior. Each individual can be in one of four states: susceptible
(S ), infected (I ), recovered (R), or deceased (D). One feature of our model is that death
can be due to either COVID-19 or another cause. We thus index each household state
with integer k  {1, ..., 64}, which uniquely identifies a triplet { (1),  (2),  (3)}, where
 (m)  {S, I, R, D} indicates the health status of individual m. Appendix Table A.1 re-
ports the list of possible household states.5


Labor supply, lockdown policy, and government budget In our model, only the
prime-age adult (m = 2) household members supply labor. They are paid a wage wt , which
the government can tax at rate µt . As in Eichenbaum et al. (2020), the tax rate µt will be
the instrument by which the policy maker implements a lockdown.6 Tax revenues are then
   5
     Note that to reduce the dimensionality of the state space, we make the assumption that within house-
holds, all members in the same age group are in the same state. We thus do not allow two children (or adults
or elderly) to be in two different states. While this assumption may be unrealistic at the household level,
this simplification does not affect analysis at the aggregate level.
   6
     We interpret "lockdown" policies broadly to include other forms of containment policies, such as encour-
aging social distancing, restricting public events, school and border closures, and so on.




                                                       6
remitted to households in a lump-sum manner. The budget constraint of household j is:
                                      
                       3
                                        (1 - µt ) wt njt + jt , Sjt (2) = 1 or Rjt (2) = 1
                                      
                            m
              cjt =           cjt (m)  (1 - µt ) wt njt + jt ,          Ijt (2) = 1                                 (4)
                      m=1
                                                   ,      jt            D (2) = 1         jt



where cjt is total household consumption. Household income on the right-hand-side of (4)
consists of after-tax labor income and government transfer jt . This budget constraint
applies to the households with a susceptible (Sjt (2) = 1) or recovered (Rjt (2) = 1) work-
ing adult. If the working adult is infected (Ijt (2) = 1), the effective labor supply falls to
njt  njt . Lastly, after the death of the working adult (Djt (2) = 1), household j lives off
government transfers.
   The amount jt transferred to households is determined by the government's budget
constraint, i.e.

       1                         1                        1                           1
             jt dj = µt wt             Sjt (2)njt dj +            Rjt (2)njt dj +           Ijt (2)njt dj   +¯ t,   (5)
      j =0                      j =0                     j =0                        j =0


where ¯ t is some exogenous development assistance revenue.


Firms There is a continuum of competitive firms of unit measure that produce consump-
tion goods Ct using aggregate labor input Nt :


                                                     Ct = ANt .                                                     (6)


Firms choose total labor input to maximize their profit, t :


                                                t = ANt - wt Nt ,                                                   (7)




                                                              7
In equilibrium, good and labor market clearing conditions are thus

                        1
                Ct =          cjt dj,
                       j =0
                         1                       1                         1
                Nt =          Sjt (2)njt dj +          Rjt (2)njt dj +           Ijt (2)njt dj .
                       j =0                     j =0                      j =0



2.2    Mortality and Disease Transmission

We incorporate a modified SIR model to our macroeconomic framework. In our model there
are three types of mortality risks: (i) economic distress risk, (ii) a COVID-19-related risk,
and (iii) an exogenous baseline risk.


Economic distress and baseline mortalities An individual in age group m faces in-
creased mortality during an economic downturn. A downturn is a downward deviation from
baseline consumption, where baseline consumption is the consumption level that would be
achieved in time t = 0 in the absence of a labor tax, i.e. µ = 0, and is denoted cj . Thus, for
household j , a contraction takes place when faced with a positive labor tax or in the case
of death of a prime-age working adult. In addition, in each period t an individual draws an
exogenous age-group specific baseline death shock with probability ¯n (m).
   The economic distress mortality cum baseline mortality probability is:
                                        
                                                     ¯n (m)               cjt  cj
                       njt (m) =                                  cjt
                                                                                      ,            (8)
                                        ¯n (m) +  (m) 1 -
                                        
                                                                  cj
                                                                          cjt < cj

where  (m) is the elasticity of economic distress-related mortality with respect to the fluctu-
ations in consumption. Importantly, in our quantification  (m) will vary by country income
level: it will be positive in poorer countries and decreasing in the income level. In rich
countries economic distress-related mortality elasticity  (m) will be 0. In the quantification,
 (m) will be positive only for children (m = 1).


COVID-related mortality The infection status of an individual of age group m in house-
hold j at time t is denoted Ijt (m)  {0, 1}. Thus, the mass of infected individuals at time t


                                                       8
is given by

                                            1    3
                                                         m
                                   It =                      Ijt (m)dj.
                                           j =0 m=1


Conditional on contracting COVID-19, The probability of death from the infection takes the
following form:

                                             m
                                    dt (m) = d + m (It ),                                         (9)

      m
where d is a baseline infection fatality rate and m (.) measures how mortality also depends
on the total infection rate. The function m (.) reflects the possibility that a larger epidemic
will lead to higher mortality due to saturation of health services such as ICU beds, oxygen
ventilators, etc. (Yang et al., 2020).

   In each period, the probability djt (m) that an individual j will die combines both
COVID-19 and non-COVID mortality risks. We make the assumption that the economic
distress and COVID-19 mortality probabilities are orthogonal to each other in the cross-
section of households. In that case, the death probability of a person of type m in household
j becomes:
                              
                              1 - [1 -                   - dt (m)] if
                                          njt (m)] [1                          Ijt (m) = 1
                  djt (m) =                                                                  .   (10)
                                           njt (m)                        if   Ijt (m) = 0

Lockdown policies and COVID-19 disease dynamics Adapting the model of Eichen-
baum et al. (2020), we assume that the transmission of the infection occurs through four
channels: (i) the labor channel, whereby the infection spreads through workplace interac-
tions, (ii) the consumption channel, which comprises contacts occurring while shopping for
goods, (iii) the community channel, which represents all other interaction of individuals
across households, and (iv) the within-household channel, to account for higher exposure of
individuals who share residence with an infected individual.
   A lockdown policy, therefore, will affect transmission likelihood through these same chan-
nels. As a tax on labor income, a lockdown reduces individual labor supply and consequently

                                                     9
lowers household consumption. Both lead to a decrease infection rates. We further allow a
lockdown policy to mitigate community-related transmission with a semi-elasticity of  by
imposing restrictions on social gatherings that affect community spread. We do not directly
model decisions related to such gatherings and therefore account for the impact of lockdowns
on community spread this way.
   The probability that a susceptible individual m in household j will get infected in period
t is given by:
                     
                      c C +  n N +  I (1 - µ ) +  I , m = 2
                      I 1 jt It I 2 jt It     I3 t           t I 4 jt
           Ijt (m) =                                                           .            (11)
                                I 3 It (1 - µt ) + I 4 Ijt ,          m = 1, 3

The first line of the equation above describes the infection probability of the working adult.
The first three elements reflect transmission through consumption, labor supply, and the
community, respectively, while the last part captures within-household transmission. Con-
sumption and labor supply transmissions are a function of the aggregate consumption and
labor supply of the infected individuals in period t CIt and NIt , which equal:

                                            1       3
                                                            m
                               CIt =                            cjt (m)Ijt (m)dj,
                                        j =0 m=1
                                            1
                               NIt =                njt Ijt (2)dj.
                                            j =0


Community transmission, on the other hand, is a function of the total number of infected
people, It , as defined above. Finally, for within-household transmission, Ijt , equals to one if
any member of the household j is infected, and zero otherwise. The second line of equation
(11) applies to the children and the elderly, who will only be infected through the community
or within-household transmission channels, since they do not work and are assumed not to
get exposed through consumption-related activities.
   The total number of newly infected individuals Tt is thus given by:

                                        1       3
                                                        m
                               Tt =                         Ijt (m)Sjt (m)dj,               (12)
                                       j =0 m=1




                                                        10
where Sjt (m) is an indicator function that takes the value of 1 when member m of household j
is susceptible, and 0 otherwise. The number of susceptible individuals, St , evolves according
to


                                            St+1 = St - Tt .                                  (13)


In period t, all infected individuals will receive the "recovery" shock. With probability
rt (m), the member recovers, with probability dt (m) s/he dies, and with probability it (m)
s/he stays infected. Note that rt (m) + dt (m) + it (m) = 1. The number of infected
individuals thus evolves according to:

                                        1    3
                                                  m
                              It+1 =                  Ij (m)it (m)dj + Tt ,                   (14)
                                       j =0 m=1


which consists of previously infected people who remain so for one additional period and
newly infected individuals.


2.3     Household Optimization

We now turn to household optimization, subject to the aggregate states of the economy as
summarized by t = {CIt , NIt , It } and government policy µt . We first note that all the
households in state k face the same maximization problem and make the same decision. As
a result, we use the subscript k instead of j to indicate the variables for all households in
state k .


Consumption and labor supply Before solving the dynamic problem, we first solve the
within-period problem by backward induction so to express household instantaneous utility
as a function of their labor supply only and then optimize accordingly.
     As we abstract away from saving and risk-sharing across households, the solution to the
consumption problem is static and is characterized by a binding budget constraint ckt =
(1 - µt )1kt (2)wt nkt + kt , where 1kt (m) is an indicator function that takes the value of one if
member m of household in state k is alive. In light of this observation, we can re-write the


                                                  11
probability of death specified in equation (10), dkt (m), as a function of labor supply:
                   
                                             (1-µt )1kt (2)wt nkt +kt         m
                    ¯n (m) +  (m) 1 -                    ck
                                                                            + d + m (It ) if         Ikt (m) = 1
 dkt (nkt ; m) =                                                                                                   .
                                                        (1-µt )1kt (2)wt nkt +kt
                             ¯n (m) +  (m) 1 -
                                                                    ck
                                                                                                if   Ikt (m) = 0

                                                                                                              (15)

Similarly, the probability of the adult contracting COVID-19 can also be re-expressed as a
function of labor supply:


           Ikt (nkt ; 2) = I 1 [(1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt ] CIt + I 2 nkt NIt + I 3 It + I 4 Ik .                 (16)


Lastly, the standard property of CES aggregation implies that we can also re-write the flow
utility function as a function of labor supply:
                                                                            
                                               3                            -1
                                                   m
                                                                     -1           
                           u(ckt , nkt ) =             [ckt (m)]                 - n2  ,
                                             m=1
                                                                                  2 kt

in which the individual level consumption is equal to

                                              1kt (m)
                      ckt (nkt ; m) =       3                   [(1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt ] .
                                                  m 1 (m)
                                            m =1     kt


Combining the two and simplifying:

                                                                                     1
                                                               3                     -1
                                                                     m                     
                    u(nkt ) = [(1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt ]                    1kt (m)         - n2  .             (17)
                                                              m=1
                                                                                           2 kt

Dynamic optimization With the solution of the consumption problem in hand, we can
turn to the dynamic problem of a household in state k . The Bellman equation for household
in state k can be written

                                                        K
                       Ukt (t ) = max u(n) +                  kk (n|t )Uk ,t+1 (t+1 ),                        (18)
                                        n
                                                       k =1




                                                       12
subject to the transition probabilities from state k to k , kk (·), that depend on the aggregate
state of the economy t .
     The first-order condition determines optimal labor supply nkt :

                                          K
                                              
                           u (nkt ) +           kk (nkt |t )Uk ,t+1 (t+1 ) = 0,                 (19)
                                         k =1
                                              n

which takes the form


                                              u (nkt ) + kt = 0,

                    K    
with kt =           k =1 n kk   (nkt |t )Uk ,t+1 (t+1 ). We can also write the optimal labor decision
as
                                                           1
                                         3   m             -1
                                         m=1   1kt (m)          (1 - µt ) wt + kt
                            nkt =                                                   .           (20)
                                                          

     First, note that in the absence of capital accumulation, households' labor decisions will
only affect a subset of the transition probabilities, kk . Labor supply only affects the prob-
ability of infection of the workers (the young adults) and the non-COVID mortality rate of
children (since we assume that excess mortality from an economic contraction only affects
children). All the other mortality rates, infection rates, and recovery rates follow a process
that is not influenced by the decision of atomistic agents but depend on aggregate state t .
We thus state the following result (proof available in the Appendix):


Lemma 1: First-order conditions The first-order condition for the household in state
k , period t is:

                   u                                                 (1 - µt )wt
                       + k                                    k
                         I [I 1 (1 - µt )wt CIt + I 2 NIt ] - d  (1)             = 0,           (21)
                   nkt                                                   ck




                                                     13
where k
      I is the Lagrangian multiplier on the infection probability, Ikt (2):

                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
   k
   I =  (1 - nkt (2))                      kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk -              kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk      ,
                                                                                                      
                                 k (2)=I                             k (2)=S

                                                                                                      (22)

and k
    d is the Lagrangian multiplier for the non-COVID child mortality rate, dkt (1):

                                                                                              
                                                                                              
          k
          d =                    kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk -              kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk        .    (23)
                                                                                              
                       k (1)=D                             k (2)=D




    For households without a susceptible prime-age adult, k
                                                          I = 0 as the terms inside the

curly bracket in equation (22) are equal to zero. Similarly, k
                                                             d = 0 for households without

a child as the terms inside the curly bracket in equation (23) are equal to zero.
    The first-order condition captures the tradeoff between a static optimization (i.e. a
tradeoff between consumption and leisure) and the health risk of increased exposure through
consumption and labor. Lemma 1 describes the heterogeneity in households' responses to
the pandemic, as a function of their demographic composition and the health status of their
members. On the one hand, labor decisions have no dynamic implications when no prime-age
adult is susceptible. On the other hand, incentives to increase (resp. decrease) labor supply
depend on whether there are children (resp. susceptible elderly people) in the household.


Equilibrium An equilibrium of the economy in period t is defined by a vector of labor sup-
ply decisions {nkt }k{1,...,K } such that nkt is a solution to (18) for some given t+1 , and t+1
is in turn determined by transition probabilities (11) and (10). To solve for the equilibrium,
therefore, we propose the following algorithm:


Solution algorithm Take the policy vector, µt , as given. Start with a guess of nkt for all
k = 1, · · · , K and t = 1, · · · , T .

   1. Given the initial conditions, simulate the model forward from t = 1 to T to generate


                                                      14
       St , It , Rt and Dt , as well as all the transition probabilities.

    2. Infer Ukt for every k in the following steps. The details are discussed in the appendix.

        (a) Compute the post-pandemic steady state values of Uk for all k .

       (b) Compute backwards from the post-pandemic state T to 1 for all the Ukt .

    3. Infer d
             k ,t and  k ,t from the first-order conditions of dkt (1) and Ikt (2), conditional
                      I

       on Ukt .

    4. Infer nkt from the first-order conditions of nkt . Iterate on nkt until convergence.



3      Data and Calibration
The strength and duration of a lockdown are critical aspects of our quantitative analysis.
Our reference lockdown policy attempts to mimic what had been observed in the first weeks
of the pandemic. It is henceforth defined by three parameters: its starting time, length,
and strength. To calibrate these parameters alongside transmission rate parameters, we
proceed in two steps. In the first step, we calibrate the transmission parameters, I 1 ,...I 4 ,
to match the relative importance of the different transmission modes and the overall predicted
infection rate in an unmitigated spread scenario. In the second step, we calibrate the effect
of lockdown severity on community transmission,  , alongside the strength of lockdown, µ
                                                                                       ¯,
to jointly match the decline in GDP and the reproduction number, R0 , as estimated by
Flaxman et al. (2020) for European countries early in the pandemic.


3.1     Infection and Mortality Parameter Calibration

The within-household transmission parameter, I 4 , is taken from a meta-analysis of house-
hold transmission estimates from different settings. Lei et al. (2020) estimate the secondary
infection rate in the household to be 0.27. To discipline the three other transmission param-
eters, we jointly match three moments.
    The first moment is the proportion of the population that would get infected in each
country in the absence of any mitigating policy. We use projections reported by Walker et

                                                   15
al. (2020), that use country- and age-specific contact patterns to simulate health impacts of
COVID-19 in 202 countries. They develop an SIR model incorporating the age distribution
of each country. Employing a basic reproduction number (R0 ) of 3.0, they project that
about 90 percent of the population would ultimately either recover from infection or die in
an unmitigated epidemic scenario in lower- and middle-income countries. The unmitigated
epidemiological model in Walker et al. (2020) assumes no behavioral response to the pan-
demic. For consistency, we assume that households continue to supply labor and consume at
the same levels as in the pre-pandemic steady state in this stage of the calibration exercise.
This assumption is relaxed in the following steps of the calibration.
    The other two moments used for the calibration of the transmission parameters are
the shares of infections occurring through labor and consumption. As most of the world's
population lives in urban areas, we chose to use data reported by Johnstone-Robertson et al.
(2011) on locations of contacts in a South African township community.7 The authors define
close contacts as those involving physical contact or a two-way conversation with three or
more words. They find the 6.2 percent of such contacts take place in workplaces while 3.5
percent of such contacts take place in shops or local bars and therefore can be thought of as
related to consumption. 8.9 percent of such contacts take place during transport and could
theoretically be linked to either labor or consumption. We assume that half of the transport
is related to labor and half to consumption. This implies that 10.6 percent of contacts are
related to work and 8 percent to consumption. For high-income countries, we use the rates
employed by Eichenbaum et al. (2020) for the US. Based on analysis of the Bureau of Labor
and Statistics 2018 Time Use Survey data and contact patterns reported in Ferguson et al.
(2006) and Lee et al. (2010), they conclude that 16 percent of transmissions are related to
consumption and 17 percent of transmissions are related to work.
   7
     We reviewed the public health literature on social contacts in low- and middle-income countries and found
no nationally representative study. Most of the studies focus on age-specific contacts and only a handful of
studies categorized interpersonal contacts in a manner that permitted direct mapping into consumption and
labor components.




                                                     16
3.2       Reference Lockdown and Community Transmission Parame-
          ter

Conditional on the transmission parameters calibrated previously, we calibrate the reference
lockdown policy, and the parameter determining the relationship between lockdown strength
and reduction in community transmission,  .
       A country starts to impose the reference lockdown when the infected population reaches
2.6%. This rate is based on the prevalence at the time of the first lockdown in the Italian
municipality of Vo, the site of the first COVID-19-related death detected in Italy (Lavezzo
et al., 2020). In our calibration, the countries start to impose the reference lockdown policy
between week 9 and 13, with an average start date at week 11.
       The length of the reference lockdown policy is based on Flaxman et al. (2020) that
estimates the impacts of non-pharmaceutical interventions in 11 European countries during
the first months of the pandemic.8 We drop the four countries that only imposed mild
or no lockdown policies (Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland) and work with the
remaining seven countries.9 We compute the lockdown length for each country based on the
difference between the reported lockdown date and the end of the sample period in Flaxman
et al. (2020). The lockdown policies range between 43 to 54 days, with an average of 7 weeks,
which we use as the length of the reference lockdown. The strength of the lockdown was
inferred from the GDP decline in the first two quarters of the year 2020. As explained later in
this section, we calibrate  = 1, which implies that a lockdown policy of µ
                                                                         ¯ reduces aggregate
labor supply and GDP by µ
                        ¯. Therefore, an x-day lockdown reduces the two-quarter GDP
by xµ
    ¯/180, from which one can infer µ
                                    ¯, conditional on the length of the lockdown calibrated
above and the observed decline in GDP. For example, the inferred µ
                                                                 ¯ in Germany with a 6.68
                                                ¯ = 0.0668  180/43 = 0.2796. We repeat
percent decline in GDP and a 43-day lockdown is µ
the calculation for all seven countries and find that the strength of the lockdown policy to
   8
     Out of the five non-pharmaceutical interventions studied in Flaxman et al. (2020), we focus on "lock-
downs" to quantify the reference lockdown. Note that the "lockdown" in our model should be interpreted
broadly to include the other four forms of intervention policies in Flaxman et al. (2020), such as social
distancing, self-isolation, school closure, and restricting public events.
   9
     The four countries with mild or no lockdown policies lead to corner solutions in the calibration of  ,
as explained below. The remaining 7 countries are Austria, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and
Spain.


                                                    17
be between 28% and 46%. The average across the seven countries is 38%, which we use as
µ
¯ for the reference policy.
       Given the country-specific µ
                                  ¯ and lockdown length in these 7 countries, we can then
compute  , the elasticity of community transmission with respect to lockdown, for each of
these countries. To do this, we simulate the model and target the post-lockdown R0 of 0.66 as
reported in Flaxman et al. (2020) for the sample countries. The corresponding R0 at period t
                                  Tt-1 /It-1
in our model is computed as        rt +dt
                                             ,   where rt and dt are the population-weighted average
recovery and mortality rates in period t. We take the R0 at the period after the lockdown
policy ends, as the counter-part of the post-lockdown reproduction number in Flaxman et
al. (2020). The resulting  ranges between 1.9 to 3.5 among the 7 countries with an interior
solution, and we take the average of 2.32 to apply to all the 86 countries in the full sample.10


3.3       Mortality Rates

We look to two distinct literatures to calibrate our mortality parameters.


COVID-19 mortality Walker et al. (2020) projects hospitalization and mortality rates
per age group that are in turn based on findings from China reported by Verity et al. (2020).11
Conditional on infection, the average projected hospitalization and mortality rates in low-
and middle-income countries are listed in Table 1. In the calibration of the model, we use
country-specific rates as countries have different age distributions within the broader age
groups defined in our model.
  10
     A corner solution in this step occurs for the four countries that we have dropped (Denmark, Sweden
Switzerland, and Norway). If the country imposes a mild lockdown, the implied µ   ¯ for this country will be
low, which makes it impossible to reach the target R0 even with  = .
  11
     Infection fatality rates calculated with data from China might not be generalizable to other countries
because of factors such as prevalence of comorbidities and quality of health services (Ghisolfi et al., 2020;
Demombynes, 2020). More recent meta-analyses found mortality rates in line with those reported by Verity
et al. (2020) (Levin et al., 2020; Meyerowitz-Katz and Merone, 2020). It is important to note, however, that
these analyses overwhelmingly rely on studies from high-income countries.




                                                       18
                      Table 1: Mortality and Hospitalization Rates by Age

                                   Age group   Hospitalization   Mortality

                                      0-14         0.0009        0.00003
                                     15-60          0.023          0.001
                                      >60           0.130          0.034

Note: Average hospitalization and mortality rate by age group in low- and middle-income countries.
Source: Walker et al. (2020).



    For severe cases of COVID-19 infection, hospitalization offers treatments such as oxygen
therapy for patients with respiratory failure. Therefore, the case fatality rate (CFR) for a
COVID-19 infection warranting hospital care but cannot access it is believed to be elevated.
For example, Yang et al. (2020) find that the CFR by the middle of February 2020 within
the city of Wuhan, China, the presumed outbreak location of origin for COVID-19, was
substantially higher (5.25 percent) than in regions outside Wuhan but within the same
province (1.41 percent) and in regions outside the province (0.15 percent). While the CFRs
within and outside Wuhan should vary for several reasons, including availability of testing, a
key factor was the initial demand for hospital beds exceeded the supply. For these reasons,
we assume that the COVID-related mortality is elevated by a factor of 3 for those patients
who are in need of hospitalization but cannot receive it.
    We denote by b (m) the probability an individual of group m requires hospitalization,
conditional on being infected. The share of individuals in need of hospital beds at time t,
Bt , is given by
                                Bt = b (1)It (1) + b (2)It (2) + b (3)It (3).

We assume that hospital bed allocation is random among those in need. Denoting by h to
be the number of hospital beds, the probability that an infected individual dies at period t
is given by
            
                                             nt (m) + d (m)                                 if   Bt  h
            
idt (m) =
             nt (m) + (1 - b (m)) d (m) + b (m)              k               Bt -k
                                                                (m)    +           3d (m)   if   Bt > h
            
                                                             Bt d             Bt




                                                     19
As in Atkeson (2020) and Eichenbaum et al. (2020), we assume that it takes an average of
18 days from infection to either recover or die. To obtain weekly mortality probabilities, we
multiply the rates obtained from Walker et al. (2020) by 7/18.
      The number of hospital beds in each country is obtained from the World Bank's World
Development Indicators. It should be noted that the most recent data available are from
2015 and that data for many countries is from even earlier years. In low- and middle-income
countries, the average number of hospital beds per 1,000 people is 2.4.


Non-COVID-19 mortality Baseline mortality rates, ¯n1 , ¯n2 and ¯n3 are computed from
country-specific life table data obtained from the Global Health Observatory Data Repository
of the World Health organization.12
      In terms of elevated mortality due to shortfalls in aggregate income, several papers have
estimated the relation between economic shocks and infant or young child mortality (Baird
et al., 2011; Bhalotra, 2010; Cruces et al., 2012; Friedman and Schady, 2013; Maruthappu
et al., 2017). For low and middle-income countries, the population groups most vulnerable
to declines in aggregate income are young children and, perhaps, the elderly (Cutler et al.,
2002). We focus on mortality impacts among children under-5 as this population group has
been the most extensively studied. We estimate the effect of short-term aggregate income
shocks on mortality following the methodology of Baird et al. (2011). We use data on GDP
per capita from the World Development Indicators. The values are adjusted for purchasing
power parity, corresponding to 2011 US dollars. Data on infant and child mortality are taken
from retrospective birth histories as reported in the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
conducted in 83 low- and middle-income countries between 1985 and 2017. The combined
sample is of 5.2 million births in low- and middle-income countries. We run regressions of
the following form:
                                 Dict = c +  logGDPct + fc (t) +    ict ,


where Dict is a binary indicator that takes the value 1 if child i in country c died in year t,
log GDP is the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, fc (t) is a country-specific flexible time
trend, and     ict   is the error term. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
 12
      who.int/gho/data


                                                   20
      We run the regression separately for countries of different income levels, as classified by
the World Bank 2020 income groups. The main result is that a 1 percent decrease in per
capita GDP is associated with a 0.15 increase in under-5 mortality per 1,000 children in
low-income countries. The semi-elasticity is 0.1 and 0.03 for lower and upper middle-income
countries, respectively. We assume that under-5 mortality is not impacted by income shocks
in high-income countries. Unlike the results from low- and middle-income countries, studies
analyzing data from the United Stated find mortality to be pro-cyclical (Ruhm, 2000; Dehejia
and Lleras-Muney, 2004).
      To map the estimated semi-elasticities into our calibration, we define s0-5 to be the share
of children under five years old in the group of children of ages 0 to 15. The semi-elasticity
of child mortality with consumption is given by


                              i (1) = s0-5 i , i = LIC, LMIC, UMIC,


where i represents the regression coefficients for low-, lower middle- and upper middle-
income countries.  (1) equals zero in high income countries. In addition, we also assume
that mortality rates of the two older age groups are not responsive to income shocks.
      It is possible that non-COVID child mortality will increase during the pandemic due to
reduced coverage of essential health services (Roberton et al., 2020). If there is a disrup-
tion to supply of health services or if households avoid health facilities due to perceived
risk of infection, our reduced-form estimation will not account for such pandemic-specific
mechanisms. It is important to note, however, that these mechanisms will likely be at play
regardless of the lockdown policy imposed by the government.


3.4      Demographic and Economic Parameters

Country-specific age distributions are obtained from the 2020 World Population Prospects.13
The age distribution is used to compute s0-5 , which is then used to rescale the semi-elasticity
of under-5 mortality to the age group 0 - 15 using the formula above. In addition, we use the
age distribution of the three age groups to compute the masses of the different age groups
 13
      population.un.org/wpp


                                                21
within the household ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) in each country.
       The weekly discount factor equals to  = 0.961/52 to reflect an annual risk-free rate
of 4 percent. We assume that at t = 0,  = 0.1 percent of population is infected. We set
 = 0.8 so that an infected working adult is only 80 percent effective in supplying labor. This
is equivalent to assume that 80 percent of the infected population is either asymptomatic
or experiences a mild case.14 We set  to 1 so that the steady state labor supply in the
pre-pandemic world is normalized to 1 in all countries.
       The parameter  governs the elasticity of substitution between household members. We
set it to 3, so that the loss of a non-productive household member ­ the children or the
                         m                                                                    m
elderly ­ with mass          reduces the instantaneous utility, u(·), by a proportion             in steady
state. Appendix B.3 provides the details of the derivation.
       The values of ¯ t are calibrated based on the Atlas of Social Protection Indicators of

Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE) data set. In the dataset, 1.55 percent of GDP was spent
on social assistance programs on average. We assume that ¯ t is constant across the entire

simulation, and calibrate it to be 1.55 percent of GDP in every country.
       Lastly, we use the GDP in current US dollars from the World Bank's World Development
Indicators when computing the dollar amount of international aid required for each country.

       Table 2 summarizes all the parameters of the model and indicates the data sources used
to calibrate them.



4        Results
To quantitatively illustrate how the same policy might differently impact mortality outcomes
in different countries, we compare two scenarios. The first scenario traces economic and
disease-related behavior without any government intervention. The second scenario involves
the reference lockdown as described above, where a labor tax of 38 percent is imposed for
a seven-week period once the rate of infection prevalence reaches 2.6 percent. While the
reference lockdown is determined to mimic policies adopted during the early months of the
  14
    This corresponds to media reports on the results of an unpublished sero-prevalence study conducted in
New York in April 2020 (nytimes.com/2020/04/23/nyregion/coronavirus-antibodies-test-ny.html). Li et al.
(2020) and Stringhini et al. (2020) report even higher rates of asymptomatic cases in China and Switzerland.

                                                    22
                                                                  Table 2: Parameters

     Name     Value              Source/Target                                                  Note
     I 1      country-specific   share of transmission due to consumption-related activities    consumption-related activity transmission
     I 2      country-specific   share of infection due to work-related activities              work-related transmission
     I 3      country-specific   proportion of infected population                              community-based infection
     I 4      0.27               Lei et al. (2020)                                              within-household infection
              2.32               post-lockdown R0 in                                            impact of lockdown on
                                 Flaxman et al. (2020), 7-country sample                        community transmission
     -        country-specific   population infection rate of 2.6%                              start date of the reference lockdown
     -        7                  lockdown length from                                           length of the reference lockdown
                                 Flaxman et al. (2020), 7-country sample
     µ
     ¯        38%                GDP decline in 2020Q1-Q2 in                                    strength of the reference lockdown
                                 the 7 countries from Flaxman et al. (2020)
                                                      semi-elasticity of child mortality w.r.t. income
     j (1)    0.15               Authors' estimation using DHS data                             low-income countries




23
              0.10               Authors' estimation using DHS data                             lower-middle income countries
              0.03               Authors' estimation using DHS data                             upper-middle income countries
              0.00               Assumed based on literature                                    high-income countries
     d (m)    country-specific   Walker et al. (2020)                                           COVID-19 mortality, type-m
     b (m)    country-specific   Walker et al. (2020)                                           probability of hospitalization, type-m
     k        country-specific   World Development Indicators                                   number of hospital beds per 1000 people
     ¯n (m)   country-specific   WHO Global Health Repository                                   non-COVID mortality, type-m
      (m)     country-specific   World Population Prospects, 2020                               mass of type-m
              0.961/52           annual risk-free rate of 4 percent                             weekly discount factor
              0.1%               Eichenbaum et al. (2020)                                       initial infected population
              0.8                Eichenbaum et al. (2020)                                       efficiency loss due to infection
              1.0                steady-state labor supply = 1                                  disutility from labor supply
              3.0                loss of type-m reduces u(·) by m                               elasticity of substitution between household members
     ¯t       1.55% of GDP       ASPIRE dataset                                                 external transfer payment

                                        Note: this table lists the calibrated parameters discussed in the main text.
pandemic, it is not designed to capture all the complexities of mobility and social gathering
restrictions imposed by various countries. Rather, the results below aim at highlighting the
large heterogeneity in outcomes following the adoption of a uniform policy rule.


4.1       Lockdowns and Total Mortality

Figure 1 illustrates the reduction in adult COVID-related mortality as a result of the reference
government-induced lockdown. The figure depicts adult excess mortality in the first year
of the pandemic, were the reference lockdown to be implemented, relative to adult excess
mortality in the no-action scenario. Excess mortality is calculated by subtracting the number
of simulated adult deaths in the two scenarios by the number of adults simulated to die
when the economy is not experiencing a COVID-19 outbreak.15 Overall, a single seven-week
lockdown will reduce adult mortality from COVID-19 by less than 9 percent in all countries.
The lockdown slows down the virus' spread but over a full-year horizon the effect on the
total share of the population ever infected is small in many countries.
       The figure also demonstrates that the policy efficacy of averting mortality through lock-
down is correlated with countries' wealth. In low-income countries, an average of 3.5 percent
of COVID-related deaths are averted, in comparison to an average of 6.2 percent in high-
income countries. Several factors drive this pattern. First, wealthier countries' populations
have a larger share of adults over 60, the group most at risk of dying from COVID-19. Sec-
ond, because of greater hospital capacity in wealthier countries, a slowed pace of the virus'
spread is more likely to translate into higher survival probabilities. Lastly, greater shares
of transmission in high-income countries occur through labor and consumption-related con-
tacts. Therefore, the reduced economic activity in these countries has a bigger impact on the
virus transmission relative to countries where a larger share of transmissions occurs through
community contacts.


Lockdowns and the mortality tradeoff Panel (a) of Figure 2 captures the inter-
generational mortality tradeoff that is the focus of this paper. As in Figure 1, countries
  15
    This calculation of excess mortality represents a minor underestimation of COVID-19 mortality. A share
of adults who are simulated to die from COVID-19 might also receive a non-COVID mortality shock in the
simulation of the no-COVID scenario. These deaths will not count towards the excess mortality calculation.


                                                   24
          Figure 1: Impact of the reference lockdown on adult COVID-19 mortality

Note: This figure presents COVID-19 fatality averted against the logarithm of per capita GDP. The vertical
axis presents the adult COVID-19 mortality during the first year of the pandemic in the reference lockdown
scenario, as a fraction of COVID-19 mortality in the no-intervention scenario. Each dot represents a country
and the color indicates the income group of the country: Low Income (blue), Lower-Middle-Income (green),
Upper-Middle-Income (pink), and High-Income (red).
Source: World Development Indicators, Penn World Tables, and the authors' calculations.


are placed along the horizontal axis according to their log PPP-adjusted per capita in-
come. The vertical axis represents the number of children's lives lost during the first year
of the pandemic per every COVID-19 fatality averted by the reference lockdown. There is a
pronounced negative relationship that arises from the different relationships between GDP
contractions and infant mortality across income groups. By construction, no child life is lost
due to COVID-19-related lockdowns in high-income countries, where we assume that GDP
contractions have no impact on child mortality. High-income countries, therefore, lie on
the horizontal axis. For lower-income countries, however, there can be a substantial loss of
children's lives for each averted fatality from COVID-19. In 19 of the low- and lower-middle
income countries in our sample, the reference lockdown policy leads to more children's lives
lost than COVID-19 fatalities averted. In low-income countries, the reference lockdown
causes an average of 1.76 child deaths per COVID-19 fatality averted. This rate is 0.59 in
lower-middle income countries, and 0.06 in upper-middle income countries.

                                                    25
(a) Number of child deaths per COVID-19 fatality(b) Total reduction in mortality caused by the reference
averted by the reference lockdown               lockdown

                 Figure 2: Impact of the reference lockdown on total mortality

Note: Panel (a) presents the expected number of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted against
the logarithm of per capita GDP. Both the expected number of lives lost and the averted COVID-19 fatality
are the differences between the reference lockdown policy and the no-intervention policy during the first year
of the pandemic. Panel (b) presents the total reduction in mortality in the reference lockdown scenario, as a
fraction of mortality in the no-intervention scenario. Each dot represents a country and the color indicates
the income group of the country: Low Income (blue), Lower-Middle-Income (green), Upper-Middle-Income
(pink), and High-Income (red).
Source: World Development Indicators, Penn World Tables, and the authors' calculations.


Lockdowns and total mortality Another informative statistic to compute is the effect
of the reference lockdown on total mortality, which in effect puts equal weight on every life
lost, irrespective of age. Panel (b) of Figure 2 plots the reduction in total excess mortality
achieved by the lockdown, relative to excess mortality in the no-action policy against the
logarithm of PPP-adjusted per capita GDP. The highest reductions in mortality are achieved
in high-income countries where the lockdown has the highest impact in terms of preventing
COVID-19-related deaths and does not impact child mortality. The implementation of the
seven-week lockdown reduces the annual excess mortality by 6.2 percent in high-income
countries. For low- and middle-income countries, the net reductions in total mortality are
smaller in magnitude as the lockdown both has less impact on adult COVID mortality, and
induces an increase in child mortality. In upper-middle and lower-middle income countries,
mortality is reduced on average by 5.2 and 2 percent, respectively. In low-income countries,
excess mortality will increase by 2.6 percent since the economic contraction leads to a higher


                                                     26
number of child deaths than the number of adult fatalities averted by the lockdown.


4.2     Understanding the Intergenerational Mortality Tradeoffs

The previous section illustrated the large variation in outcomes across countries due to the
impact of the reference economic lockdown. In this section, we investigate the contributions
of various country characteristics to the spread of the infection and subsequent mortality,
both COVID-19-related and not.


4.2.1   Lockdown and the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic

To illustrate further what drives cross-country differences in outcomes, we present a more
detailed analysis from four countries at different stages of economic development. We pur-
posefully selected one country from each income group: Uganda (low income), Pakistan
(lower-middle income), South Africa (upper-middle income), and the US (high income).
These different income levels dictate how consumption shortfalls due to lockdown policies
would affect child mortality. The selected countries also differ substantially along other
dimensions that determine effectiveness of lockdown policies such as population age distri-
bution and capacity of their health systems. Forty-six percent of the Ugandan population
is under the age of 15 while only 3 percent are 60 years or older. In Pakistan and South
Africa, respectively, 34 and 29 percent of the population are under 15 and 7 and 9 percent
are 60 or older. The US has the oldest population out of the four countries, with only 18
percent under 15 and 23 percent 60 or older. Uganda and Pakistan have only 0.5 and 0.6
hospital beds per 1,000 people to contrast with rates in South Africa and the United States
of 2.8 and 2.9, respectively.
   Column (a) in Figure 3 displays the aggregate labor supply during the first year of
the pandemic as a fraction of the no-pandemic steady-state labor supply. The blue line
represents labor supply without any government intervention and the red line represents the
reference lockdown scenario. Without any government action, there would be only small
declines in labor supply during the weeks with the highest rates of active (current) infections
(depicted in Panel (c) of the figure, solid blue line). The drop is entirely due to households



                                              27
limiting their own labor supply to lower COVID-19 transmission risks to their own members.
Relative to the other countries, the drop in labor supply is largest in the United States given
its substantially larger share of older adults in the population. However, even in the United
States the peak of the labor decline in the no-action scenario is less than five percent. This
muted response reflects the sizeable externality associated with pandemics, i.e. households
consider the tradeoff between their members' mortality risk and income loss but not the
impact their exposure could have on the further spread of the virus in the population. Under
the lockdown scenario, there will be a uniform reduction of 38 percent in labor supply during
the weeks in which the labor tax will be in effect. Then there are subsequent additional small
reductions in labor supply when active infections reach their highest rates. As in the no-
action scenario, the subsequent reduction in labor supply is largest in the US but never
exceeds five percent.
   Columns (b) and (c) of Figure 3 illustrate how the lockdown policy affects virus trans-
mission in the different countries. As can be seen in column (b), the seven-week lockdown
will have only a negligible impact on the share of the population ever-infected by the end of
the pandemic's first year. Instead, the lockdown slows the pace of transmission and displaces
the peak infectivity period to later in the year. Overall, this policy more effectively slows the
spread of the virus is wealthier countries. The infection rate peaks in Uganda and Pakistan
before it does in South Africa and the US. The primary reason for that is that the share of
working-age adults in the total population is larger in the wealthier countries and, hence,
the reduced economic activity has a larger impact on transmission rates in South Africa and
the US than it does in the other two countries.
   Column (d) of Figure 3 depicts the cumulative all-cause child and adult mortality in
the reference lockdown scenario, relative to the cumulative mortality in the no-lockdown
scenario. In the three low- and middle-income countries, lockdown policies increase child
mortality. This increase in child mortality is entirely due to the impact of the economic
contraction induced by the lockdown policy. Given the high sensitivity of survival rates to
income fluctuations in low-income countries, the largest increase in child mortality is caused
by the lockdown in Uganda. In the United States, however, the lockdown policy reduces
child mortality. Here this reduction is entirely associated with reduced COVID-related child


                                               28
            (a) Aggregate Labor   (b) Cumulative    (c) Current    (d) Mortality Rates (e) Total Mortality
                  Supply             Infection       Infection          by Age                Rates
    Uganda
    Pakistan
    South Africa
    United States




                                    Figure 3: Selected Pandemic Indicators

Note: This figure presents several pandemic-related indicators for selected countries under a no action
scenario (solid-blue line) and a reference lockdown scenario (dashed-red line). Column (a) presents the change
in aggregate labor supply, relative to the pre-COVID-19 steady state. Column (b) presents the cumulative
infection rate, where the total population is normalized to 1. Column (c) shows the contemporaneous
infection rate in each week. Column (d) portrays the cumulative all-cause mortality rates (from both
COVID-19 and non-COVID-19) separately for children and adults under the reference lockdown relative to
the no intervention policy. Column (e) presents the total cumulative mortality rate of the reference lockdown
policy relative to the no intervention policy.
Source: authors' calculation.


mortality, albeit from a low reference level.
    With respect to adults, the reference lockdown temporarily reduces mortality in all coun-
tries. However, by the end of the first year of the epidemic, the single seven-week lockdown
will have an average small effect on the cumulative adult mortality, as already shown in
Figure 1. As highlighted above, the lockdown slows the spread of the virus by a number of
weeks but has negligible impact on the cumulative rate of infections at the one-year horizon.
Of the four countries, the 2 percent adult mortality reduction experienced in the US is the
biggest due to several factors. First, the US has the highest share of adults over 60 who are

                                                      29
at greater risk of COVID mortality. Second, the lockdown is most effective in slowing down
the virus spread in the US because of the differential modes of transmission. Third, because
of higher hospital capacity, the slowdown in the virus spread causes a bigger improvement
in survival rates.
   Finally, column (e) of Figure 3 displays the total cumulative mortality rates in the lock-
down scenario, expressed relative to the no-action mortality rate. In the poorest country of
the four, Uganda, the total mortality in the lockdown scenario is higher than the no-action
mortality rate by the end of the year. That is, the number of children who die from the
decline in income is greater than the number of individuals' whose death is averted due to
lockdown. In Pakistan, the excess child mortality is just slightly smaller than the mod-
est adult mortality reduction achieved by the lockdown. In South Africa and the US, the
lockdown achieved positive although small reductions in total deaths.


4.2.2   Decomposing the heterogeneity in policy impact

In this subsection we run counterfactual simulations to isolate various contributing mecha-
nisms and gauge their influence on the overall cross-country variation in lockdown impacts.


Population age distribution In a first simulation, we impose the same age distribution
for all countries, equal to the unweighted average age distribution across all 85 sample coun-
tries. Figure 4 is a scatterplot of the number of children's lives lost per COVID-19 fatality
averted by the reference lockdown in this scenario (y-axis) against the baseline scenario. Rel-
ative to the results presented in Figure 2, the ratios are substantially lower when equalizing
the age distribution in all countries. The ratio is below the 45-degree line and below 0.5 in
value for all countries. This suggests that variation in the age distribution plays a crucial
role in determining how the lockdowns affect overall mortality and the ratio of child deaths
per COVID-19 fatality averted.


Country income In the second exercise, we keep the age structure of each country as
is in the data but assign all countries the same per capita income and therefore the same
semi-elasticity of child mortality with respect to income. The income level in each country


                                              30
                         Figure 4: Decomposition: Constant age structure

Note: This figure presents the expected number of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted in the
baseline scenario against the counter-factual of constant age structure for all countries. Each dot represents
a country. The solid blue line is the 45-degree line.
Source: authors' calculation.


in this example is the geometric average of per capita incomes in the sample, corresponding
to a level within the upper-middle income designation. As can be seen in Figure 5, the
variation in children's lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted shrinks considerably in this
counterfactual. This implies that the differences in income are even more important than
age structure in determining the impact of lockdown policies on overall mortality, given the
relationship between income shortfalls and child mortality in poorer countries.


Hospital capacity In the next simulation, we impose the US hospital capacity to all
countries. As illustrated in Figure 6, the ratio of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality
averted increases for most low-income countries under such scenario. The reason is that
with more extensive health systems, there are fewer COVID-19 fatalities under both the
no-intervention and lockdown policies, leading to a smaller number of fatalities averted by
the lockdown. It should be noted that in this simulation, health system capacity only
affects COVID-related mortality. Improved health system capacity may also reduce also


                                                     31
                             Figure 5: Decomposition: constant income

Note: This figure presents the expected number of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted in the
baseline scenario against the counter-factual. In the counter-factual, all the countries have the same income
(within the upper middle-income range), and thus the same semi-elasticity of GDP fluctuations to child
mortality. Each dot represents a country. The solid blue line is the 45-degree line.
Source: authors' calculation.


non-COVID-related mortality and improve child survival resiliency to income shocks, but
these channels are not incorporated in our model.


COVID-19 transmission shares by activity Finally, Figure 7 depicts a counterfactual
in which transmission probabilities in all the countries are calibrated such that the share of
transmission through each channel is similar to the U.S. As explained in the data section,
the spread of COVID-19 in high-income countries is more reliant on work- and consumption-
related activities, while more dependent on community transmission in developing countries.
Therefore, the reference lockdown policy is more effective in slowing transmission in high-
income countries, although the reduction in aggregate labor supply induced by the policy is
identical in all countries. We see that the higher effectiveness of the reference lockdown leads
to moderate declines in the ratio of child-lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted. However,
the change in transmission channel probabilities also affects the distribution of infections
among the different age groups regardless of whether a lockdown is imposed. Because only

                                                     32
                      Figure 6: Decomposition: Constant hospital capacity

Note: This figure presents the expected number of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted in the
baseline scenario against the counter-factual. In the counter-factual, all the countries have the hospital
capacity, measured as the number of hospital beds per thousand population. Each dot represents a country.
The solid blue line is the 45-degree line.
Source: authors' calculation.


working-age adults both supply labor and conduct consumption-related activities in our
model, increasing the weight of these channels implies that a larger share of the initial
infections would be among this group. Therefore, when the reference lockdown would be
imposed (at a population prevalence of 2.6 percent), a smaller share of older adults would
be infected at this point, and fewer deaths would be averted by the lockdown. This would
push upwards the mortality ratio and explains why changing the transmission probabilities
could increase the mortality ratio for some countries or only cause a moderate reduction in
others.


Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition One way to assess the relative importance of the various
mechanisms considered is to group all sample countries according to a binary distinction
of low or high income, and then conduct an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition including all
factors explored individually above. This exercise (Table C.1 in the appendix) indicates three
mechanisms absorb most of the cross-country variation in the relation between lockdown

                                                   33
                      Figure 7: Decomposition: Constant transmission share

Note: this figure presents the expected number of children lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted in the
baseline scenario against the counter-factual. In the counter-factual, the I 1 , I 2 , and I 3 parameters in all
the countries are calibrated to the same targets as the United States. Each dot represents a country. The
solid blue line is the 45-degree line.
Source: authors' calculation.


induced child mortality and averted COVID-19 deaths (these findings hold for the reference
lockdown as well as the optimal lockdown discussed below). The most influential factor is the
semi-elasticity of child mortality to economic contraction, which accounts for 80 percent of
the explained variation across the two country groups. The share of the population under 15
years of age is also a significant factor, accounting for 29 percent of the explained variation.
These two factors "explain" more than 100 percent of the variation across countries since
other considered factors decrease the cross-country variation in the ratio of child deaths
to averted COVID-19 deaths. The most significant factor that decreases this variation is
the community transmission parameter. When community-based transmission constitutes a
larger share of total COVID-19 disease transmission, any lockdown policy will be less effective
in averting COVID-19 mortality, resulting in higher ratios of child deaths to averted COVID-
19 deaths. These three considered factors are the only significant factors in the decomposition
exercise. Other factors such as the share of the population 60 years or older, hospital capacity,



                                                      34
or the work and consumption related transmission parameters are not especially influential
in explaining the observed variation in the tradeoff between child- and COVID-mortality.


4.3    Optimal Lockdown Policy

To conclude our discussion, we consider alternative lockdown policies that explicitly weigh
COVID-19-related mortality against welfare more generally. We define an optimal lockdown
policy as a labor tax sequence, {µt }, that would lead to maximizing the present value of
aggregate social welfare, i.e.

                                               1
                                     max             Uj ({µt })dj.
                                      {µt }   j =0


As such, the optimality condition now captures the tradeoff between COVID-19 deaths and
both increased infant mortality and the welfare loss due to reduced consumption. As the
maximization problem does not yield a straightforward optimality condition, we use global
maximization methods to search for the optimal lockdown policy.
   Figure 8 depicts the ratio of child deaths per adult death averted by this lockdown policy.
In comparison to the rates presented in Panel (a) of Figure 2 for the reference lockdown, the
ratio of child to adult mortality under the optimal policy is substantially lower. The ratio
for all countries is below 0.7 and Uganda is the only country with a ratio above 0.5. Thus,
in contrast to the reference lockdown calibrated to mimic policies implemented by European
governments in the first few months of the pandemic, the optimal lockdown never leads to a
net mortality increase.
   Figure 9 demonstrates how the optimal lockdown policies vary across the four selected
countries considered above. Relative to the reference lockdown, the optimal lockdown policy
would be milder in terms of labor contraction but start earlier and last longer in all countries.
Column (a) of the figure also highlights that there are substantial differences in the length and
severity of the optimal lockdowns in the four countries. There is a negative relation between
a country's income level and the drop in labor supply induced by the optimal policy. Relative
to the poorer countries, the lockdown in the US will be more severe as it has no impact on
child mortality and is more effective in reducing transmission. In the US, lockdown measures


                                                     35
Figure 8: Number of child deaths per COVID-19 fatality averted by the optimal lockdown

Note: This figure presents the expected number of child lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted against
the logarithm of per capita GDP. Both the expected number of lives lost and the averted COVID-19 fatality
are the differences between a lockdown policy and the no-intervention policy during the two years since the
beginning of the pandemic. Each dot represents a country and the color indicates the income group of the
country: Low Income (blue), Lower-Middle-Income (green), Upper-Middle-Income (pink), and High-Income
(red).
Source: World Development Indicators, Penn World Tables, and the authors' calculations.


will be applied during the whole duration of the first year of the pandemic and the labor
supply will decline by more than 25 percent when the current infection rate peaks. At the
other extreme, Uganda will introduce lockdown measures only in the first half of the year
and labor supply never drops below 90 percent of the pre-COVID rate.
    As seen in column (b) of Figure 9, the optimal lockdown policy substantially reduces
the share of the population that ever gets infected in South Africa and the US but not in
Uganda and Pakistan. As a result, the optimal policy has a much larger impact on adult
mortality in the wealthier countries, in comparison to the reference lockdown (column d).
On the other hand, the optimal policy induces smaller increases in child mortality in the
low- and middle-income countries.




                                                    36
            (a) Aggregate Labor   (b) Cumulative    (c) Current    (d) Mortality Rates (e) Total Mortality
                  Supply             Infection       Infection          by Age                Rates
    Uganda
    Pakistan
    South Africa
    United States




                                    Figure 9: Selected Pandemic Indicators

Note: This figure presents several pandemic indicators for selected countries. Panels (a) present the cu-
mulative infection rate, where the total population is normalized to 1. Panels (b) are the infection rate in
each week. Panels (c) are the mortality rates of COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 under the optimal lockdown
relative to the no intervention policy. Panels (d) present the total mortality rates of different lockdown
policies relative to the no intervention policy. Panels (e) present the aggregate labor supply under different
policies.
Source: authors' calculations.


5                   Conclusion
At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, countries around the world imposed lockdown mea-
sures similar in severity. Our analysis, however, suggests that optimal policies substantially
differ, depending on the resiliency of child survival to income shocks, countries' demographic
characteristics, and patterns of social contacts. The reason is that economic contractions
in low- and middle-income countries have been tied to increased rates of child mortality.
During the COVID-19 period, disease control responses have contributed to declines in na-
tional income for much of the world. This paper highlights and then quantifies this relatively



                                                      37
neglected consequence of disease control policies, thereby informing country-specific assess-
ments of the costs and benefits of lockdowns as policies to fight a pandemic.
   While our paper highlighted and quantified a tradeoff between human lives, namely chil-
dren vs. adults, attenuating or mitigating it could be achieved with a second policy instru-
ment such as targeted social assistance towards families with young children and pregnant
women.
   A more comprehensive evaluation of the tradeoffs underlying the use of disease control
interventions would require considering a more exhaustive list of potential channels that go
beyond the scope of this paper. For example, the pandemic and the policy responses to it
are likely to affect coverage rates of essential health services which may result in additional
detriments to population health than those considered here. On the health service supply-
side, there are expected to be disruptions of supply chains and resource reallocation towards
COVID-19-related activities. On the demand-side, users might avoid health facilities out
of fear of infection or have their mobility constrained by lockdown policies. Such indirect
health effects have been shown to substantially reduce coverage of maternal and child health
services during the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa (Brolin Ribacke et al., 2016).
   Another, longer-run, cost of lockdowns may be detriments to human capital as a result of
school closures and reduced household income. It is unclear if the lower investment in human
capital over the pandemic period can or will be compensated by increased future investment.
On the other hand, COVID-19 infections averted through control policies will also lower the
incidence of any long-term health complications from COVID-19 infection survivors.
   Finally, future work in the vein presented here would also need to rely on a better un-
derstanding (both qualitative and quantitative) of the policies chosen to address the current
pandemic and the behavioral responses of private actors. While our model allows for some
private response to infection likelihood, it may understate the extent of private protective
behavior, at least in high-income countries (Sheridan et al., 2020; Atkeson et al., 2021). In
part due to the likely presence of behavioral responses, the extent to which government social
distancing policies affect social contacts in all aspects of people's lives is an important yet
under-investigated parameter, on which many quantitative assessments rely.



                                              38
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iv´     an Werning, and Michael D Whin-
 ston, "Optimal Tageted Lockdowns in a Multi-Group SIR Model," December 2020. Forth-
 coming, American Economic Review: Insights.
Alon, Titan M, Minki Kim, David Lagakos, and Mitchell VanVuren, "How Should
 Policy Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic Differ in the Developing World?," May 2020.
 NBER Working Paper No. 27273.
Alvarez, Fernando, David Argente, and Franceso Lippi, "A Simple Planning Problem
 for COVID-19 Lockdown, Testing, and Tracing," American Economic Review: Insights,
 2020.
Andreasen, Viggo, C´   ecile Viboud, and Lone Simonsen, "Epidemiologic character-
 ization of the 1918 influenza pandemic summer wave in Copenhagen: implications for
 pandemic control strategies," The Journal of infectious diseases, 2008, 197 (2), 270­278.
Atkeson, Andrew, "What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough
 Estimates of Disease Scenarios," March 2020. NBER Working Paper 26867.
Atkeson, Andrew G, Karen Kopecky, and Tao Zha, "Behavior and the Transmission
 of COVID-19," in "AEA Papers and Proceedings," Vol. 111 2021, pp. 356­60.
Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman, and Norbert Schady, "Aggregate income shocks and
 infant mortality in the developing world," Review of Economics and statistics, 2011, 93
 (3), 847­856.
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Nonlinear Production Networks with an
 Application to the Covid-19 Crisis," April 2020. mimeo, UCLA and Harvard.
   and , "Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application
  to the Covid-19 Crisis," April 2020. Mimeo, UCLA and Harvard.
Barnett-Howell, Zachary and Mushfiq Mobarak, "The Benefits and Costs of Social
 Distancing in Rich and Poor Countries," April 2020. arXiv:2004.04867.
Barrot, Jean-Noel, Basile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat, "Sectoral Effects of Social
 Distancing," April 2020. Mimeo, HEC-Paris and Bocconi.
Bhalotra, Sonia, "Fatal fluctuations? Cyclicality in infant mortality in India," Journal of
 Development Economics, 2010, 93 (1), 7­19.
Bonadio, Barth´
              el´
                emy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-
 Nayar, "Global Supply Chains in the Pandemic," May 2020. NBER Working Paper
 No. 27224.
Cruces, Guillermo, Pablo Gl¨   uzmann, and Luis Felipe L´      opez Calva, "Economic
 crises, maternal and infant mortality, low birth weight and enrollment rates: evidence
 from Argentina's downturns," World Development, 2012, 40 (2), 303­314.

                                            39
Cutler, David M, Felicia Knaul, Rafael Lozano, Oscar M´           endez, and Beatriz
 Zurita, "Financial crisis, health outcomes and ageing: Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s,"
 Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 84 (2), 279­303.

Davies, Nicholas G, Sam Abbott, Rosanna C Barnard, Christopher I Jarvis,
 Adam J Kucharski, James D Munday, Carl AB Pearson, Timothy W Russell,
 Damien C Tully, Alex D Washburne et al., "Estimated transmissibility and impact
 of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B. 1.1. 7 in England," Science, 2021, 372 (6538).

Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Booms, busts, and babies' health," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (3), 1091­1130.

Demombynes, Gabriel, "COVID-19 Age-Mortality Curves Are Flatter in Developing
 Countries," 2020.

Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, "The Macroeco-
  nomics of Epidemics," Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research
  March 2020.

Ferguson, Neil M, Derek AT Cummings, Christophe Fraser, James C Cajka,
  Philip C Cooley, and Donald S Burke, "Strategies for mitigating an influenza pan-
  demic," Nature, 2006, 442 (7101), 448­452.

Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H Juliette T Unwin, Thomas A
  Mellan, Helen Coupland, Charles Whittaker, Harrison Zhu, Tresnia Berah,
  Jeffrey W Eaton et al., "Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on
  COVID-19 in Europe," Nature, 2020, pp. 1­8.

Friedman, Jed and Norbert Schady, "How many infants likely died in Africa as a result
  of the 2008­2009 global financial crisis?," Health Economics, 2013, 22 (5), 611­622.

Garske, Tini, Anne Cori, Archchun Ariyarajah, Isobel M Blake, Ilaria Dorigatti,
 Tim Eckmanns, Christophe Fraser, Wes Hinsley, Thibaut Jombart, Harriet L
 Mills et al., "Heterogeneities in the case fatality ratio in the West African Ebola outbreak
 2013­2016," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2017,
 372 (1721), 20160308.

Ghisolfi, Selene, Ingvild Alm° as, Justin C Sandefur, Tillman von Carnap, Jesse
 Heitner, and Tessa Bold, "Predicted COVID-19 fatality rates based on age, sex, co-
 morbidities and health system capacity," BMJ global health, 2020, 5 (9), e003094.

Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and Jos´         e-V´ictor R´
                                                                              ios-Rull,
 "Health versus Wealth: On the Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic," April
 2020. CEPR Discussion Paper 14606.

Hall, Robert E, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow, "Trading off consumption and
 covid-19 deaths," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.



                                             40
Jia, Na, Dan Feng, Li-Qun Fang, Jan Hendrik Richardus, Xiao-Na Han, Wu-
  Chun Cao, and Sake J De Vlas, "Case fatality of SARS in mainland China and
  associated risk factors," Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2009, 14, 21­27.
Johnstone-Robertson, Simon P, Daniella Mark, Carl Morrow, Keren Mid-
  delkoop, Melika Chiswell, Lisa DH Aquino, Linda-Gail Bekker, and Robin
  Wood, "Social mixing patterns within a South African township community: implica-
  tions for respiratory disease transmission and control," American journal of epidemiology,
  2011, 174 (11), 1246­1255.
Kaplan, Greg, Ben Moll, and Gianluca Violante, "Pandemics According to HANK,"
 March 2020. mimeo.
Karlberg, J, DSY Chong, and WYY Lai, "Do men have a higher case fatality rate of
 severe acute respiratory syndrome than women do?," American journal of epidemiology,
 2004, 159 (3), 229­231.
Kim, Young Eun and Norman V Loayza, "Economic loss from COVID-19 fatalities
 across countries: a VSL approach," Applied Economics Letters, 2021, pp. 1­7.
Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, "Macroeconomic Dynamics and Real-
 location in an Epidemic," April 2020. CEPR Discussion Paper 14607.
Lavezzo, Enrico, Elisa Franchin, Constanze Ciavarella, Gina Cuomo-
  Dannenburg, Luisa Barzon, Claudia Del Vecchio, Lucia Rossi, Riccardo Man-
  ganelli, Arianna Loregian, Nicol`     o Navarin et al., "Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2
  outbreak in the Italian municipality of Vo'," Nature, 2020, 584 (7821), 425­429.
Lee, Bruce Y, Shawn T Brown, Philip C Cooley, Richard K Zimmerman,
  William D Wheaton, Shanta M Zimmer, John J Grefenstette, Tina-Marie
  Assi, Timothy J Furphy, Diane K Wagener et al., "A computer simulation of
  employee vaccination to mitigate an influenza epidemic," American journal of preventive
  medicine, 2010, 38 (3), 247­257.
Lei, Hao, Xiaolin Xu, Shenglan Xiao, Xifeng Wu, and Yuelong Shu, "Household
  transmission of COVID-19-a systematic review and meta-analysis," Journal of Infection,
  2020, 81 (6), 979­997.
Levin, Andrew T, William P Hanage, Nana Owusu-Boaitey, Kensington B
  Cochran, Seamus P Walsh, and Gideon Meyerowitz-Katz, "Assessing the age
  specificity of infection fatality rates for COVID-19: systematic review, meta-analysis, and
  public policy implications," European journal of epidemiology, 2020, pp. 1­16.
Li, Ruiyun, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, and Jeffrey
  Shaman, "Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel
  coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)," Science, 2020, 368 (6490), 489­493.
Loayza, Norman, "Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an Epidemic," May
  2020. World Bank Research and Policy Brief no. 35.

                                             41
Maruthappu, Mahiben, Robert A Watson, Johnathan Watkins, Thomas Zeltner,
 Rosalind Raine, and Rifat Atun, "Effects of economic downturns on child mortality:
 a global economic analysis, 1981­2010," BMJ global health, 2017, 2 (2), e000157.

Meyerowitz-Katz, Gideon and Lea Merone, "A systematic review and meta-analysis
 of published research data on COVID-19 infection-fatality rates," International Journal
 of Infectious Diseases, 2020.

Olson, Donald R, Lone Simonsen, Paul J Edelson, and Stephen S Morse, "Epi-
 demiological evidence of an early wave of the 1918 influenza pandemic in New York City,"
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2005, 102 (31), 11059­11063.

Pritchett, Lant and Lawrence H Summers, "Wealthier is Healthier.," Journal of Hu-
 man Resources, 1996, 31 (4).

Ravallion, Martin, "Could Pandemic Lead to Famine?," April 2020. Project Syndicate.

  , "Pandemic Policies in Poor Places," April 2020. CGD Note.

Ribacke, Kim J Brolin, Dell D Saulnier, Anneli Eriksson, and Johan von Schreeb,
 "Effects of the West Africa Ebola virus disease on health-care utilization­a systematic
 review," Frontiers in public health, 2016, 4, 222.

Roberton, Timothy, Emily D Carter, Victoria B Chou, Angela R Stegmuller,
 Bianca D Jackson, Yvonne Tam, Talata Sawadogo-Lewis, and Neff Walker,
 "Early estimates of the indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on maternal and child
 mortality in low-income and middle-income countries: a modelling study," The Lancet
 Global Health, 2020.

Ruhm, Christopher J, "Are recessions good for your health?," The Quarterly journal of
 economics, 2000, 115 (2), 617­650.

Sheridan, Adam, Asger Lau Andersen, Emil Toft Hansen, and Niels Johannesen,
  "Social distancing laws cause only small losses of economic activity during the COVID-19
  pandemic in Scandinavia," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2020, 117
  (34), 20468­20473.

Singer, Peter and Michael Plant, "When Will the Pandemic Cure Be Worse Than the
  Disease?," April 2020. Project Syndicate.

Slovic, Paul and Ellen Peters, "Risk perception and affect," Current directions in psy-
  chological science, 2006, 15 (6), 322­325.

Stringhini, Silvia, Ania Wisniak, Giovanni Piumatti, Andrew S Azman,
  Stephen A Lauer, Helene Baysson, David De Ridder, Dusan Petrovic,
  Stephanie Schrempft, Kailing Marcus et al., "Repeated seroprevalence of anti-
  SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies in a population-based sample from Geneva, Switzerland,"
  medRxiv, 2020.


                                           42
Verity, Robert, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles
 Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson,
 Patrick GT Walker, Han Fu et al., "Estimates of the severity of coronavirus dis-
 ease 2019: a model-based analysis," The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.

Viscusi, W Kip and Joseph E Aldy, "The value of a statistical life: a critical review
 of market estimates throughout the world," Journal of risk and uncertainty, 2003, 27 (1),
 5­76.

Walker, PGT, C Whittaker, O Watson et al., "The Global Impact of COVID-19 and
 Strategies for Mitigation and Suppression: WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Dis-
 ease Modelling," MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Abdul Latif Jameel
 Institute for Disease and Emergency Analytics, Imperial College London, 2020.

Yang, Shu, Peihua Cao, Peipei Du, Ziting Wu, Zian Zhuang, Lin Yang, Xuan
 Yu, Qi Zhou, Xixi Feng, Xiaohui Wang et al., "Early estimation of the case fatality
 rate of COVID-19 in mainland China: a data-driven analysis," Annals of translational
 medicine, 2020, 8 (4).




                                           43
A       Additional Tables and Figures

                                         Table A.1: Household states

                     k    States   Case        k   States   Case       k    States   Case
                     1     SSS       3        23    ISR       3        45    IDR       5
                     2     ISS       3        24    RSR       3        46    IRD       2
                     3     RSS       3        25    DSR       1        47    IRR       2
                     4     DSS       1        26    ISD       3        48    IDD       5
                     5     SIS       2        27    RSD       3        49    DIR       4
                     6     SRS       2        28    DSD       1        50    RID       2
                     7     SDS       5        29    IIS       2        51    RIR       2
                     8     SSI       3        30    RIS       2        52    DID       4
                     9     SSR       3        31    DIS       4        53    DRI       4
                    10     SSD       3        32    IRS       2        54    RDI       5
                    11     SII       2        33    RRS       2        55    RRI       2
                    12     SRI       2        34    DRS       4        56    DDI       5
                    13     SDI       5        35    IDS       5        57    RRR       2
                    14     SIR       2        36    RDS       5        58    DRR       4
                    15     SRR       2        37    DDS       5        59    RDR       5
                    16     SDR       5        38    III       2        60    RRD       2
                    17     SID       2        39    RII       2        61    RDD       5
                    18     SRD       2        40    DII       4        62    DRD       4
                    19     SDD       5        41    IRI       2        63    DDR       5
                    20     ISI       3        42    IDI       5        64    DDD       5
                    21     RSI       3        43    IIR       2
                    22     DSI       1        44    IID       2

Note: this table lists all the states that a household could be in. The three letters indicate the state of each
of the three members of the household. "S" means that the member is susceptible, "I" for infected, "R" for
recovered, and "D" for deceased. For example, for a household in state 53, "DRI", children are deceased,
adults recovered, and the elderly infected. "Case" refers to the cases used to prove Lemma 1, as detailed in
Appendix B.1.




                                                      44
                                   Table A.2: List of Countries

      Low-income countries:
              Benin                    Burkina Faso           Burundi           Central African Republic
              Eritrea                    Ethiopia            Madagascar                 Malawi
           Mozambique                     Nepal                Niger                    Rwanda
           Sierra Leone                 Tanzania               Togo                     Uganda

 Lower-middle income countries:
            Angola                     Bangladesh               Bolivia               Cambodia
           Cameroon                    Cote d'Ivoire     Egypt, Arab Republic         El Salvador
             India                      Indonesia          Kyrgyz Republic             Lao PDR
           Mongolia                     Myanmar               Nicaragua                Pakistan
          Philippines                    Senegal               Vietnam                  Zambia
           Zimbabwe

 Upper-middle income countries:
            Albania                       Algeria            Argentina                 Armenia
           Azerbaijan                     Belarus              Belize           Bosnia and Herzegovina
           Botswana                        Brazil            Bulgaria                   China
           Colombia                     Costa Rica       Dominican Republic            Ecuador
              Fiji                        Georgia               Iraq                   Jamaica
            Jordan                      Kazakhstan           Lebanon                   Malaysia
            Mexico                       Namibia             Paraguay                    Peru
          South Africa                   Sri Lanka           Thailand

      High-income countries:
           Bahamas, The                   Bahrain             Barbados                   Chile
              France                       Italy                Japan                  Panama
               Spain                      Sweden           United Kingdom            United States


Note: Countries included in the analysis by income group classification based on the World Bank grouping
for fiscal year 2020.




                                                    45
B      Model and Quantification
B.1      Proof of Lemma 1
First, note that we can divide the future states starting from any k into two categrories:
those k that depend on nkt and those that do not. We define the set of future states to
                                                                                     ¯ k:
which the transition probability that are independent from the household decision as K
                                   ¯ k = {k |kk (nkt |t ) = kk (t )} .
                                   K

All the infeasible states from k with kk = 0 are also part of the set K  ¯ k . With this insight
we can re-write the household decision problem, highlighting that from the household's
                                                             ¯ k will be taken as exogenously
perspective, the transition probabilities into the states k  K
given:
                                                                               

                Uk = u(nkt ) +                    kk (nkt |t )Uk +               kk (t )Uk  .        (B.1)
                                            ¯k)
                                      k (K \K                              ¯k)
                                                                        k (K


The household will internalize the dynamic effects of labor supply on 1) child mortality and
2) virus transmission through equations (15) and (16). In the rest of the section, we discuss
all the possible combinations of these two dynamic effects.

Case 1, Infection Shock (Ikt (2)) Applicable In the first case, the household has a
susceptible young adult but no children, and thus only the infection shock applies. We
express the household problem as:

               Uk = u(nkt ) + Ikt (2) (1 - nkt (2))                   kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk
                                                            k (2)=I

                      +  (1 - Ikt (2)) (1 - nkt (2))                  kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk
                                                            k (2)=S

                      +            kk (t )Uk                                                         (B.2)
                             ¯k)
                          k (K


In the equation above, we separate the future states depending on the outcome of the young
adult, k (2), which relies on the realization of Ikt (2). We also use kk (m) denote the
probability that the state of individual m will change from k (m) to k (m) in the next period:16
                                                        3
                                     kk (nkt |t ) =         kk (m|t ).
                                                      m=1

  16
    The equation above implicitly relies on the assumption that the transition shocks are independent across
family members. Note that the future states in which the young adult dies due to non-COVID reasons,
                               ¯ k , and thus do not affect the policy function of the household.
k (2) = D, are part of the set K




                                                     46
Considering the transition probabilities, the Lagrangian of the household problem is:
       Uk = u(nkt ) + Ikt (2) (1 - nkt (2))                  kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk
                                                   k (2)=I

            +  (1 - Ikt (2)) (1 - nkt (2))                   kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk +             kk (t )Uk
                                                   k (2)=S                                ¯k)
                                                                                       k (K

            +   k
                I    [I 1 [(1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt ] CIt + I 2 nkt NIt + I 3 It + I 4 Ik - Ikt (2)] ,
where k  I is the multiplier associated with the transition probability. The FOC with respect
to nkt is
                           u
                                + k I [I 1 (1 - µt )wt CIt + I 2 NIt ] = 0.             (B.3)
                          nkt
Lastly, the FOC for Ikt (2) is:
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
  (1 - nkt (2))          kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk -              kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk - kI = 0.
                                                                                 
                        k (2)=I                                 k (2)=S
                                                                                                         (B.4)
Note that from the equation above, it is clear that k
                                                    I captures the drop in the future value
if the young adult becomes infected in the next period. In other words, k I is the value of
staying uninfected during the pandemic.

Case 2, Child Mortality Shock (dkt (1)) Applicable In this case, the young working
adult is either infected or recovered, and the children are alive. The Lagrangian equation
is:17
             Uk = u(nkt ) + dkt (1)                kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk
                                         k (1)=D

                     +  (1 - dkt (1))              kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk +              kk (t )Uk
                                         k (1)=D                                 ¯k)
                                                                              k (K

                                                       (1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt
                     + k
                       d ¯n (m) +  (m) 1 -                                   - dkt (1) ,
                                                                 ck
The FOC with respect to nkt is:
                              u             (1 - µt )wt
                                  - kd  (1)             = 0,                                             (B.5)
                             nkt                ck
and the FOC with respect to dkt (1):
                                                                 
                                                                 
            kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk -           kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk - k
                                                                    d = 0.                               (B.6)
                                                                 
           k (1)=D                                  k (2)=D

Similar to the previous case, the multiplier k
                                             d captures the value of the children.
  17
     Note that in the equation above, we have assumed that the children are not infected. Assuming infected
children will only alter the level of dkt (1) without affecting the first order conditions. The FOC also assumes
that the young working adult is not infected. If the adult is infected, the FOC will be slightly modifed to
reflect the discount on productivity.

                                                         47
Case 3, Both Shocks Applicable When both the infection and the mortality shocks
apply, the Lagrangian becomes:

       Uk = u(nkt ) + dkt (1)Ikt (2) [1 - nkt (2)]                            kk (3|t )Uk
                                                             k (1)=Dk (2)=I

             +  [1 - dkt (1)] Ikt (2) [1 - nkt (2)]                          kk (3|t )Uk
                                                            k (1)=Dk (2)=I

             + dkt (1) [1 - Ikt (2)] [1 - nkt (2)]                           kk (3|t )Uk
                                                           k (1)=Dk (2)=S

             +  [1 - dkt (1)] [1 - Ikt (2)] [1 - nkt (2)]                         kk (3|t )Uk
                                                                 k (1)=Dk (2)=S

             + dkt (1)nkt (2)                         kk (3|t )Uk
                                     k (1)=Dk (2)=D

             +  [1 - dkt (1)] nkt (2)                        kk (3|t )Uk +               kk (t )Uk
                                           k (1)=Dk (2)=D                          ¯k)
                                                                                k (K

             +    k
                 [I 1 [(1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt ] CIt + I 2 nkt NIt + I 3 It + I 4 Ik - Ikt (2)]
                  I
                                          (1 - µt ) wt nkt + kt
             + k
               d  ¯n (m) +  (m) 1 -                               - dkt (1) .
                                                    ck

The FOC for labor supply is:

                 u                                                 (1 - µt )wt
                     + k                                    k
                       I [I 1 (1 - µt )wt CIt + I 2 NIt ] - d  (1)             =0                    (B.7)
                 nkt                                                   ck
and for Ikt (2):
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
 (1 - nkt (2))                  kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk -                kk (1|t )kk (3|t )Uk      - k
                                                                                                  I = 0.
                                                                                             
                      k (2)=I                               k (2)=S
                                                                                                     (B.8)

Lastly, the FOC for dkt (1):
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk -                       kk (2|t )kk (3|t )Uk          - k
                                                                                           d = 0     (B.9)
                                                                                    
        k (1)=D                                k (2)=D


Case 4, Neither Shocks Applicable In this case, the labor decision today does not
affect the transition probability. As a result, the FOC of labor supply only takes the current
utility into consideration:
                                                u
                                                    = 0.
                                                nkt


                                                      48
Case 5, No Young Adult In the four cases above, we have implicitly assumed that the
young adult is alive. In the case of a deceased young adult, there is no optimization of
problem for the household to solve. The remaining members of the household will consume
the government transfer in every period.

B.2     Recursion
We use recursion to compute the post-pandemic steady state levels of Uk , as well as Ukt in
the backward induction.
    To infer the steady state Uk , the necessary condition is that Uk are known for all the
k = k such that kk > 0. In other words, we need to know the value of all the future states
k that state k can possibly transit into, except for k itself, in order to infer the value of state
k . We start the recursion by assuming that no Uk is known. In the first iteration, the only
state that can be inferred is the absorbing state, k = 64, in which all the agents are dead.
In the second recursion, we can then infer all the states that are only one-step away from
the absorbing state, k = 61, 62, 63. We repeat this process until all the Uk are known. The
last state to infer is k = 1.
    With the steady state Uk computed for all k , we then repeat this process for all t =
T, T - 1, · · · , 1 to compute all the Ukt . At t = T , we assume that the future states are steady
state. For all t < T , the future states are simply t + 1.

B.3     Calibration of 
From equation (20), it is straightforward to see that in the pre-pandemic steady state, kt = 0
and µt = 0. Therefore the labor supply is reduced to:
                                                                           1
                                                       3   m               -1
                                                       m=1   1k (m)             wt
                                           nk =                                      .                           (B.10)
                                                                  
The instantenous utility function in equation (17) simplifies to:
                                             1
                      3                      -1
                              m                      
 u(nk ) = (wt nk )                1k (m)            - n2
                     m=1
                                                     2 k
                                       1
                                                                           1                                1
                                                                                                                      2
                 3   m                 -1    2          3                  -1               3   m           -1
                 m=1   1k (m)               wt               m                              m=1   1k (m)         wt
       =                                                         1k (m)         -                                     
                                                       m=1
                                                                                     2             
                                     2
              3   m                  -1     2
              m=1   1k (m)                 wt
       =                                        .
                          2
From the expression above, it is straightforward to see that when  = 3, the death of a
non-productive member with mass m reduces u(nk ) by m fraction.




                                                             49
C       Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition
We use two-way Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition to understand the driving forces behind the
expected number of children's lives lost per COVID-19 fatality averted across country groups.
This exercise divides the entire sample into two groups, with the LIC and the LMC in the
first group and the UMC and HIC in the second. We include the semi-elasticity of child
mortality with respect to income ( (1)), the population age distribution ( 1 and 3 ), hospital
capacity (), and the calibrated transmission parameters (I 1 , I 2 , and I 3 ) on the RHS of
the decomposition. Table C.1 reports the results of the decomposition exercise.

                            Table C.1: Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition


                                 Optimal Lockdown                         Criteria-Based Lockdown
                            Overall Explained Fraction                  Overall Explained Fraction
  LIC + LMC                   0.204                            1.061
                            (0.021)                           (0.121)
  UMC + HIC                   0.010                            0.039
                            (0.002)                           (0.007)
  Difference                  0.194                            1.021
                            (0.021)                           (0.122)
  Explained                  0.283                             1.659
                            (0.051)                           (0.208)
  Unexplained                -0.089                            -0.638
                            (0.042)                           (0.164)
  Semi-Elasticity                         0.226     0.798                 1.333     0.803
                                        (0.060)                         (0.240)
  Population Share, 0-14                 0.097      0.343                 0.477     0.288
                                        (0.031)                         (0.172)
  Population Share, 65+                  -0.015     -0.053               -0.047    -0.028
                                        (0.023)                         (0.126)
  Hospital Beds per 1000                 -0.002     -0.007               -0.024    -0.014
                                        (0.003)                         (0.020)
  I 1                                    -0.001     -0.004                0.032     0.019
                                        (0.011)                         (0.038)
  I 2                                    0.009      0.032                 0.061     0.037
                                        (0.006)                         (0.034)
  I 3                                    -0.033     -0.117               -0.173    -0.104
                                        (0.014)                         (0.059)
  Constant

  N                            85                               85

Note: this table reports the two-way Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition of the expected number of children lives
lost per COVID-19 fatality averted by country groups. The first group is the low-income countries (LIC) and
the lower-middle-income countries (LMC); the second group is the upper-middle-income countries (UMC)
and the high-income countries (HIC).

   The columns "overall" reports the differences in means across country groups and the
overall explanatory power of the RHS variables. In the detailed decomposition, it is clear
that the income factors (the semi-elasticity) are by far the most prominent force, explaining

                                                    50
between 63.3 to 81.2% of the between-group differences. The age-structure, especially the
population share of children between 0 and 14, explains most of the remaining variations.
The hospital capacity has little power in driving variations across country groups.




                                           51
D   Robustness




     (a) criteria-based lockdown,  = 1.01          (b) optimal lockdown,  = 1.01




      (c) criteria-based lockdown,  = 5             (d) optimal lockdown,  = 5

                           Figure D.1: Alternative values of 




                                            52
