                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ARE STATED EXPECTATIONS ACTUAL BELIEFS?
      NEW EVIDENCE FOR THE BELIEFS CHANNEL OF INVESTMENT DEMAND

                                        Haoyang Liu
                                      Christopher Palmer

                                      Working Paper 28926
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28926


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021


For helpful feedback and discussions, we thank our discussants Michael Haliassos, Lawrence Jin,
Linda Salisbury, and Johannes Stroebel; Marianne Andries, John Campbell, Richard Crump,
Francesco D'Acunto, Benjamin Enke, Andreas Fuster, Stefano Giglio, Ed Glaeser, Thomas
Graeber, Jerry Hausman, Wei Jiang, Theresa Kuchler, Eben Lazarus, Jeffrey Levine, Yueran Ma,
Ulrike Malmendier, Stefan Nagel, Jonathan Parker, Antoinette Schoar, Felipe Severino, Andrei
Shleifer, Jason Somerville, Steven A. Snell, David Sraer, David Thesmar, Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, Adrien Verdelhan, James Vickery, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Michael
Weber; and seminar and workshop participants at AFA, BC Consumer Finance Workshop,
Bundesbank International Conference on Household Finance, Chicago Booth, Chicago Federal
Reserve, CUHK Shenzen, the Federal Reserve MBS Analytical Forum, ITAM, MIT, Nankai
SOF, NBER Summer Institute (Real Estate), PKU GSM, and SFS Cavalcade. Tammy Lee, David
Rubio, Dean Parker, and Claire Nelson provided outstanding research assistance. Palmer
acknowledges funding from NSF CAREER Grant 1944138. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Haoyang Liu and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Stated Expectations Actual Beliefs? New Evidence for the Beliefs Channel of Investment
Demand
Haoyang Liu and Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 28926
June 2021
JEL No. D84,D91,G11,R21

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite growing interest in expectation surveys, critics argue that survey responses are not
reliable measures of the expectations underlying financial decisions, and empirical work often
finds only a weak correlation between investment and stated beliefs. In this paper, we document a
systematic gap between an individual's own forecasted returns and the beliefs used in investment
decisions. In particular, perceived past housing returns predict individual real estate investment
decisions even conditional on flexible controls for an individual's forecasted distribution of future
home-price growth. Many respondents acknowledge that they rely on past returns more than their
survey-reported expected returns when making investment decisions, ruling out simple
measurement-error explanations. To interpret these findings, we present evidence that investment
decision-making induces cognitively uncertain investors to rely more on belief factors in which
they are relatively confident, such as their estimation of recent local housing returns. Survey
respondents that rely on past returns more than their surveyed forecasts frequently cite
uncertainty about other belief factors as their rationale.


Haoyang Liu
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, New 10045
liuhy@berkeley.edu

Christopher Palmer
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
cjpalmer@mit.edu
            "Prediction is hard, especially when it's about the future." -Yogi Berra


1       Introduction
A significant body of recent work in behavioral macroeconomics and finance seeks to un-
derstand both how people form expectations and how these subjective assessments of the
likelihood of future states (i.e., beliefs) affect actions (e.g., investment decisions).1 As a re-
sult, several new expectation surveys have been developed to study the link between stated
expectations and subsequent behavior.2 Critics of expectation surveys argue against their
usefulness because respondents lack sufficient comprehension of the questions or because their
answers do not correspond to decision-relevant expectations (Cochrane (2011, 2017)). As a
response, survey designers have proposed several techniques to reduce measurement error, for
example, by using multiple framings to ask the same question, designing instruments for self-
reported expectations, and eliciting both point estimates and expected distributions (Glaser
et al. (2007); Armona et al. (2018); Giglio et al. (2021)). However, even when researchers are
able to both elicit beliefs and measure investment decisions for the same respondents, the
empirical relationship between stated forecasts and actions is often weaker than predicted by
theory.3 Moreover, even though survey respondents are usually willing to answer numerical
expectations questions, it is unclear whether the representation of subjective beliefs elicited
by expectations surveys is an accurate characterization of the subjective probability func-
tion used in actual decision making.4 Might the projection of beliefs onto survey forecasting
exercises differ from the way actual beliefs are used in investment decision-making?
    In this paper, we show that the role of home-price beliefs in explaining investment be-
havior, which we refer to as the beliefs channel, is stronger when subjective past home-price
growth is used as an additional predictor of behavior even conditional on stated expectations.
Traditionally, researchers treat stated beliefs as a sufficient statistic for forecast-relevant data

    1
      See Manski (2004, 2018) for recent surveys.
    2
      See, for example, Armantier et al. (2015); Armona et al. (2018); Bailey et al. (2018); D'Acunto et al.
(2018, 2019c); Kosar et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2020); Giglio et al. (2021); D'Acunto et al. (2020). Hurd (2009)
overviews the predictive power of surveyed subjective probabilities.
    3
      For examples, see Vissing-Jorgensen (2003); Dominitz and Manski (2011); Amromin and Sharpe (2014);
Drerup et al. (2017); Ameriks et al. (2020); Giglio et al. (2020); Liu and Sui (2020); Giglio et al. (2021).
By contrast, Hendren (2013, 2017) finds that surveyed beliefs code some private information that predicts
insurance demand even conditional on public observables.
    4
      For example, Manski (2018) describes this open question as follows. "There has, nevertheless, been
awareness that the willingness and ability of respondents to report probabilistic expectations does not imply
that persons regularly think probabilistically and use subjective probability distributions to make decisions.
It has long been known that survey respondents are willing and able to respond to questions seeking point
predictions of uncertain events or verbal assessments of likelihood. Yet persons need not use point predictions
or verbal assessments of likelihood to make decisions."

                                                       2
such as past price growth, implicitly assuming that past returns affect future investment only
through the formation of the stated beliefs captured by survey. Such modeling of expecta-
tions and actions by first studying how expectations are formed and then how expectations
affect actions permits a divide-and-conquer approach, where in the second step of modeling
action prediction, the empiricist need not include any other variables in households' infor-
mation set after controlling for their forecasts. In contrast, our results show that there is
a direct empirical link from certain belief-formation factors to actions that bypasses stated
beliefs.
    To fix ideas, our findings can be illustrated mathematically as follows. In the classic
Merton (1969) model of portfolio choice with a single risky asset with normally distributed
future return rt+1 , the optimal share  allocated to the risky asset is

                                                 Et [rt+1 ] - Rf
                                          t =              2
                                                                 ,                                       (1)
                                                       t

where Et [rt+1 ] is the expected return from t to t +1 conditional on all information available at
          2
time t, t   is the conditional variance of rt+1 ,  is the constant absolute risk-aversion param-
eter, and Rf is the risk-free rate. The risky-asset share therefore depends on the distribution
of returns used to form the expected return, and this expected return could depend on many
factors. In a market with momentum, like the housing market, the prior period's return rt
could be one such factor used to predict Et [rt+1 ]. However, after conditioning on Et [rt+1 ],
  2
t   and , past returns rt would not independently enter this rational portfolio-choice rule.
In contrast, our main empirical result can be summarized as finding that rt affects t even
after flexibly controlling for Et [rt+1 ], measures of , and the forecasted distribution of rt+1 .5
    Our analysis starts from the investment experiment of Armona et al. (2018) run in the
New York Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Expectations, wherein respondents were
asked to allocate a $1,000 investment between a 2% risk-free savings account and a housing
fund with returns tracking local home price appreciation (HPA). In the same survey, Armona
et al. (2018) also collected respondents' estimation of past returns (a subjective measure
potentially differing from actual realized home-price growth), their forecasted home-price
growth, and a rich set of demographics. We show that in this experiment, perceived past
returns better predict investment behavior than do stated forecasted returns.6 Outside of
this hypothetical experiment, perceived past home-price growth also improves the prediction
   5
      While we offer the frictionless Merton model as an example of how portfolio decisions might be made,
we are agnostic about the true form of investment demand and instead endeavor to establish that stated
expectations are not a sufficient statistic for the beliefs channel of demand. See Giglio et al. (2021) for a
discussion of how important real-world frictions affect the predictions of the Merton model.
    6
      As we discuss below, this investment experiment allows us to abstract away from confounding demand
shocks such as the effect of past returns on financial constraints.

                                                     3
of intention to purchase a non-primary residence even after controlling for stated forecasted
returns and the forecasted distribution of returns. We further verify that our results are
robust to controlling for individual-specific risk aversion and a rich set of demographics,
addressing potential collinearity between forecasted returns and subjective past returns,
instrumenting to account for measurement error in surveyed beliefs, and flexibly controlling
for the forecasted distribution of returns to allow for any difference between risk-neutral and
physical-risk beliefs.
     Why do people rely on their memory of past returns when making investment decisions
even conditional on how this memory affects their forecasts? We explore several explanations
for our findings. We first address potential omitted variable bias from factors that are
correlated with both beliefs and investment demand (e.g., risk aversion). Even after flexibly
controlling for several such factors that could be correlated with both investment demand and
past returns, perceived past home-price growth still improves investment-decision prediction.
Next, to address whether measurement error in survey responses can explain our findings, we
show that our results hold after instrumenting for elicited expected returns. Taken together,
respondents' investment decision-making deviates from a fully rational framework wherein
stated beliefs capture all decision-relevant information about future returns.
     To motivate our preferred theoretical explanation for our findings, we collect additional
data by asking respondents explicitly whether they rely more on past or expected returns
when making decisions.7 We rerun the investment experiment designed by Armona et al.
(2018) in the 2020-2021 waves of the same survey, but before eliciting respondents' allocation
of their $1,000 investments, we ask some respondents whether they consider the reported
return forecasts they reported on the survey or their memory of past home-price growth
more in their investment decisions.8 A significant fraction (44%) of the population admits
to relying more on their perceived past returns than their surveyed return forecasts. This
confirms that our findings about the importance of memory even conditional on expected
returns are not an artifact of survey noise or omitted variables for a meaningful fraction of
respondents.
     To interpret these empirical findings, we turn to a growing literature on limited atten-
tion and cognitive uncertainty (Gabaix (2014); Enke and Graeber (2021); Frydman and Jin
(2019); Gabaix (2019); Khaw et al. (2020)). We show that a model where the complexity
in financial decisions induces investors to rely on signals that they are more certain about
is consistent with our evidence. Using an example similar to the one in Enke and Graeber
   7
      This approach builds on a nascent survey literature in household finance which elicits both investors'
decisions and asks them to self-examine the factors behind their investment choices (Chinco et al. (2020);
Choi and Robertson (2020); Liu et al. (2020)).
    8
      See Appendix B for detailed question framing.

                                                     4
(2021), when asked by a low-stakes survey question about past and expected home-price
growth, a respondent might confidently reply 5% and 10%, respectively. However, when
asked to make a more complex investment decision, she might start to question her certainty
of her own return forecast (e.g., "Is my forecast really 10% as opposed to 7% or 13%?").
The respondent may therefore shrink her stated forecast towards something that she is more
certain about, such as her own perception of last period's return, an object referred to as
the "mental default" in Enke and Graeber (2021). For example, imagine an agent observes
signals on past home-price growth and future rent growth. While the optimal combination
of both of them comprises a more accurate forecast of future returns than using past returns
alone, the agent perceives the future rent-growth signal to be less accurate. Accordingly,
when making an actual decision with higher stakes and more complexity than a survey ques-
tion about expected returns, the agent relies more heavily on past home-price growth instead
of the combination of past returns and future rent growth.9
    While other economic frameworks could also generate our empirical findings, we pro-
vide direct evidence for a cognitive uncertainty mechanism in Section 6.2. First, we show
that certain factors play a large role in stated forecasts but are shrunk in actual investment
decision-making. Second, we directly implement the Enke and Graeber (2021) test for cog-
nitive uncertainty in the 2021 survey wave. After eliciting subjective confidence intervals, we
find that investors who are less confident about their future forecasts relative to their recalled
past returns drive the conditional reliance on past returns when making decisions. Finally,
we analyze free-text responses about why some investors rely more on past returns than their
surveyed expectations and find many answers consistent with cognitive uncertainty.

Prior Literature Our paper makes several contributions to the literature measuring the
role of beliefs about returns on investment decisions (e.g., Glaser et al. (2007); Armona et
al. (2018); Andonov and Rauh (2020); Giglio et al. (2021)), especially to findings empha-
sizing the empirically weak correlation between expected returns and investment (Vissing-
Jorgensen (2003); Dominitz and Manski (2011); Amromin and Sharpe (2014); Drerup et al.
(2017); Ameriks et al. (2020); Giglio et al. (2020); Liu and Sui (2020); Giglio et al. (2021)).10
First, our results suggest that researchers could improve the measurement of the beliefs
channel by directly controlling for factors that affect beliefs in addition to stated beliefs

   9
      As demonstrated by Enke and Graeber (2021), cognitive uncertainty can also affect the expectation
formation stage, itself a complicated process about which respondents may be uncertain. While complexity
in the belief formation stage could help explain the wedge between stated beliefs and decision-making, the
cross-sectional variance of stated beliefs does not decrease with subjective certainty about them, supporting
our interpretation of the investment stage being a key source of cognitive uncertainty.
   10
      See, too, work on inflation expectation formation and consumption decisions (e.g., Bachmann et al.
(2015); D'Acunto et al. (2019c)).

                                                     5
themselves. At least in the housing market, such a factor appears to be perceived past
returns, consistent with research emphasizing short-term price momentum in the housing
market (Glaeser et al. (2014); Glaeser and Nathanson (2017); DeFusco et al. (2017); Ar-
mona et al. (2018); Guren (2018)).11 Our findings also build on studies that uncover new
sources and measures of belief heterogeneity by highlighting that belief factors may have
direct effects at the decision stage (Binder (2017); Ben-David et al. (2018); Das et al. (2019);
D'Acunto et al. (2019b,a)).12 Moreover, our findings that perceived past returns matter
more than objectively measured past returns suggest that belief surveys, perhaps especially
of retail investors, would further benefit from asking respondents about their perceptions of
past returns.13
    We stress that our results do not argue against the usefulness of expectations surveys
or reject the beliefs channel. Instead, we show that the magnitude of the beliefs channel
could be larger than previously estimated, consistent with the prior literature recognizing
the noisiness of stated forecasts (Glaser et al. (2007); Armona et al. (2018); Giglio et al.
(2021)). Our contribution is to show that the gap between stated beliefs and the beliefs
used in decision-making is not purely noise and instead has a systematic structure partially
explainable by observable factors such as past returns experiences. Relatedly, we extend the
extrapolative belief literature (e.g., Piazzesi and Schneider (2009); Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014); Barberis et al. (2015); Glaeser and Nathanson (2017); Armona et al. (2018); Barrero
(2020)) by showing that perceptions of past returns can directly influence behavior, finding
evidence of implicit extrapolation even conditional on the explicit extrapolation that drives
stated beliefs.14
    Second, our paper is directly related to work on limited attention and cognitive uncer-
tainty in decision-making (Gabaix (2014); Drerup et al. (2017); Enke and Graeber (2021);
Frydman and Jin (2019); Gabaix (2019); Khaw et al. (2020)). For example, Drerup et al.
(2017) allow investors' decision processes to deviate from a rational investment-return model
and instead follow some intuitive rule of thumb, with such departures from rationality poten-
  11
      Related work outside of real estate demonstrates extrapolation in the expectations of corporate managers
(Barrero (2020)) and pension fund managers (Andonov and Rauh (2020)) and overreaction to recent memory
(Bordalo et al. (2020b); Afrouzi et al. (2020)). For underreaction in analyst and manager forecasts, see
Bouchaud et al. (2019) and Ma et al. (2020). Whether our findings generalize to beliefs and investment
decisions in other asset markets that do not feature price momentum is a useful avenue for future research.
   12
      For example, evidence from Finland in D'Acunto et al. (2019b) suggests that the wedge between beliefs
and demand is particularly pronounced for low-IQ investors.
   13
      See also Cookson and Niessner (2020), who find that a significant source of belief heterogeneity is
heterogenous interpretations of public information.
   14
      Similar to Andonov and Rauh (2020) and Andries et al. (2020), by considering investment decisions
directly, we find a stronger role for extrapolative beliefs than would be appreciated from an examination
of expectation formation alone. As we discuss below, this also helps reconcile large estimates of personal
experience effects with somewhat smaller extrapolation effects in expectation formation.

                                                      6
tially depending on an investor's financial sophistication. Building on this literature, Enke
and Graeber (2021) propose that investors are often aware of their own cognitive noise and
shrink their choices towards "mental defaults," or example, an even 50-50 split between risky
and risk-free assets. Our work extends this literature by showing that recalled past returns
serve as a plausible individual-specific mental default, generating between-investor variation
in mental defaults.15 Moreover, by implementing the cognitive uncertainty elicitation pro-
posed in Enke and Graeber (2021), we provide direct evidence that cognitive uncertainty
is an important driver of our core findings.16 Giglio et al. (2021) show that allowing for
taxes, limited attention, and subjective uncertainty drives a wedge between stated beliefs
and actions in the Merton (1969) model. By holding taxes and attention fixed, our setting
isolates the role of subjective uncertainty by demonstrating that investors rely on belief fac-
tors about which they are more confident, similar to Andries et al. (2020). Furthermore, we
find evidence that financial illiteracy is a potential driver of cognitive uncertainty, broadly
consistent with the finding of Enke and Graeber (2021) that cognitive uncertainty is more
acute in more complex environments.17
    Our results are also consistent with the finding of Frydman and Jin (2019) that risk
taking is more sensitive to more frequently occurring stimuli. In our context, subjective past
experience is more salient to investors than their forecasts, which have yet to occur, a sen-
timent repeatedly born out in the free-text responses to a question about decision-making.
In a similar spirit, Andries et al. (2020) find that investors extrapolate more in the absence
of a signal in which they are confident, D'Acunto et al. (2019c) find that people rely most
on the prices they personally observe most frequently to form expectations decisions, and
Afrouzi et al. (2020) find that people overreact to their most recent memory. We also find
that investors who are more informed are less likely to shrink their decisions towards past
returns when making investment decisions. Taken together, our findings are consistent with
the existence of cognitive uncertainty and suggest some of its important drivers. We further
show that investors' uncertainty about the same object can vary across survey questions,
plausibly covarying with their attention to a given factor. In particular, complexity and the
financial risk associated with investment decisions could disproportionately increase subjec-
tive uncertainty for signals about which investors are relatively less certain by triggering a

   15
      For practicality in their setting, Enke and Graeber (2021) use a common mental default for all agents
(although they manipulate it experimentally in some treatments), adding that they "acknowledge that the
mental default in general likely depends on a multitude of factors." One useful feature of our data is to allow
us to model mental defaults varying cross-sectionally.
   16
      See also work showing that individual-level measures of forecast confidence predict the level of forecast-
investment correlation cross-sectionally (Bachmann et al. (2020); Giglio et al. (2021)).
   17
      While risk-averse investors are more likely to display cognitive uncertainty in our data, risk aversion
and cognitive uncertainty are two distinct behavioral traits (cf. Enke and Graeber (2021)).

                                                       7
stress response in respondents.
    Third, our results offer a potential solution to reconcile the strong evidence of personal
experience as a belief driver that strongly affects behavior (Kaustia and Knüpfer (2008);
Chiang et al. (2011); Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2016); Malmendier et al. (2019); Nagel
and Xu (2019)) and the somewhat weak empirical link between self-reported expectations
and behavior found in recent papers. This puzzle begins with the growing literature on the
"experience effect," anchored by evidence in Malmendier and Nagel (2011) that investors
with lifetime experience of low real stock-market returns simultaneously have low stock-
return expectations and low equity shares. Although this evidence is consistent with the
experience effect working through the beliefs channel, recent work matching individual-level
expectations data with trading records often finds only a modest empirical relationship
between stated beliefs and investment actions. For example, using administrative stock
trading data with expectation surveys, Giglio et al. (2021) and Giglio et al. (2020) show that
belief changes do not predict when trading occurs and explain the direction and magnitude
of trades conditional on trading less than textbook models would imply. While Giglio et
al. (2021) suggest that measurement error and inattention drive the empirical weakness of
the beliefs channel, our paper shows that the somewhat weak empirical link between stated
beliefs and behavior could be caused by a wedge between decision-relevant expectation and
stated forecasts. Instead of using what they state they believe on surveys when they make
investment decisions, investors could base their actions on their subjective past experience,
which could help explain strong experience effects contrasted with the weak predictability
of stated beliefs.
    The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical model
adapting notions of cognitive uncertainty to our setting and allowing for a role of risk aver-
sion. Section 3 describes the survey data used in our study and presents summary statistics.
Section 4 presents our empirical findings. Section 5 discusses various interpretations for our
results, and Section 7 concludes.


2    Model
In this section, we provide a theoretical framework based on the nascent literature on cogni-
tive imprecision (Gabaix (2014); Enke and Graeber (2021); Frydman and Jin (2019); Gabaix
(2019); Khaw et al. (2020)) that can rationalize our empirical findings. While the stylized
model presented here offers an intuitive framework to rationalize our empirical results, it is
by no means the only model consistent with our findings.
    As argued in Enke and Graeber (2021), people are often aware of their own cognitive lim-

                                              8
itations and shrink their posterior estimates of parameters towards a default value. Consider
a GDP expectation survey as an example. Based on all available information, a respondent's
best guess for next year's GDP growth could be 5%, termed the "signal" because it incor-
porates signals the respondent has received. However, because the respondent is uncertain
about this answer, she might shrink it towards a "mental default." One possible mental de-
fault is the average GDP growth in the postwar period of approximately 3%. After shrinkage
towards her default, the respondent might report 4% as her final answer.
    In our context, we hypothesize that complexity and financial stakes in investment deci-
sions trigger a stress response and induce investors to rely more on signals about which they
are more certain. Because there is no personal wealth on the line when answering a survey
question about forecasted returns, respondents perceive the survey question eliciting their
expected returns as relatively simple and use all information available to them (e.g., 5% in
the GDP example above). However, households find investment decisions to be complicated
and stressful (e.g., Gennaioli et al. (2015)). Facing the complex real-world decision of buy-
ing an asset and having to consider other demand factors like risk aversion or other assets
in their portfolios, cognitively uncertain investors upweight factors such as their perceived
experiences as their lived experience feels more salient them than other information.18
    Let rt+1 denote the future return respondents are asked to forecast and assume agents'
prior belief rt+1  N (µd ,  2 ), where µd stands for the mental default for rt+1 . Agents form
their forecasts using two pieces of relevant data. The first is their perception of past home-
price growth, denoted as rt . The second is a home-price forecast based on forecasts for
variables related to home prices, including, for example, forecasts of rent, inflation, GDP,
and local unemployment. We call the second piece of information the signal, denoted s.
Both rt and s are noisy forecasts for rt+1 , which we write as

                                               rt = rt+1 + p                                      (2)
                                                s = rt+1 + s                                      (3)

because each factor contains a random deviation from future returns . While the error in
                                      2
past returns as a forecast p  N (0, p   ), respondents act as if the distribution of the error in
the signal s depends on the context of the particular survey question being asked. We index
parameters used in survey forecast questions with e for expected and parameters used in
investment actions with a. When asked to forecast returns, respondents treat the distribution
               2
of s as N (0, s,e ), and when asked about investment choices, some respondents act as if the


  18
       See, e.g., Malmendier and Nagel (2011) for support for this personal-experience channel.

                                                      9
                             2
distribution of s is N (0, s,a ) with s,a > s,e .19 In a reduced-form way, the assumption
s,a > s,e captures that in forecasting returns, respondents focus on forming their beliefs
and correctly measure the noisiness of s. By contrast, when making a complex investment
decision with monetary incentives, some risk-averse respondents lacking confidence in their
own forecasts need to shift their limited cognitive ability to other factors such as risk bearing
capacity and therefore pay less attention to and perceive higher uncertainty in s.
    This assumption is in part motivated by a finding of Enke and Graeber (2021) that in-
vestors display more cognitive uncertainty when facing more complex choices. This added
complexity could affect the perceived uncertainty in s more than in rt because past experi-
ence is salient to investors and relatively unaffected by question framing. Textual analysis
of open-ended survey responses in Section 6.1 provide support for this mechanism; many
investors explain that when it comes to investment decisions, past returns are observable
and verifiable and therefore viewed as more reliable. Another rationalization that gener-
ates a disproportionate increase in perceived uncertainty in s relative to rt is through the
endogenous attention framework of Gabaix (2014), which would lead such respondents to
have different loss functions in answering the expectation and the investment questions.20
Whether driven by complexity, financial risk, or sparsity, the end result is that because of dif-
ferential stakes when reporting forecasts versus making relatively complex and consequential
financial decisions, agents may weight factors differently across domains.
    To simplify the exposition, in this section we assume that p stays constant from the
expectation to the investment-decision stage, while s increases. In Appendix A, we show
that the sufficient and necessary condition to generate a positive coefficient on past returns
even conditional on stated expected returns is that s disproportionately increases relative
to p from the expectation to the decision question. Let re,t+1 and ra,t+1 denote a respon-
dent's stated return forecast and the decision-relevant forecast used in investment decisions,
respectively. We have

                     re,t+1 = E [rt+1 |rt , s, (rd , , p , s,e )] = ce + 1,e rt + 2,e s                  (4)
                     ra,t+1 = E [rt+1 |rt , s, (rd , , p , s,d )] = ci + 1,a rt + 2,a s,                 (5)

where by Bayesian updating,


  19                                                                     2              2
      The true distribution of s is allowed to be different from N (0, s,e ) and N (0, s,a ); our results are
robust to any deviation between the perceived distribution of s and the true distribution.
   20
      Ambiguity-averse investors may also weight probabilities differently in the investment and belief for-
mation stages (Dow and da Costa Werlang (1992); Fox and Tversky (1995); Ilut and Schneider (2014)).
However, many respondents increase their reliance on past returns when investing even when past returns
exceed their expected returns, at odds with the usual worst-case-weighting of ambiguity-averse investors.

                                                     10
                                                2
                                              s,e  (µ2
                                                     d+ )
                                                          2
                                 1,e =    2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,e p     d          p s,e
                                                 2
                                              p    (µ2
                                                     d+ )
                                                         2
                                 2,e =    2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,e p      d         p s,e
                                                2
                                               s,a (µ2d+ )
                                                          2
                                 1,a   = 2     2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                        (s,a + p    d          p s,a
                                                 2
                                               p   (µ2
                                                     d+ )
                                                         2
                                 2,i   = 2     2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                                                     .
                                        (s,a + p     d         p s,a


Because s,a > s,e , we have that 1,e < 1,a and 2,e > 2,a . Intuitively, respondents who
perceive their signal s to be noisier in the investment-decisions domain than the forecasting-
returns domain will rely more on their past experience rt and less on the signal s.
    In our setting, our experiment asks respondents to allocate a fixed investment amount
between a housing fund and a risk-free savings account. To map the investment-decision-
relevant return forecast ra,t+1 to the share invested in a housing fund, we again return to the
standard Merton (1969) single risky asset model with constant absolute risk aversion used
in the introduction, with the housing share t given by

                                                  ra,t+1 - Rf
                                            t =         2
                                                              ,
                                                    a,t   +1

                                                                                  2
where Rf is the risk-free rate,  is the absolute risk aversion parameter, and a,t   +1 is the
conditional variance of ra,t+1 .21 Taking a linear approximation of  around the average value
               2                                                                        2
of ra , , and a  , and letting  and  denote the partial derivatives of  over  and a       , we
have

                                        2
                   t  c
                      ~ + ra,t+1 +   +  a,t +1
                                                   2
                      = c1 + 1,a rt + 2,a s +   +  a,t +1
                                             2,a      2,a               2
                      = c2 + 1,a - 1,e           rt +     re,t+1 +   +  a,t +1 .                         (6)
                                             2,e      2,e

Equation (6) motivates the regression specifications we use in our empirical section below
and provides a framework to think about what statistical role we might expect rt to play in
explaining decisions when agents have cognitive uncertainty.22 In a standard model, condi-

  21                2
     The variance a,t  +1 is conditional on all information available to an investor, including ra,t+1 and s.
  22
     We take a linear approximation in (6) instead of using a log-log specification to be able to include
individuals in our estimation sample that choose  = 0 or report re,t+1  Rf = 2% or rt  0. Although

                                                     11
tional on expected returns re,t+1 , there would be no role for rt in (6) because rt is simply a
linear factor in re,t+1 with the same weight in (4) and (5) because re,t+1 = ra,t+1 .23 However,
for investors with significant cognitive uncertainty, we have the result that 1,e < 1,a and
2,e > 2,a such that the coefficient on subjective past experience rt in (6) is positive. Consis-
tent with this prediction, our empirical findings below provide evidence that perceived past
returns have independent predicting power for investment decisions even after conditional
on stated forecasts.


3     Data and Summary Statistics
Our data come from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Consumer Expec-
tations (SCE). The SCE is an internet-based survey of a rotating panel of approximately
1,200 household heads from across the US. The survey elicits expectations about a variety
of economic variables, such as inflation, stock market returns, GDP growth, and the unem-
ployment rate. Respondents participate in the panel for up to twelve months, with a roughly
equal number rotating in and out of the panel in each month. For a detailed overview of the
SCE, see Armantier et al. (2017). The data that we use are mainly from the housing module
of the SCE, an annual survey fielded in February every year since 2014 to the active panel
members in the SCE that we will often refer to as the housing survey. The housing module
has multiple blocks of questions, collecting perceived past home-price growth, housing choice
and mortgage credit history, expectations of future home-price growth and credit conditions.
    We use three samples throughout the paper. Our analysis starts with the 2015, 2020,
and 2021 samples. One unique advantage of these three waves is that they all include an
investment experiment designed by Armona et al. (2018), originally for the 2015 survey.
Respondents are asked how they would allocate a $1,000 investment between a 2% risk-free
savings account and a housing fund that tracks home-price appreciation in their local zip
code.24 Usefully for our purposes, this experiment is not subject to any real-world constraints
on housing-related behavior. For example, some borrowers might want to invest in housing

underpowered, our results are qualitatively robust to a log-log specification dropping these observations and
                                  2
controlling for an estimate of e,t  +1 , as we show in the appendix.
   23
      To relax the assumption that rt enters re,t+1 linearly, many of our empirical specifications will control
for flexible functions of re,t+1 and its forecasted distribution.
   24
      To provide real-world stakes, a subset of respondents were promised a random chance of receiving the
actual gross return of their investment. The survey instrument informed the randomly selected incentivized
respondents that two out of 1,000 respondents would receive the gross return of their constructed derivative
after one year. While belief survey research shows that incentivizing attentive responses improves elicitation
accuracy (Carson et al. (2014)), a literature on survey responsiveness finds that people are often insensitive
to the odds of receiving a reward and are more responsive to a small chance at a large reward rather than a
certain small reward (Porter and Whitcomb (2003); Dohmen et al. (2011); March et al. (2016)).

                                                      12
but do not believe they qualify for a mortgage or have sufficient cash on hand. For other
decisions, past returns could also be correlated with risk aversion, hedging demand, or beliefs
at longer horizons. By abstracting away such demand factors, the hypothetical investment
question offers a measure of investment choices unlikely to be affected by typical demand
factors. We primarily use the housing share  in the allocation of $1,000 as our primary mea-
sure of investment behavior, but we also examine other housing-related behaviors, including
the probability of buying a non-primary residence.
    The second sample that we use is a combined sample based on the 2015-2021 housing
surveys with seven years of data. Although the $1,000 investment question was not asked
from 2016-2019, we use data from these later years to show that our key results hold in
other real-world outcomes, for example probability of buying investment properties. Our
final sample is a subsample of the 2020-2021 housing survey waves. In addition to repeating
the investment experiment of the 2015 data, we add to the 2020-2021 surveys the additional
feature of asking some respondents whether they base their investment decisions more on
past returns or expected returns and in 2021 an open-response question asking why.


3.1     Survey Questions
This section provides examples of how the the Survey of Consumer Expectations questions
are framed. See Appendix B for a complete list of the relevant survey question text.
    Respondents are asked about home price changes in their zip code over the last 12 months
and how they expect home prices to change in their zip code over the next 12 months.25 These
questions are framed in three formats with each respondent randomly shown one of the three
alternative framings.26 In all multivariate specifications, we control for indicators of which
format was used for a given respondent. For example, past one-year home-price percentage
change perceptions are elicited as follows:

       You indicated that you estimate the current value of a typical home in your zip
       code to be [X] dollars. Now, think about how the value of such a home has changed
       over time. Over the past 12 months, how has the value of such a home changed?
       (By value, we mean how much that typical home would approximately sell for.)
       [increased/decreased] followed by By about what percent do you think the value
       of such a home has [increased/decreased] over the past 12 months? Please give
       your best guess.
  25
      The same past and expected returns questions are also asked about five-year horizons.
  26
      The SCE wording is standard for belief surveys. Having multiple framings is motivated by Glaser et al.
(2007), who find that framing affects how survey respondents report expected stock returns. See Armona et
al. (2018) for further discussion.

                                                    13
A respondent's one-year expected returns in percentage points are elicited as follows:

      You estimated that the current value of a typical home in your zip code to be [X]
      dollars. Now, we would like you to think about the future value of such a home.
      Over the next 12 months, what do you expect will happen to the value of such a
      home? [increase/decrease] followed by what percent the respondent expects for
      the increase or decline.

The distribution of expected returns is elicited using questions such as:

      You estimated that the current value of a typical home in your zip code to be [X]
      dollars. What do you think is the percent chance that the value of such a home,
      over the next 12 months (by February 2022), will...
           decrease by 5% or more:          percent chance
           decrease by 0% to 5%:         percent chance
           increase by 0% to 10%:          percent chance
           increase by 10% or more:          percent chance

We provide the complete text of how investment decisions are elicited in Appendix B. As
an example, the wording of the housing fund investment decision is illustrated in panel I
of Figure 1. To cross-sectionally test whether cognitive uncertainty is related to a reliance
on past over future returns, we follow the procedure of Enke and Graeber (2021) to allow
respondents to express their uncertainty by choosing their own subjective confidence interval,
as illustrated in panel II of Figure 1.See, too, other papers that elicit confidence in forecasted
returns (e.g., Bachmann et al. (2020); Giglio et al. (2021)).


3.2    Summary Statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics for our core variables. The average age in our sample
is 51 years old. Homeowners comprise 76% of respondents, 29% have household income
higher than $100,000, and 57% are college educated. Respondents were asked a series of five
questions based on Lipkus et al. (2001) and Lusardi (2008) that provide an individual-specific
measure of numeracy. We code the number of correct answers (ranging from 0 to 5) as a
covariate. There is strong correlation between the numeracy score and education or income,
consistent with Lusardi (2008). For example, 53% of the college graduates in our sample
answered all 5 questions correctly, compared with 30% among respondents without a college
degree. Similarly, 59% of households with income over $100,000 answered scored 5 out of
5, compared with 37% among other households. Later in the paper, we use the numeracy


                                               14
score, college education, and income as proxies for financial literacy to explore heterogeneity
and potential drivers for cognitive uncertainty.
    We note that, as an online survey, the SCE oversamples college-educated and high-income
households. In general, we expect any bounded rationality identified in the SCE sample to
be stronger in the overall population. Using a SCE-ACS weight to calculate nationally
representative statistics, we verify that our results are largely unchanged or stronger after
weighting the observations. For example, for the self-reflection question in 2020 and 2021,
46% of our weighted respondents report that they base their decisions on past returns,
slightly higher than the 44% number before weighting.
    On average, households perceive that local home-price growth over the past 12 months
was around 4.7% and expect an average of 3.8% local home-price growth over the next
12 months. Both perceived past HPA and HPA forecasts show substantial heterogeneity,
with standard deviations of 6.2% and 4.9%, respectively. There are also differences between
perceived and objectively measured past experiences, which we term the perception gap.
The average absolute perception gap is 4.9 percentage points, indicating that on average,
people's perception of last year's local returns is five percentage points away from objectively
measured average local returns. Both the actual experience and the perception gap affect
investors' choices with similar coefficients after controlling for the forecasted distribution of
future returns.
    Our primary outcome variable is the average share of $1,000 invested in the housing
fund and averages 57% with standard deviations over 34%. For other real-estate investment
outcomes, the average self-reported probability of moving in the next three years is 30%.
Among those who reported an over 5% moving probability, 67% expect to buy their next
primary residence, in line with the 2019 U.S. homeownership rate of 65%. Around 10% of
respondents expect to buy an investment property within the next 3 years.
    Finally, Appendix Table A1 reports summary statistics on surveyed expectations about
variables usually considered fundamental demand factors for housing: inflation, mortgage
interest rates, residential rents, and economic conditions. The average survey respondent
expects 3.6% inflation and 6.2% rent growth in the year following the survey, although there
is considerable variation across respondents around these means. On average, respondents
expect mortgage interest rates to rise only 35 basis points over the next year, and they expect
year-ahead economic conditions to be roughly the same as the day they filled out the survey.




                                               15
4    Home-Price Beliefs and Behavior
Before presenting our main results on how forecasted and perceived past home-price growth
predict investment behavior, Table 2 investigates how stated beliefs are formed by estimat-
ing the relationship between a respondent's perceived past and her forecast of future local
housing-price returns. Consistent with Armona et al. (2018) and Glaeser and Nathanson
(2017), these results demonstrate that perceived past home-price growth is an important
factor considered by investors in their stated beliefs, making it a plausible mental default for
return forecast in investment decisions. Column 1 of Table 2 regresses the expected home-
price growth on the perceived past home-price growth in a bivariate regression. Columns
2 to 4 add individual controls and forecasted fundamentals, both separately and together.
Across all specifications, there is a strong relationship between the perceived past and the
forecasted home home-price growth, showing that respondents incorporate past returns into
their return forecasts. Every one percentage point higher perceived past home-price growth
is associated with 24 basis points higher forecasted home-price growth, controlling for fore-
casted fundamentals and individual controls. We also note that the R2 in column 4 is 0.26,
suggesting that even with our detailed set of demographic covariates and controls for each
individual's forecast of fundamentals, much of the variation in home-price beliefs is idiosyn-
cratic and driven by unobservables.
    To illustrate our core findings, we first present graphical evidence on the relationships
between investment actions and forecasted and perceived past home-price growth. Figure 2
shows binned scatter plots of shares invested in the housing fund out of a $1,000 investment
versus perceived past returns, both unconditionally (left-hand graph) and conditional on
stated expected returns (right-hand graph). The unconditional graph on the left shows a
strong relationship between past returns and investment, which we expect expected given
momentum in housing returns, extrapolative beliefs, and the beliefs channel of investment
demand. However, the right-hand graph shows that even conditional on stated forecasts,
perceived past returns still have strong predictive power for investment. This statistically
significant conditional relationship contrasts with the notion that an investor's forecasted
return summarizes all past information relevant to expected returns used in her decision-
making and suggests a wedge between survey-elicited expectations and investment demand.
To relax the strong assumptions imposed in 2, including imposing a linear functional form
and the independence of past returns and other factors that affect demand such as risk
aversion and the distribution of expected returns, we next develop a multivariate regression
framework for investment demand.




                                              16
4.1     Perceived Past Home-Price Growth and Investment
To estimate the relationship between perceived returns, stated beliefs, and investment deci-
sions, our main regression model is

                            Yi,t =  + 1 r        ^t [ri,t+1 ] + X  + i,t ,
                                        ^i,t + 2 E                                                      (7)
                                                                 i,t


where r          ^t [ri,t+1 ] are respondent i's perception of home-price appreciation (HPA) over
        ^i,t and E
the past 12 months and her stated expected HPA over the next 12 months, respectively,
and Yit is an investment outcome of interest.27 In our baseline specifications, we consider
the share of a $1,000 investment allocated to a housing derivative tracking local home-price
growth. Additional specifications consider the stated probability of buying a primary or
a non-primary residence in the next three years. The vector Xit is a set of demographic
controls relative to the prior literature on beliefs and contains binary indicators for owning
a home, numeracy, ethnicity, gender, marital status, education, labor force status, census
region, a quadratic in age, and logs of household income, home equity, liquid savings, and
personal debt.
    We begin with the housing fund share as the outcome variable. Table 3 examines whether
perceived past home-price growth improves action prediction after controlling for an indi-
vidual's forecasted home-price growth. Columns 1 to 3 regress the housing fund investment
share it on expected and perceived past returns, both separately and together. The bivari-
ate regression results in columns 1 and 2 report coefficients for the past and future returns
with similar magnitudes. In column 3, when we include both return variables in one spec-
ification, perceived past returns still have statistically significant predictive power for the
housing investment allocation.
    Whether these results demonstrate that stated beliefs are not a sufficient statistic for
beliefs used in investing depends on whether perceived past returns are simply correlated
with other non-belief factors that influence investment demand. As a first step to assess
the potential role of omitted variables, columns 4-6 add the same demographic controls as
in Armona et al. (2018). Of particular interest, these controls include a dummy for above-
median self-reported risk aversion, helping us address potential endogeneity from high past
returns causally increasing risk tolerance (Malmendier and Nagel (2011); Meeuwis (2019)),
conceptually similar to a correlation between  and r      ^i,t .28 Being confident in one's assessment

   27                                                                                                   2
      Estimating the Merton model (1) via a log-log specification and controlling for an estimate of i,t  +1
instead of (7) results in similar implied magnitudes; see Appendix Table A2 for regression results and
                                              2
Appendix C for details on the estimation of i,t +1 .
   28
      While separating higher risk tolerance from higher expected returns with survey evidence is always
challenging (cf. Malmendier and Nagel (2011)), Section 5.1 accounts for risk aversion in more flexible ways.

                                                    17
of past returns and having high risk tolerance are both strong predictors of risky-asset shares.
The gender gap in the risky-asset share is also large; even when males and females have equal
expected returns, males invest as if they expect 7 percentage point higher returns.
     In column 6, which includes both expected and perceived-past HPA and the full set
of demographic controls, perceived past HPA still has a statistically significant effect on
investment decisions. We find that a one percentage point higher perceived past HPA is
associated with 54 basis points higher share allocated to a local housing fund. Again, this
finding contrasts with the traditional approach, which assumes that past returns affect deci-
sions only through expectations and that belief factors can be omitted from action-prediction
regressions conditional on stated beliefs.
     Another consideration when interpreting Table 3 is the lack of controls for the expected
distributions of returns. The role of other moments besides expected mean returns is cap-
                2
tured in the t   +1 term in the Merton model. For example, it could be that investors believe
that past home-price growth is a strong predictor for downside risk even conditional on the
expected mean. Without controlling for downside risk, the statistically significant coefficient
on perceived past home-price growth could be driven by investors basing their decisions on
downside risk (Armona et al. (2018); Adelino et al. (2018)). To address this, Table 4 includes
a number of controls for the forecasted distribution of returns. Inspired by Engelberg et al.
(2009), the SCF asks respondents about their belief probabilities of home prices going up by
more than 10%, up between 0% and 10%, down by less than 5%, and down by more than
5%. In column 1, we add the probability of a decline in home prices to the specification in
column 6 of Table 3. In column 2, we further add the other two self-reported probabilities. In
column 3 and 4, we add a quadratic and cubic, respectively in each return-range probability.
Across all these specifications, the relationship between perceived past home-price growth
and investment remains statistically significant. Comparing column 3 with column 4, we also
observe that adding incremental flexibility of a cubic in the forecasted distribution moments
adds very little to the adjusted R2 and almost does not change the coefficient on perceived
past home-price growth, suggesting that our specification of the distribution of returns is
sufficiently flexible. One might argue that we only measure the forecasted distribution of
returns through four coarse bins, which limits our power. For example, we ask respondents
about the probability of home prices going down by more than 5% but perhaps what affects
their decision-making is their belief probabilities of home prices going down by more than
10%. While our sample sizes prevent us from being fully nonparametric about the expected
distribution of returns and which moments are most important in demand, our results are
also robust to restricting our sample to those who placed zero probability on a home-price



                                              18
decline larger than 5%.29
    Collinearity between forecasted home-price growth and subjectively measured past home-
price growth could also make it challenging to interpret the coefficients separately for these
two return measures. However, a priori, such collinearity should bias us against finding
evidence that past returns matter even conditional on stated forecasts. To address this,
in columns 5 and 6 of Table 4, we include one return variable linearly in our specification
while controlling for the other return variable flexibly through bin fixed effects. For example,
in column 5, we first divide our observations into 50 equally sized bins according to their
perceived past HPA. We then control for fixed effects for these bins and also control for the
expected HPA linearly. Similarly, in column 6, we control for bin fixed effects for the expected
HPA and report a linear coefficient for the perceived past HPA. Bin fixed effects allow us
to control for one factor relatively nonparametrically and thereby absorb any correlation
between perceived past returns and forecasted returns.30 Column 6 shows that subjective
past home-price growth remains an important predictor for investment behavior even after
controlling for the forecasted home-price growth in a flexible way. Appendix Table A3 verifies
that this result is robust to different numbers of bins for the returns variables.
    We conduct several other robustness tests to probe the validity of our finding that while
respondents incorporate past returns into their return forecasts, they increase their emphasis
on past returns when actually making decisions. For example, our online survey oversamples
high-income and educated households. To verify that our results hold in the general popula-
tion, we weight observations using ACS-SCE sampling weights and show stronger effects of
past experience in Appendix Table A4 for the nationally representative adult, as anticipated
in Section 3.2. We also note that the hypothetical investment experiment studied in our
main results is from the baseline stage in Armona et al. (2018), where respondents were not
incentivized. In Appendix Table A5, we show that our results hold for the smaller subsample
whose investment decisions were incentivized with the possibility of receiving the realized
gross return of their composite housing and savings fund with their chosen weights (see Ar-
mona et al. (2018) for details). Further, Bordalo et al. (2020a) raise the possibility that
past returns are correlated with beliefs about future fundamentals, a potentially important
component of investment demand distinct from beliefs about future housing returns. We
address this concern in Appendix Table A6, which shows that our results are also robust
  29                                                                                                        2
      We also consider estimates of the Merton (1969) demand equation (1) directly using an estimate of t    +1
implied by each individual's forecast distribution. See Appendix C and Appendix Table A2 for details.
   30
      Note that because survey responses bunch around round number like "0%", "5%", or "10%", the actual
number of bins tends to be smaller than the specified target number of equally sized bins. This is because, for
example, 8.5% of the respondents answered "0%" as their forecasted home-price growth and these respondents
are always put in the same bin, independent of the number of bins that specified. We report both the number
of specified bins and actual bins.

                                                      19
to controlling for individual investor forecasts of fundamentals. Finally, Appendix Table A7
verifies that perceived past returns have added predictive power for investment decisions
even conditional on actual past returns. In column 2, where both the perceived past and
the actual past returns are included as controls, perceived past returns are still significant
predictors of investment.
    Taking stock, in all specifications, controlling for perceived past returns improve the
prediction of investment decisions even conditional on stated beliefs. Moreover, this finding is
robust to flexible specifications and explanations based on collinearity. This is consistent with
the empirically weak predictive power of stated beliefs to explain investment actions relative
to theoretical benchmarks (see Giglio et al. (2020); Liu and Sui (2020); Giglio et al. (2021)).
Still, our main point of emphasis is not to reject the beliefs channel but to demonstrate that
allowing belief factors to independently capture some of the gap between decision-relevant
and stated expectations strengthens the empirical connection between beliefs and investment.
In the remainder of this section, we test for cross-sectional heterogeneity in the emphasis of
past returns in decision making and verify our results hold with other measures of housing
investment.


4.2     Heterogeneity
We investigate heterogeneity across different subgroups in our sample to test potential ex-
planations for our findings. We divide our sample into homeowners and renters, college
graduates and not, those with household income above and below $75,000, ages above 50
and below 50, males and females, those with a high and low numeracy scores, and those who
did and did not check a housing website in the past year.31 Appendix Tables A8 and A9
report the results of estimating (7) for each subsample.
    Across most subgroups, even after controlling for the forecasted distribution of future
returns and demographics, perceived past home-price growth strongly predicts investment
choices.32 An important exception is renters, for whom the return-related variable with the
highest statistical significance is the downside risk. One potential explanation is that renters
are sensitive to downside risk in home prices and therefore avoid buying a home.
    Another source of heterogeneity that we seek to explore with the heterogeneity results is

  31
      Given that our surveys are answered by household heads, we note that male and female household
heads could have different characteristics than average males and females in the general population. The
question framing for recently checking a housing website is "Over the past 12 months, how often have you
consulted websites or other sources that give you information on the estimated current value of your property
or properties in your area?" with answers "Never", "1-2 times", "3-4 times", or "5 times or more".
   32
      The results of Appendix Table A8 are further robust to controlling for a cubic in the probabilities that
make up the forecasted distribution of returns.

                                                     20
financial literacy. As suggested by the framework in Section 2, it is possible that many in-
vestors lack the required expertise to make an informed home price forecast. Facing financial
risk, they trust their subjective experience as a more reliable signal than their own stated
forecasts for investment decisions. It could be that financially sophisticated investors can
make a relatively informed forecast and use it as a basis for financial choices. We use several
proxies for financial literacy, including income, education, age, numeracy score, and whether
respondents checked housing websites or other sources for their homes' estimated values.
We find evidence for the effect of financial sophistication. The combination of columns 3-6
of Appendix Table A8 and columns 1-2 and 5-8 of Appendix Table A9 suggests that our
results are primarily driven by younger, low-numeracy, lower-income, non-college educated
investors and those who do not actively follow the housing market.33
    While our main focus is on the coefficients for the perceived past returns, we also note
that the coefficients for the stated forecasts in columns 7 and 8 of Appendix Table A9 show
that investors actively following the housing market display a much stronger reliance on
their expected returns than do the other investors. This is consistent with the heterogeneity
results in Giglio et al. (2021), who find a much stronger relationship between stated forecasts
and actions for investors who pay more attention to their accounts, measured by frequency
of logging in. Here, our contribution is that even the inattentive investors could also demon-
strate a strong expectation effect if we properly measure their decision-relevant expected
return by incorporating the perceived past returns. This supports the explanation that lack
of knowledge about the housing market could induce investors to rely on their subjective
past and shrink the role of stated forecasts, broadly consistent with the cognitive uncertainty
framework in Section 2.


4.3     Other Housing-Related Behaviors
To examine robustness to alternative measures of investment beyond the investment exper-
iment, we extend our analysis to include other measures of housing investment: the prob-
ability of buying a non-primary residence (including both investment and vacation homes)
within the next three years, the probability of buying the next primary residence conditional
on moving within the next three years, and viewing housing as a good investment. These
variables are collected in all years between 2015 and 2021, and, unlike the housing-fund
investment experiment, are subject to real-world constraints. For example, borrowers who
would like to invest in housing might not nevertheless qualify for a mortgage or be inter-
ested in moving. Similarly, places with the highest past home-price growth tend to be high
  33
     See also Agarwal et al. (2009), who find a higher incidence of financial mistakes among the young and
old relative to the middle-aged.

                                                   21
cost areas, creating added challenge for households to become homeowners, even if they do
believe home prices will continue to rise. Accordingly, we a priori expect the relationship
between returns, forecasted or subjective historical and behavior to be weaker than in the
investment experiment, similar to the findings of Armona et al. (2018).
    Appendix Table A10 reports regression estimates using alternative investment action
outcomes. Columns 1 and 2 show that there is a strong correlation between perceived past
home-price growth and the probability of buying a non-primary home. For buying a primary
residence, columns 3 and 4 show that we fail to have power to detect an effect of past returns
on intention to buy an owner-occupied residence conditional on expected returns, although
the coefficient magnitudes are similar to other columns. Still, this result could be in part due
to constraints and confounds. Columns 5 and 6 show that both forecasted and subjective
past home-price growth are strong predictors of viewing housing as a good investment.
Taken together, controlling for past returns improves the ability of belief factors to predict
real-world investment outcomes beyond in the investment experiment.


5     Robustness
In this section, we adjudicate among possible interpretations of the empirical findings in
Section 4. First, we consider the possibility that our results are affected by omitted variable
bias (Section 5.1) or measurement error in stated home-price expectations (Section 5.2).
While there are surely omitted variables and measurement errors in stated beliefs, we show
that they are unlikely to fully explain our results. Section 6 then provides direct evidence
supporting cognitive uncertainty as a key reason why beliefs surveys may measure different
projections of beliefs than the ones used in decision-making.


5.1    Omitted Variable Bias and Risk Aversion
The Merton (1969) framework for risky-asset demand in equation (1) above motivates our
exploration of factors that should affect investment demand and that could be conditionally
correlated with past returns rt . Specifically, we check whether beliefs about the distribution
                           2
of expected returns (t       ), risk aversion (), measurement error in surveyed expectations
E^t [rt+1 ], and multicollinearity between E ^t [rt+1 ] and rt could be driving our results. Other
potential omitted variables include demand shocks that depend on the outcome variable of
interest. For example, when the dependent variable is the probability of buying a primary
residence, omitted variables include preferences over home ownership, the relative quality
of owner-occupied and rental housing in a respondent's local area, the likelihood of moving


                                               22
regions, mortgage-credit availability, etc. When the outcome variable is share invested in
the housing fund, the environment is much simpler, motivating its use for our purposes.
Presumably, an investor's decision about such a derivative investment is a function of only
the forecasted distribution of the expected return distribution and risk aversion, especially
when the initial investment capital is provided by the survey administrators.
    For the forecasted distribution of home-price growth, we control for the subjective prob-
abilities of future returns falling into four ranges--and polynomials of those bin probabili-
ties--in Table 4. Such flexible controls help absorb any nonlinearities in the mapping from
agents' physical risk to risk-neutral probabilities not captured by the Merton model.34 As
discussed in Section 4.1 above, flexible return-distribution controls add some explanatory
power and reduce the magnitude of the coefficient on past returns in predicting investment.
However, past returns are still a significant predictor of investment demand even conditional
on the distribution of expected returns.
    While Tables 2-4 include some risk-aversion controls, Table 5 further explores the role of
risk aversion in explaining our results. Column 1 reports estimates from a bivariate regression
of the housing investment share on a risk tolerance metric, measured using a 1-10 scale. The
coefficient is both economically and statistically significant. Moving the risk tolerance from
1 to 10 increases the housing share by as much as 30 percentage points, suggesting that our
risk tolerance variable is a particularly meaningful measure of risk appetites. In columns 2
and 3, respectively, we add the risk tolerance measure to our baseline specification linearly
and by controlling for indicators of each potential value from 1 to 10. Conditional on this
measure of risk tolerance, there is still a strong correlation between the perceived past home-
price growth and the housing investment share, suggesting that our results cannot be fully
explained by risk aversion as an omitted variable. We also note that the R2 increases by only
0.011 from columns 2 to 3 as we move from a linear control for the risk tolerance score to
more nonparametric indicators for each value of the risk tolerance score. This small marginal
impact of additional flexibility suggests that finer measures of risk appetites are unlikely to
reverse our main results.
    Another alternative explanation based on risk aversion is through the wealth channel.
Large past home-price growth increases households' net worth and could reduce their abso-
lute risk aversion parameter, if for example we model households having constant relative
risk aversion or decreasing relative risk aversion (see Chetty et al. (2017); Meeuwis (2019)).
However, our risk-tolerance variable is measured contemporaneous with the investment de-
cision, i.e., after any effect of past returns on current risk aversion has been realized. In

  34
     See Adam et al. (2021) for related evidence that expectations survey respondents do not report risk-
adjusted return forecasts.

                                                   23
Appendix Table A11, we interact past home-price growth with measures of the importance
of home equity in an individual's portfolio. These measures include leverage in her pri-
mary residence, home value as a share of net assets, and home values divided by income.
Intuitively, the wealth effect of past returns should be stronger for households with higher
leverage or a more expensive home relative to their income. Across all specifications, the
interaction terms have a statistically insignificant or negative coefficient, suggesting past
returns lowering risk aversion is not an alternative explanation for our empirical findings.


5.2     Measurement Error in Home Price Expectations
Could our results in Section 4 stem from noise in survey responses? Such an explanation
finds plausibility, for example, in the bunching of returns forecasts around 0%, 5%, 10%,
etc. (Dominitz and Manski (1997); Manski and Molinari (2010); Binder (2017)). Similarly,
the common finding across expectations surveys that different question framings on returns
generate systematically different responses (Glaser et al. (2007); Armona et al. (2018); Glaser
et al. (2019)) suggests a degree of instability and noise in stated beliefs. While such survey
errors are likely present in both perceived past and forecasted returns, stated forecasts could
be particularly noisy. For example, survey participants might more often round for forecasted
returns than perceived past returns.35 This could induce downward bias in the expected
return coefficient and an upward bias in the past experience coefficient as the latter would
be correlated with the signal in the former.
    However, several pieces of evidence are inconsistent with a measurement-error interpre-
tation. Foremost, as we discuss in Section 6.1, 44% of surveyed investors admit relying
more on the past return over the expected return. We also analyze free-text responses to an
open-ended question asking why respondents indicate they rely on past or expected returns.
We find justifications consistent with cognitive uncertainty driving many people towards in-
vestment decision-making that significantly weights past returns. If an investor knows her
expected return and the expected return is only imperfectly observed by the econometrician
due to measurement error, we would still expect all investors to report that their decisions
are based on their observable-to-them true expected returns. Instead, we find that a sizable
fraction of the population is backward-looking and aware of it. Consistent with this qualita-
tive evidence, our results that past returns matter even conditional on the expected returns
are robust to instrumenting for the expected returns. To formalize the null hypothesis that

   35
      To address this particular concern, we conduct a robustness test by restricting the sample to observations
without rounding for perceived past or forecasted returns. Our results are actually stronger for these non-
rounders, the opposite prediction of a measurement error alternative explanation based on rounding or even
differential rounding.

                                                      24
measurement error explains our results and the bias correction instrumenting affords under
the null, we first present an econometric framework and supporting simulation results, with
the corresponding empirical results detailed in Appendix D.
    To adjudicate the measurement error explanation of our results, we consider whether the
following data generating process (DGP) could generate our results.

                                        Yi,t = 0 + 1 Et [ri,t+1 ] + i,t
                                 Et [ri,t+1 ] = 0 + 1 r   ^i,t + Zi,t 2 + vi,t                           (8)
                                 E^t [ri,t+1 ] = Et [ri,t+1 ] + i,t ,

where the outcome variable Yi,t is a linear function of the true forecast Et [ri,t+1 ] plus some
independent unobserved heterogeneity.36 Consistent with classical assumptions about ex-
pectation formation, investors form expectations Et [ri,t+1 ] as a function of perceived past
returns r ^i,t and other belief factors, including a systematic component Zi,t (expected eco-
nomic conditions, expected rent growth, etc.) and a discretionary adjustment vi,t .37 In this
data-generating process, investors base their decisions on their actual forecasts Et [ri,t+1 ], but
the econometrician observes only a noisy measure E       ^t [ri,t+1 ] of true beliefs that contains mea-
surement error i,t . The measurement error concern is that because forecasted returns are
imprecisely reported, when we regress actions on r      ^i,t and E   ^t [ri,t+1 ], we could still estimate a
positive coefficient on r^i,t even if investors do follow a two-step procedure of first formulating
  
Et [ri,t+1 ] and then basing investment decisions on it.
    Our alternative DGP is

                        Yi,t = 0 + 1 Et [ri,t+1 ] + 2 r
                                                      ^i,t + Zi,t 3 + i,t
                             = 0 + (1 1 + 2 )^
                                             ri,t + Zi,t (1 2 + 3 ) + 1 vi,t + i,t
                 Et [ri,t+1 ] = 0 + 1 r   ^i,t + Zi,t 2 + vi,t                                           (9)
                 E^t [ri,t+1 ] = Et [ri,t+1 ] + i,t ,

where we acknowledge measurement error  in stated beliefs but also allow the possibility
that subjective past experience r  ^i,t and Zi,t have independent effects on actions, such that
the null hypothesis in (8) corresponds to 2 = 3 = 0. Equivalently, an investor could weight
factors differently in the action stage than in the forecast stage, for example, overweighting
their own past experience in investment decisions relative to the forecast-stating domain.38
  36
      To simplify the exposition, we abstract away from risk aversion in this version of the decision rule.
  37
      Table 2 shows that forecasted fundamentals can explain a meaningful fraction of the variation in stated
forecasts.
   38
      As argued in Section 2, one motivation for overweighting and underweighting at the decision stage is

                                                      25
    The following simulation illustrates that the DGP under the null hypothesis can generate
a positive coefficient on r
                          ^i,t if we only control for r           ^t [ri,t+1 ] together. We parameterize
                                                         ^i,t and E
the model in 9 according to the null hypothesis of no independent effect of past returns on
                        
investment with 1 = 2, 1 = 2 = 3 = 0 = 0, 1 = 2 = 1, and r                        ^i,t , Zi,t , i,t , and vi,t are
independently, identically distributed N (0, 1). We then vary the standard deviation  of the
                                     2
measurement error i,t  N (0,           ) to test how measurement error affects the corresponding
regression coefficients. Panel I of Figure 3 shows that the estimated coefficient on r               ^i,t increases
in the variance of the measurement error. In other words, despite the data being generated
under the null with the true coefficient 2 on past returns being zero, measurement error in
expected returns and the positive correlation between past returns and the signal in stated
returns (from 1 > 0) upward biases OLS estimates of the role of past returns in investment.
This result highlights the potential for measurement error in stated returns to spuriously
generate a non-zero estimated role for past returns in the second-stage statistical model of
investment decisions.
    As we detail further below, our survey responses to multiple-choice and open-ended ques-
tions about whether people rely on their surveyed stated beliefs when making investment
decisions push back against the measurement error interpretation. While the derivations and
simulations above show that measurement error could econometrically explain our findings
of past returns mattering even conditional on stated returns, the high fraction of people
that report relying more on past returns than their stated expected returns when making
decisions provide strong evidence that our results are not driven spuriously by mismeasured
forecasts.
    We further show in Appendix D that if we instrument for E                ^t [ri,t+1 ], this fixes the bias
in the second-stage coefficient on r     ^i,t . If past returns in fact have no effect on investment
because they are fully incorporated into expectations, instrumental-variables estimates of 2
should be statistically close to zero. To see this, consider the second-stage equation, where
we regress investment decisions on predicted expected returns and perceived past returns

                                    Yi,t = 0 + 1 Et [ri,t+1 ] + 2 r
                                                                  ^i,t + i,t ,                                   (10)

where the predicted values are a function of both the included (r   ^) and excluded (Z ) exogenous
variables Et [ri,t+1 ] = ^0 + ^1 r
                                 ^i,t + Zi,t ^2 Under the null hypothesis, where both r^i,t and Zi,t
                             
only affect Yi,t through Et [ri,t+1 ], instrumenting would provide an unbiased estimate of 2
such that the expected 2SLS estimate of           ^2 would be 0. In Appendix D.1, we formally
derive E [^2 ] = 0 under the null DGP. Panel II of Figure 3 illustrates this finding, showing

the investor's confidence in r  ^i,t relative to her confidence in Zi,t . If an investor is more confident in r
                                                                                                              ^i,t than
in Zi,t , she is likely to overweight r ^i,t .

                                                          26
that in simulations the estimated coefficient      ^2 on r
                                                         ^i,t is consistently close to 0 regardless
of the size of the measurement error  . This simulation result is also robust to adding
measurement error in Zi,t , alleviating potential concern that other factors considered in the
stated forecasts being measured with noise could also affect the coefficient on r     ^i,t . We then
show that instrumenting for expected returns in our data does not drive the coefficient on
past returns, allowing us to reject the measurement error explanation.
    For instruments, we note that under the null, other belief factors Zi,t meet the require-
ments for a valid instrument for E^t [ri,t+1 ] because under the null hypothesis, these factors are
independent of the measurement error in expected returns and conditionally independent of
the error term  under the usual two-step model of expectation formation and investment
decision-making.39 We further develop an instrument based on the second moment of the
mismeasured variable, a strategy based on Lewbel (1997), and detail the assumptions re-
quired for its validity. Appendix Tables A12 and A13 present results using these instruments
that provide further econometric evidence allowing us to reject the null hypothesis that our
findings are driven by noise in surveyed forecasts.


6        Evidence for Cognitive Uncertainty Mechanism
To understand the mechanism underlying the wedge between surveyed expectations and in-
vestment decisions, we ask half of the 2020 and all of the 2021 survey respondents whether
they value subjective past returns more or return forecasts more in decision-making and re-
port results in Section 6.1. Among other results, we find a substantial share of respondents
reporting they don't use the forecasted returns they report on the survey but instead rely
on past returns when investing. Categorizing free-text responses to an open-ended question
in the 2021 survey that asked them why they do this, we find many responses conveying
subjective uncertainty about their own forecast. We further show that lack of financial so-
phistication (proxied by non-college graduates) and risk aversion are both strong predictors
for choosing perceived past HPA over forecasted HPA. Furthermore, the treatment group re-
lies less its return forecasts than the control group does, consistent with an explanation based
on cognitive uncertainty. In Section 6.2, we present direct evidence for inflation expectations
and rent-growth expectations as "shrunk factors" (denoted s in equations (2) to (5)) in the
cognitive-uncertainty framework of Section 2. Combined, the evidence points towards the
complexity of the investment domain triggering cognitive uncertainty, which leads investors
to rely relatively more on belief factors in which they have more confidence.

    39
     We caveat that this particular IV strategy is invalid under richer models of measurement error being
correlated with stated beliefs about fundamentals.

                                                   27
6.1     Direct Survey Measures of Decision Factors
For a more direct measure of decision-making factors, we first ask half of the 2020 and all
of the 2021 survey respondents whether they rely more on their survey-reported returns
forecasts or past home-price growth when making investment decisions.
    Table 6 presents summary statistics for those who consider their stated expected returns
(column 1) or past returns (column 2) as the more important consideration underlying their
investment decisions. First, 44% of respondents report that they rely on past returns more
than their survey-stated expectations in decision-making. This confirms our earlier empir-
ical finding that, at least for a substantial share of our sample, realized returns do drive
investors' decisions independent of their effect on expected returns.40 Respondents relying
on past or stated expected returns also have significantly different observable characteristics.
Compared with those stating they rely on past returns, respondents who rely more on stated
expected returns are more likely to be college graduates, have higher income and savings and
are more risk seeking, contributing to their higher average housing investment in the housing
derivative (62.4% versus 54.9%).41 While both groups are more confident about past returns
than forecasted returns, forward-looking respondents are relatively more confident about
their forecasted returns than backward-looking respondents. Moreover, forward-looking re-
spondents are more confident about both their estimate of past returns and their forecast of
future returns. These summary statistics are broadly consistent with our preferred cognitive-
uncertainty explanation that respondents weight past returns more heavily when they are
more uncertain about other future signals.
    Next we test whether people's reported reliance on future versus past returns is consistent
with their actual investment decision rule. In other words, do those reporting that they rely
on stated expected returns indeed base their investment decisions on their return forecast?
Appendix Table 7 reports these results. Forward-looking respondents indeed rely more on
their stated expected returns and less on their perceived past returns, consistent with their
self-reported decision factors. We also note that the forward-looking group on average invests
much more in the housing fund than does the backward-looking group.

  40
      In the 2020 survey, we also elicited whether survey respondents are forward- or backward-looking if they
were to invest in the stock market. Table 6 reports that 40% of survey respondents are backward-looking
for the stock market. Among those that are forward-looking for the housing market, 77% are also forward-
looking for the stock market. For the backward-looking group for the housing market, 64% of them are also
backward-looking when investing in the stock market. While not our focus, these results suggest that our
results for the housing market potentially apply to other asset markets.
   41
      On average, Table 6 shows that 38% of respondents report relying more on past stock returns than
expected stock returns when making stock-market investment decisions, consistent with Andries et al. (2020).
Among respondents selecting stated expected return for the housing question, 80% of them also choose stated
expected returns for the stock-market investment question.

                                                     28
    We then directly test the cognitive uncertainty mechanism by studying how survey re-
spondents' reliance on past returns changes as a function of their relative confidence in their
forecasts. In other words, when investors are more confident about their forecasts than their
perceived past HPA, do they rely more on their forecasts instead of the past returns? Table
8 reports the evidence consistent with this hypothesis. The main coefficients of interest are
those for the interaction terms of forecasted returns or perceived past returns with the confi-
dence gap in these two return variables. We can see that reliance on past return decreases as
people become more confident about their forecasts relative to their perceived past returns.
    In the 2021 survey, we pose an open-response question, asking respondents why they
rely on either past or their stated expected returns more when making housing investment
decisions. We code these responses into five categories for each of the two investor types.42
For the group that relies more on their stated forecasted returns, we title the five categories
fundamentals, expectations, past returns not guaranteed, last year different, and other. For
the group that relies more on past returns in investment decision-making, the five categories
are consistent trends, real data, uncertainty, conservative, and other. The definitions of each
category are described in Appendix E, and the frequencies of these categories are plotted in
Figure 4.
    Overall, the answers for forward-looking investors resemble the rationale behind a text-
book model of demand. Panel I of Figure 4 shows that most common response categories
for this group are fundamentals and expectations, codes that reflect answers emphasizing
beliefs about market fundamentals and the importance of expectations about the future in
investing. The following illustrative example responses to why forward-looking investors rely
more on forecasted returns are consistent with the classical approach to thinking about past
returns insofar as they inform a forecast with investment demand ultimately depending on
forecasted returns.

   · "Because the question asked me to make a decision pertaining to the future, not the
     past. I used past price growth to project future growth in my assessment."
   · "I'd be investing in future returns, while past returns are important information, future
     gains are what I'm more concerned with."
   · "Because [my forecast] is a prediction about the future, not an observation about the
     past. I'm not investing 12 months ago."

However, the data also show forceful rationalizations by potential investors stating they
make decisions by relying on past returns more than their own forecasts reported on the

  42
     See Appendix B for the exact question wording and Appendix E for the procedure we follow in coding
the open-ended text responses.

                                                  29
survey. Panel II of Figure 4 shows that the most common response categories for this group
are consistent trends, real data, and uncertainty, codes that reflect answers emphasizing the
consistency of the local housing market, the reliability of historical data, and uncertainty
about stated expectations. In a textbook model of demand, consistent trends would simply
be incorporated into expected returns. However, responses focusing on respondents' lack of
confidence in their stated expectations relative to verifiable and observable past returns is
entirely consistent with cognitive uncertainty affecting the weighting of belief factors differ-
entially during the complex investment stage relative to expectations survey questions. For
example, answering why they rely more on past returns than their stated expected returns,
such respondents say things such as:

   · "The future is always uncertain and many factors can change the outcome. The past
     performance is a certainty that has happened."
   · "I rely on [past returns] more because it is what is documented in writing. My fore-
     casting is only a best guess."
   · "[Past returns] better indicator because based on facts not projections"
   · "I rely more on past home price growth because it has happened already, but the
     forecast is uncertain."

Contrasting the pattern of responses by those that rely on past returns and those that rely
on their forecasted returns offers strong evidence for heterogeneity in the degree to which
surveyed expectations reflect the beliefs used in investment decision-making.


6.2       Reduced Form and Evidence for Shrunk Factors
The cognitive uncertainty model in Section 2 assumes existence of a signal s that an investor
relies on when forming return forecasts but down-weights in investment decisions. Math-
                                                                                   2
ematically, this behavior would imply 2,e > 2,i in equations (4) and (5) and        3
                                                                                      >  2
                                                                                          1
                                                                                            in
equation (9). In this section, we show that forecasted rent growth and inflation forecast are
such factors.43 Column 1 in Table 9 repeats column 5 of Table 2 for reference by regressing
home-price growth forecast on perceived past home-price growth, forecasted rent growth,
inflation forecast and demographic controls. Both forecasted rent growth and forecasted in-
flation are statistically significant factors considered in home-price growth even conditional
on other factors. A one percentage point higher rent growth is associated with a 0.14 percent-
age point higher expected home-price growth, and a one percentage point higher inflation
forecast is associated with a 0.12 percentage point higher expected home-price growth.

  43
       See Kindermann et al. (2019) for evidence on the effect of rent growth on home-price forecasts.

                                                      30
    Column 2 regresses the share invested in a housing fund on perceived past home-price
growth, forecasted rent growth, forecasted inflation, and our usual individual controls. De-
spite rent growth's and inflation forecast's importance in home price forecast, they are ig-
nored (if not down-weighted) in this reduced-form specification of the investment decision,
inconsistent with their impacting investment only through beliefs. Column 3 reinforces this
point by conditioning on flexibly specified return distribution forecasts that should capture
the effect of beliefs on investment if stated beliefs are a sufficient statistic for the beliefs
used in decision making. Instead, conditional on past beliefs, past returns are up-weighted
and forecasted rent growth and forecasted inflation are down-weighted. While the negative
coefficients on forecasted rent growth and inflation are statistically insignificant, their mag-
nitudes are relatively large and insensitive to our controls for beliefs about the distribution
of future returns.
    The pattern of results in Table 9 are inconsistent with with stated beliefs fully capturing
the beliefs channel of investment demand. They are, however, consistent with a model
of decision making such as cognitive uncertainty wherein investors form different beliefs
depending on the nature of the decision domain, relying more (less) on belief factors they
are more (less) confident in when making financial decisions.


7    Conclusion
In this paper, we document that the subjective beliefs survey respondents state on expec-
tations surveys are not sufficient statistics summarizing all decision-relevant information
about expected returns used in decision-making. In the context of risky-asset investment
demand, we find that belief factors can have independent effects at the decision stage even
conditional on expected returns. We focus on a unique investment experiment where survey
respondents allocated $1,000 between a risk-free asset and a derivative that earns what their
zip code's local housing price index earns over the next year, although our results hold for
other outcomes. While past returns are incorporated into expected returns, controlling for
perceived past returns improves risky-asset investment prediction in the cross-section even
after controlling for each individual's forecasted return distribution.
    Our preferred explanation is that this extra extrapolation of relying on past returns even
conditional on stated beliefs stems from cognitive uncertainty triggered by the complexity
of the investment domain. We test this explanation by fielding new questions in the 2020
and 2021 waves of the Survey of Consumer Expectations. When asked whether they rely on
their surveyed forecasted returns or past returns more in making investment decisions, 44%
of respondents report using past returns to make investment choices. Respondents confident

                                              31
about their forecasted returns relative to their estimate of past returns are more likely to
rely on them relative to past returns, and vice versa. Analyzing open-ended explanations
for reliance on past or expected returns, respondents using past returns more frequently cite
uncertainty and a lack of confidence in many of the speculative belief factors incorporated into
their surveyed forecasts. We also test and reject several alternative explanations including
omitted variables bias, multicollinearity, and measurement error in surveyed expectations.
    These results have important empirical and theoretical implications. Empirically, our
results suggest that researchers could improve the measurement of the beliefs channel of
investment demand underlying investment choices by eliciting and controlling for perceptions
of belief factors such as past returns. Correcting for the independent effect of belief factors
even conditional on stated beliefs strengthens both the magnitude of the beliefs channel
and the estimated degree of extrapolation in investment choices. Theoretically, our findings
advance the growing literature of limited attention and cognitive uncertainty by providing
novel supporting evidence about how cognitive noise affects investment decision-making.




                                              32
References
Adam, Klaus, Dmitry Matveev, and Stefan Nagel, "Do survey expectations of stock
 returns reflect risk adjustments?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2021, 117, 723­740.

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, "Perception of house price
 risk and homeownership," 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 25090.

Afrouzi, Hassan, Spencer Yongwook Kwon, Augustin Landier, Yueran Ma, and
 David Thesmar, "Overreaction and working memory," 2020. NBER Working Paper No.
 27947.

Agarwal, Sumit, John C Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson, "The age of
 reason: Financial decisions over the life cycle and implications for regulation," Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity, 2009, 2009 (2), 51­117.

Ameriks, John, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D Shapiro, "Heterogene-
 ity in expectations, risk tolerance, and household stock shares: The attenuation puzzle,"
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2020, 38 (3), 633­646.

Amromin, Gene and Steven A Sharpe, "From the horse's mouth: Economic conditions
 and investor expectations of risk and return," Management Science, 2014, 60 (4), 845­866.

Andonov, Aleksandar and Joshua D Rauh, "The return expectations of institutional
 investors," 2020. Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research Paper.

Andries, Marianne, Milo Bianchi, Karen K Huynh, and Sébastien Pouget, "Return
 Predictability, Expectations, and Investment: Experimental Evidence," October 2020.
 Working Paper.

Armantier, Olivier, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert Van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar, "An
 overview of the survey of consumer expectations," Economic Policy Review, 2017, (23-2),
 51­72.

  , Wändi Bruine de Bruin, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert Van Der Klaauw, and Basit
  Zafar, "Inflation expectations and behavior: Do survey respondents act on their beliefs?,"
  International Economic Review, 2015, 56 (2), 505­536.

Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar, "Home price expectations and be-
 haviour: Evidence from a randomized information experiment," The Review of Economic
 Studies, 2018, 86 (4), 1371­1410.

Bachmann, Rüdiger, Kai Carstensen, Stefan Lautenbacher, and Martin Schnei-
 der, "Uncertainty is More Than Risk­Survey Evidence on Knightian and Bayesian Firms,"
 2020. Working Paper.

  , Tim O. Berg, and Eric R. Sims, "Inflation Expectations and Readiness to Spend:
  Cross-Sectional Evidence," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2015,
  7 (1), 1­35.

                                            33
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, "The eco-
 nomic effects of social networks: Evidence from the housing market," Journal of Political
 Economy, 2018, 126 (6), 2224­2276.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer, "X-
 CAPM: An extrapolative capital asset pricing model," Journal of Financial Economics,
 2015, 115 (1), 1­24.
Barrero, Jose Maria, "The micro and macro of managerial beliefs," 2020. SSRN Working
 Paper No. 3196761.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Elyas Fermand, Camelia M Kuhnen, and Geng Li, "Expecta-
 tions Uncertainty and Household Economic Behavior," December 2018. NBER Working
 Paper No. 25336.
Binder, Carola C., "Measuring uncertainty based on rounding: New method and applica-
  tion to inflation expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2017, 90, 1­12.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer, "Expec-
 tations of Fundamentals and Stock Market Puzzles," May 2020. Working Paper.
  ,   , Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Overreaction in Macroeconomic Expecta-
  tions," American Economic Review, September 2020, 110 (9), 2748­82.
Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, Philipp Krüger, Augustin Landier, and David Thes-
 mar, "Sticky Expectations and the Profitability Anomaly," The Journal of Finance, 2019,
 74 (2), 639­674.
Cao, H Henry, Tan Wang, and Harold H Zhang, "Model uncertainty, limited market
 participation, and asset prices," The Review of Financial Studies, 2005, 18 (4), 1219­1251.
Carson, Richard T., Theodore Groves, and John A. List, "Consequentiality: A
 Theoretical and Experimental Exploration of a Single Binary Choice," Journal of the
 Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2014, 1 (1/2), 171­207.
Chetty, Raj, László Sándor, and Adam Szeidl, "The effect of housing on portfolio
 choice," The Journal of Finance, 2017, 72 (3), 1171­1212.
Chiang, Yao-Min, David Hirshleifer, Yiming Qian, and Ann E Sherman, "Do
 investors learn from experience? Evidence from frequent IPO investors," The Review of
 Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (5), 1560­1589.
Chinco, Alexander M, Samuel M Hartzmark, and Abigail B Sussman, "Necessary
 Evidence For A Risk Factor's Relevance," May 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 27227.
Choi, James J. and Adrianna Z. Robertson, "What Matters to Individual Investors?
 Evidence from the Horse's Mouth," The Journal of Finance, 2020, Forthcoming.
Cochrane, John H, "Presidential address: Discount rates," The Journal of Finance, 2011,
 66 (4), 1047­1108.

                                            34
  , "Macro-finance," Review of Finance, 2017, 21 (3), 945­985.

Cookson, J Anthony and Marina Niessner, "Why don't we agree? Evidence from a
 social network of investors," The Journal of Finance, 2020, 75 (1), 173­228.

D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, "Unconventional fiscal
 policy," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 519­23.

  , , and , "Managing Households' Expectations with Unconventional Policies," Tech-
  nical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

  , , Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber, "Cognitive abilities and inflation expec-
  tations," in "AEA Papers and Proceedings," Vol. 109 2019, pp. 562­66.

  , , , and        , "IQ, Expectations, and Choice," January 2019. NBER Working Paper
  No. 25496.

  , Ulrike Malmendier, Juan Ospina, and Michael Weber, "Exposure to daily price
  changes and inflation expectations," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 26237.

Das, Sreyoshi, Camelia M Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel, "Socioeconomic Status and
 Macroeconomic Expectations," The Review of Financial Studies, 03 2019, 33 (1), 395­432.

DeFusco, Anthony A, Charles G Nathanson, and Eric Zwick, "Speculative Dynamics
 of Prices and Volume," May 2017. NBER Working Paper No. 23449.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and
 Gert G Wagner, "Individual risk attitudes: Measurement, determinants, and behavioral
 consequences," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011, 9 (3), 522­550.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski, "Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective
 Income Expectations," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1997, 92 (439),
 855­867.

   and Charles F Manski, "Measuring and interpreting expectations of equity returns,"
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2011, 26 (3), 352­370.

Dow, James and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, "Uncertainty aversion, risk aver-
 sion, and the optimal choice of portfolio," Econometrica, 1992, pp. 197­204.

Drerup, Tilman, Benjamin Enke, and Hans-Martin Von Gaudecker, "The precision
 of subjective data and the explanatory power of economic models," Journal of Economet-
 rics, 2017, 200 (2), 378­389.

Engelberg, Joseph, Charles F. Manski, and Jared Williams, "Comparing the Point
 Predictions and Subjective Probability Distributions of Professional Forecasters," Journal
 of Business & Economic Statistics, 2009, 27 (1), 30­41.

Enke, Benjamin and Thomas Graeber, "Cognitive uncertainty," 2021. NBER Working
 Paper No. 26518.

                                            35
Fox, Craig R and Amos Tversky, "Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110 (3), 585­603.

Frydman, Cary and Lawrence J Jin, "Efficient coding and risky choice," 2019. SSRN
  Working Paper No. 3270773.

Gabaix, Xavier, "A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1661­1710.

  , "Behavioral inattention," in "Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foun-
  dations 1," Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2019, pp. 261­343.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "Money doctors," The Jour-
 nal of Finance, 2015, 70 (1), 91­114.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Stephen Utkus, "Inside
 the Mind of a Stock Market Crash," May 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 27272.

  , , , and , "Five Facts about Beliefs and Portfolios," American Economic Review,
  May 2021, 111 (5), 1481­1522.

Glaeser, Edward L and Charles G Nathanson, "An extrapolative model of house price
 dynamics," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 126 (1), 147­170.

  , Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles G Nathanson, "Housing dy-
  namics: An urban approach," Journal of Urban Economics, 2014, 81, 45­56.

Glaser, Markus, Thomas Langer, Jens Reynders, and Martin Weber, "Framing
 effects in stock market forecasts: The difference between asking for prices and asking for
 returns," Review of Finance, 2007, 11 (2), 325­357.

  , Zwetelina Iliewa, and Martin Weber, "Thinking about prices versus thinking about
  returns in financial markets," The Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (6), 2997­3039.

Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer, "Expectations of returns and expected returns,"
 The Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (3), 714­746.

Guren, Adam M, "House price momentum and strategic complementarity," Journal of
 Political Economy, 2018, 126 (3), 1172­1218.

Hendren, Nathaniel, "Private information and insurance rejections," Econometrica, 2013,
 81 (5), 1713­1762.

  , "Knowledge of future job loss and implications for unemployment insurance," American
  Economic Review, 2017, 107 (7), 1778­1823.

Hurd, Michael D, "Subjective probabilities in household surveys," Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, 2009, 1 (1), 543­562.



                                            36
Ilut, Cosmin L and Martin Schneider, "Ambiguous business cycles," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2014, 104 (8), 2368­99.

Kaustia, Markku and Samuli Knüpfer, "Do investors overweight personal experience?
 Evidence from IPO subscriptions," The Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (6), 2679­2702.

Khaw, Mel Win, Ziang Li, and Michael Woodford, "Cognitive Imprecision and Small-
 Stakes Risk Aversion," The Review of Economic Studies, 08 2020. rdaa044.

Kindermann, Fabian, Julia Le Blanc, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider,
 "Learning about Housing Cost-Survey Evidence from German House Price Booms," Tech-
 nical Report, mimeo, Stanford University 2019.

Kosar, Gizem, Tyler Ransom, and Wilbert der Klaauw, "Understanding migration
 aversion using elicited counterfactual choice probabilities," 2020.

Lewbel, Arthur, "Constructing instruments for regressions with measurement error when
  no additional data are available, with an application to patents and R&D," Econometrica,
  1997, 65 (5), 1201­1213.

Lipkus, Isaac M, Greg Samsa, and Barbara K Rimer, "General performance on a
  numeracy scale among highly educated samples," Medical Decision Making, 2001, 21 (1),
  37­44.

Liu, Hongqi and Pengfei Sui, "Social Interactions in the Market: A Live Belief Contagion
  Test," 2020.

  , Cameron Peng, A. Wei Xiong, and Wei Xiong, "Resolving the Excessive Trading
  Puzzle: An Intergrated Approach Based on Surveys and Transactions," 2020.

Lusardi, Annamaria, "Financial literacy: an essential tool for informed consumer choice?,"
 2008. NBER Working Paper No. 14084.

Ma, Yueran, Tiziano Ropele, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, "A quantitative
 analysis of distortions in managerial forecasts," 2020. NBER Working Paper No. 26830.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, "Depression babies: do macroeconomic experi-
 ences affect risk taking?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 373­416.

   and , "Learning from inflation experiences," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016,
  131 (1), 53­87.

  , Demian Pouzo, and Victoria Vanasco, "Investor experiences and financial market
  dynamics," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.

Manski, Charles F., "Measuring expectations," Econometrica, 2004, 72 (5), 1329­1376.

  , "Survey Measurement of Probabilistic Macroeconomic Expectations: Progress and
  Promise," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2018, 32, 411­471.


                                           37
   and Francesca Molinari, "Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in Surveys," Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics, 2010, 28 (2), 219­231.

March, Christoph, Anthony Ziegelmeyer, Ben Greiner, and René Cyranek, "Pay
 Few Subjects but Pay Them Well: Cost-Effectiveness of Random Incentive Systems," 2016.
 CESifo Working Paper.

Meeuwis, Maarten, "Wealth fluctuations and risk preferences: Evidence from us investor
 portfolios," 2019. Working Paper.

Merton, Robert C, "Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time
 case," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1969, pp. 247­257.

Nagel, Stefan and Zhengyang Xu, "Asset pricing with fading memory," 2019. NBER
 Working Paper No. 26255.

Palmer, Christopher, "Why Did So Many Subprime Borrowers Default During the Crisis:
 Loose Credit or Plummeting Prices?," 2015. SSRN Working Paper No. 2665762.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, "Momentum traders in the housing market:
  Survey evidence and a search model," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), 406­11.

Porter, Stephen R. and Michael E. Whitcomb, "The Impact of Lottery Incentives on
 Student Survey Response Rates," Research in Higher Education, 2003, 44 (4), 389­407.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, "Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does `irrationality'
 disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions," NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual, 2003, 18, 139­194.




                                          38
            Figure 1: Investment and Subjective Confidence Survey Questions


                                  I. Investment Question




                           II. Subjective Uncertainty Question




Notes: Figure shows the investment experiment question in the 2021 survey (panel I) and the
subjective confidence elicitation question in the 2021 survey (panel II).




                                            39
                                               Figure 2: Risky Asset Shares and Perceived Past Returns
                                             I. Unconditional                   II. Conditional on Expected Returns
                    .8




                                                                                                   .8
                                  .7




                                                                                                                 .7
    Share Invested in Housing Fund




                                                                                   Share Invested in Housing Fund
                        .6




                                                                                                       .6
             .5




                                                                                            .5
  .4




                                                                                 .4
                    .3




                                                                                                   .3
                                       -.1    0                  .1    .2                                             -.1          0                    .1                   .2
                                                  Perceived Past HPA                                                        Perceived Past HPA Conditional on Expected HPA



Notes: Figure presents binned scatter plots for the share of an $1,000 investment in the housing fund
versus the perceived past home-price growth unconditionally in panel I and after first partialling
out individual-level forecasted home-price growth in panel II. N = 2,966.




                                                                            40
          Figure 3: Simulated Past Returns Coefficients Under Measurement Error
                       I. Simulated OLS Coefficient on Past Returns




                                        1.5
                 Average Coefficient for Perceived Past HPA
                       0              .5-.5         1




                                                              0                 .5                  1                   1.5            2
                                                                       Standard Deviation for Measurement Error in the Stated Belief


                                                                  II. Simulated 2SLS Coefficient on Past Returns
                                        1.5
                 Average Coefficient for Perceived Past HPA
                       0              .5-.5         1




                                                              0                 .5                  1                   1.5            2
                                                                       Standard Deviation for Measurement Error in the Stated Belief


Notes: Panels I and II, respectively, plot average OLS and 2SLS coefficients on perceived past
returns from a regression of simulated investment decisions on expected returns and past returns
where expected returns are measured with error. The 2SLS estimator in panel II instruments for
stated expected
                 returns with expected rent growth. The data generating process is specified in (9)
with 1 = 2, 0 = 2 = 3 = 0, 1 = 2 = 1, and ri,t , Zi,t+1 , i,t , vi,t  N (0, 1). The measurement
error i,t in the stated forecasts is normally distributed, with varying standard deviation shown in
the horizontal axis. Black lines plot average coefficients from 100 simulations of 1,000 observations
each. Dashed red lines plot average confidence intervals.

                                                                                                41
            Figure 4: Coded Responses to Investment Decision Factor Rationale

                             I. Reasons for Relying on Expected Returns


                     Fundamentals



                       Expectations



                             Other



        Past Returns Not Guaranteed



                Last Year Different


                                      0      50            100          150    200
                                                       Response Count


                                II. Reasons for Relying on Past Returns


                  Consistent Trends



                         Real Data



                        Uncertainty



                             Other



                      Conservative


                                      0      50            100          150    200
                                                       Response Count


Notes: Figures plot the distribution of coded free-text answers to the 2021 survey question of why
respondents state that they rely more on either their stated expected returns (panel I) or past
returns (panel II) when making investment decisions. See Appendix B for question wording and
Appendix E for details on the coding procedure. N = 548 for panel I and N = 457 for panel II.




                                                  42
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics: 2015-2020 Sample
                                                       Response Count     Mean    Std. Dev.
                                   I. Individual Characteristics
      Age (years)                                            7,065        51.22     19.04
      Male Indicator                                         7,064         0.53      0.50
      Minority Indicator                                     7,056         0.16      0.37
      Married Indicator                                      7,066         0.65      0.48
      Homeowner Indicator                                    7,025         0.76      0.43
      College Graduate Indicator                             7,064         0.57      0.50
      1(Household Income  $100K)                             6,998         0.29      0.45
      1(Liquid Savings  $75K)                                6,630         0.39      0.49
      Numeracy Score (0-5)                                   7,065         4.05      1.05
      Risk Tolerance (1-10)                                  7,066         4.45      2.24
                                II. Beliefs and Investment Actions
      Forecasted HPA in the Next 12 months (p.p.)            7,056         3.81      4.85
      Perceived HPA in the Past 12 months (p.p.)             7,053         4.73      6.18
      Confidence in Perceived Past Returns (1-5)             7,053         3.20      0.93
      Confidence in Forecasted Return (1-5)                   984          2.96      1.03
      Actual HPA in the Past 12 months (p.p.)                6,711         5.38      3.98
      |Perception Gap| (p.p.)                                6,698         4.87      4.43
      Share Invested in a Housing Fund (p.p)                 3,015        57.26     34.26
      Probability of Moving within 3 years                   7,050         0.30      0.34
      Probability of Buying a Primary Residence              4,999         0.67      0.33
      Probability of Buying an Investment Property           7,049         0.10      0.18

Notes: Table reports means, standard deviations, and counts of individual responses used in the
empirical analysis. Numeracy is coded between 1 and 5, based on the number of correct answers
to 5 questions testing numerical literacy. Risk tolerance is coded from 1 (risk averse) to 10 (risk
loving). Confidence level of past home-price growth estimate is coded from 1 (not all confident) to
5 (very confident). Perception Gap is the absolute value of the difference between a respondent's
perception of last year's home-price growth in their zip code and zip-code-level returns estimated
from CoreLogic's repeat-sales index. Share invested in a housing fund is asked in both 2015 and
2020 and represents the share of a hypothetical $1,000 investment allocated by the respondent to
an index of local housing market returns instead of a savings account with a 2% annual yield.
Likelihood of buying a primary residence is asked to respondents who report an over-5% probability
of moving within 3 years.




                                                43
             Table 2: The Effect of Perceived Past Returns on Belief Formation
               Dependent Variable: Forecasted Returns
                                             (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)

               Perceived Past Returns      0.29***   0.28***   0.25***    0.24***
                                           (0.013)   (0.014)   (0.013)     (0.014)
               Forecasted Rent Growth                          0.15***    0.15***
                                                               (0.011)     (0.011)
               Forecasted Inflation                            0.070***   0.065***
                                                               (0.017)     (0.017)
               Individual Controls
               Fundamentals
               Observations                 6,993     6,993     6,993       6,993
               R-squared                    0.139     0.163     0.202       0.222


Notes: Dependent variable is surveyed expected house price appreciation over the next year. Per-
ceived past returns are respondent's estimate of home-price appreciation in their zip code over the
past year. One percentage point is denoted as 1. Individual controls include binary indicators for
owning a home, numeracy, ethnicity, gender, marital status, education, labor force status, census
region, age, age2 , and logs of household income, equity in home, liquid savings, personal debt, a
dummy for consulting websites about home prices in the past 12 months, and a dummy for re-
ceiving questions in a percentage-change framing instead of a level framing, a dummy that equals
1 if respondent reports being confident in their recall of past home price changes (i.e., answers 4
or more on a 1-5 scale, where 5 is very confident), a dummy that equals 1 if respondent reports a
4 or less (on 1-10 scale) to a question about willingness to take risks in financial matters, where
10 is very willing. Fundamentals include measures of respondent expectations of general inflation,
rent growth, mortgage-rate changes, future economic conditions, and future credit availability. The
sample used is from survey years 2015-2021. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at
*p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                44
                Table 3: Effects of Forecasted and Past Returns on Investment
   Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)

   Forecasted Returns               1.30***              0.88***    1.23***               0.93***
                                     (0.13)               (0.15)     (0.13)                (0.14)
   Perceived Past Returns                      1.01***   0.71***               0.85***    0.54***
                                               (0.10)     (0.11)                (0.10)     (0.11)
   Confident in Past Returns                                        5.48***    5.44***    5.35***
                                                                     (1.29)     (1.30)     (1.29)
   Above-median Risk Aversion                                      -9.63***    -9.45***   -9.38***
                                                                     (1.29)     (1.30)     (1.29)
   Male                                                             6.44***    6.68***    6.52***
                                                                     (1.27)     (1.26)     (1.26)
   Homeowner                                                          1.11       0.11       0.67
                                                                     (1.54)     (1.55)     (1.54)
   Individual Controls
   Observations                      2,963      2,963     2,963      2,963      2,963       2,963
   R-squared                         0.033      0.035     0.047      0.129      0.123       0.136


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning
2%). One percentage point is denoted as 1. Confident in past returns is a dummy that equals 1
if respondent reports being confident in their recall of past home price changes (i.e., answers 4 or
more on a 1-5 scale, where 5 is very confident). Above-median risk aversion is a dummy that equals
1 if respondent reports a 4 or less (on 1-10 scale) to a question about willingness to take risks in
financial matters, where 10 is very willing. Individual controls are controlled in columns 4 to 6. For
definitions of these controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant
at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                  45
             Table 4: Robustness of Investment Effects to Distributional Controls
 Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

 Forecasted Returns                   0.66***    0.59***     0.54***    0.55***     0.62***
                                       (0.14)     (0.15)      (0.15)     (0.15)      (0.16)
 Perceived Past Returns               0.51***    0.49***     0.48***    0.49***                0.51***
                                       (0.11)     (0.11)      (0.11)     (0.11)                 (0.11)
 Pr(HPA next year < 0%)              -0.14***    -0.14***    -0.15*     -0.0003      0.01        0.01
                                      (0.022)    (0.029)     (0.090)     (0.17)      (0.16)     (0.16)
 Pr(HPA next year < -5%)                          0.012       -0.14       -0.43      -0.41       -0.40
                                                 (0.048)      (0.18)     (0.29)     (0.29)      (0.29)
 Pr(HPA next year > 10%)                          0.057      0.34***    0.50***     0.44***     0.37**
                                                 (0.038)     (0.086)     (0.17)      (0.17)     (0.17)
 Confident in Past Returns            4.98***    4.99***     5.05***    5.09***     4.58***    4.79***
                                       (1.28)     (1.28)      (1.29)     (1.29)      (1.28)     (1.28)
 Above-median Risk Aversion          -9.20***    -9.19***   -9.18***    -9.15***   -8.49***    -8.45***
                                       (1.28)     (1.28)      (1.27)     (1.27)      (1.27)     (1.27)
 Individual Controls
 Probabilities Squared
 Probabilities Cubed
 Bin FEs for Past Returns
 Bin FEs for Forecasted Returns
 Observations                          2,963      2,963       2,963      2,963       2,963      2,963
 R-squared                             0.149      0.150       0.154      0.155       0.177      0.181


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
One percentage point is denoted as 1. Controls for the probability that next year's local housing
returns fall within a given range are derived from answers to a question detailed in Section 3.1
about the distribution of returns; the omitted category is the probability that next year's returns
are between 0 and 10%. For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. In column 5, we
first divide our observations into 50 equally sized bins according to their perceived past HPA, and
then control for fixed effects for these bins. In column 6, we control for bin fixed effects for expected
HPA in a similar way. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05,
***p <0.01.




                                                   46
                  Table 5: The Role of Risk Aversion in Investment Decisions
               Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share
                                                             (1)       (2)        (3)

               Risk Tolerance (1-10)                      3.70***    2.74***
                                                           (0.28)     (0.29)
               Forecasted Returns                                    0.54***    0.54***
                                                                      (0.15)    (0.15)
               Perceived Past Returns                                0.48***    0.46***
                                                                      (0.11)    (0.11)
               Confident in Past Returns                             4.40***   4.56***
                                                                      (1.29)    (1.29)
               Probabilities Cubic
               Individual Controls
               Risk Tolerance Score FEs × Year FEs
               Observations                                2,963      2,963      2,963
               R-squared                                   0.059      0.167      0.178


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an
index of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account
earning 2%). One percentage point is denoted as 1. Probabilities cubic is a vector of controls for
a cubic polynomial for each respondent's stated probability that next year's returns fall in one of
four ranges--see Section 3.1 for question framing. Risk tolerance score × year fixed effects are
interactions of year fixed effects and risk tolerance score fixed effects. For definitions of individual
controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10,
**p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                  47
              Table 6: Summary Statistics by Forward and Backward Looking
                                                              Select        Select r
                                                                                   ^i,t     Equal
                                                             ^t [ri,t+1 ]
                                                             E                             Means
                                                                                          (p-value)
                                                                (1)            (2)          (3)
     Number of Observations                                     772            613
     Share Invested in Housing Fund (p.p.)                     62.40          54.90         0.00
     Forecasted HPA in the Next 12 months (p.p.)                4.57           4.18         0.16
     Perceived HPA in the Past 12 months (p.p.)                 6.37           5.97         0.25
     Actual HPA in the Past 12 months (p.p.)                    7.04           7.25         0.43
     |Perception Gap| (p.p.)                                    5.12           5.32         0.45
     Confidence in Forecasted Returns (1-5)                     3.06           2.86         0.00
     Confidence in Perceived Past Returns (1-5)                 3.21           3.05         0.00
     Confidence in Forecast - Confidence in Past Returns       -0.11          -0.19         0.10
     Age (years)                                                50.8           50.5         0.71
     Homeowner Indicator                                        76.2           77.5         0.56
     College Graduate Indicator                                 64.1           58.1         0.02
     1(Household Income  $100K)                                 34.3           32.0         0.36
     1(Liquid Savings  $75K)                                    32.1           27.2         0.05
     Risk Tolerance (1-10)                                      4.89           4.49         0.00
     Forward-Looking for Stocks                                 77.4           35.6         0.00

Notes: Table reports variable means for the 2020-2021 samples that were asked a question about
whether they rely more on their stated expected housing returns (column 1) or their perceived past
returns (column 2) when making housing investment decisions. Column 3 reports p-values for a
t-test of whether the means in that row are equal across the two columns. Confidence in forecasted
returns is only available for the 2021 sample. Forward-looking for stocks is an indicator for whether
a respondent in the 2020 sample reported that she relies more on her own stated expected returns
than past returns when making decisions about investing in the stock market. See notes to Table 1
for further details.




                                                 48
         Table 7: Investment Decision Factors by Forward- and Backward-Looking
           Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)

           Forecasted Returns                             1.41***      0.42       0.50
                                                           (0.27)     (0.32)     (0.31)
           Perceived Past Returns                           0.19     1.16***    1.28***
                                                           (0.22)     (0.25)     (0.24)
           Forward-Looking                                                      7.52***
                                                                                 (2.70)
           Forecasted Returns × Forward-Looking                                  0.91**
                                                                                 (0.41)
           Perceived Past Returns × Forward-Looking                             -1.14***
                                                                                 (0.32)
           Individual Controls
           Sample                                         Forward- Backward- Full
                                                          Looking Looking Sample
           Observations                                     772        613       1,385
           R-squared                                       0.175      0.234      0.185


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
The sample in column 3 is all respondents in the 2020-2021 surveys that were asked whether they
rely more on their perceived past (column 2 sample) or their stated expected returns (column 1
sample) when making investment decisions. Forward-looking is an indicator for respondents that
reported relying more on their stated expected returns. One percentage point is denoted as 1.
For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                49
          Table 8: Effects of Cognitive Uncertainty on Investment Decision-making
          Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)

          Forecasted Returns                      1.28***     0.87**     0.77**      0.20
                                                   (0.24)     (0.34)     (0.33)     (0.35)
          Perceived Past Returns                  0.53***    0.78***    0.82***     0.79***
                                                   (0.17)     (0.23)     (0.24)     (0.24)
          Forecasted Returns                        0.12       0.11      0.016       0.063
               × (Conf Forecast - Conf Past)       (0.24)     (0.23)     (0.21)     (0.21)
          Perceived Past Returns                 -0.56***    -0.52***   -0.46***   -0.47***
               × (Conf Forecast - Conf Past)       (0.17)     (0.17)     (0.17)     (0.16)
          Confidence in Forecast Returns           3.39*      3.11*     5.08***     4.23**
               - Confidence in Past Returns        (1.86)     (1.88)     (1.95)     (1.91)
          Risk Tolerance (1-7)                   6.58***     6.57***    5.11***     5.03***
                                                  (0.72)      (0.72)     (0.78)     (0.77)
          Forecasted Returns × Treated                        0.89*      0.94**     0.88**
                                                              (0.46)     (0.45)     (0.44)
          Perceived Past Returns × Treated                    -0.55     -0.74**     -0.71**
                                                              (0.34)     (0.34)     (0.33)
          Treated                                              1.62       2.05       3.01
                                                              (3.35)     (3.37)     (3.26)
          Individual Controls
          Distribution of Forecasted Returns
          Observations                              925        925        925         925
          R-squared                                0.161      0.165      0.233       0.257


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
One percentage point is denoted as 1. Treated is a dummy for the treatment group, who receives the
nudging question before reporting their investment choices. Conf Forecast - Past is the difference
between reported confidence in the respondent's 1-year HPA forecast and reported confidence in 1-
year perceived past HPA. For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Controls for the
distribution of forecasted returns is a vector of linear controls for a respondent's stated probability
of future returns falling into four ranges. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at
*p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                  50
                          Table 9: Evidence for Shrunk Belief Factors
                   Dependent Variable:             Forecasted         Housing
                                                       Returns      fund share
                                                         (1)       (2)       (3)

                   Forecasted Returns                                      0.53***
                                                                            (0.15)
                   Perceived Past Returns              0.29***   0.80***   0.49***
                                                       (0.020)   (0.10)     (0.11)
                   Forecasted Rent Growth              0.14***    0.07      -0.09
                                                       (0.016)   (0.11)     (0.11)
                   Forecasted Rate of Inflation        0.12***    -0.05     -0.17
                                                       (0.026)   (0.15)     (0.15)
                   Individual Controls
                   Probabilities Cubic
                   Observations                         2,963     2,963     2,963
                   R-squared                            0.276     0.144     0.170


Notes: For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Probabilities cubic is a vector of
controls for a cubic polynomial for each respondent's stated probability that next year's returns fall
in one of four ranges--see Section 3.1 for question framing. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                  51
Appendix
A      Condition for Independent Effect of Past Experience
    In this appendix, we derive the sufficient and necessary condition for an independent effect of
past experience in the theoretical model of Section 2. We relax the assumption in Section 2 that
p is constant between the expectation to the investment decision stages. That is, we assume that
p,i > p,e and s,i > s,e . The model and coefficients are as follows
                                      2
                        c
                        ~ + ri +   +  i
                                                       2
                          = c1 + 1,i rt + 2,i s +   +  i
                                               2,i      2,i           2
                          = c2 + 1,i - 1,e         rt +     re +   +  i .                        (11)
                                               2,e      2,e
                                                 2 (µ2 +  2 )
                                                s,e  d
                                1,e =     2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,e p,e   d          p,e s,e
                                                 2 (µ2 +  2 )
                                               p,e    d
                                2,e =     2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,e p,e   d          p,e s,e
                                                 2 (µ2 +  2 )
                                                 s,i d
                                 1,i =    2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,i p,i   d          p,i s,i
                                                 2 (µ2 +  2 )
                                                 p,i d
                                 2,i =    2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2
                                         (s,i p,i   d          p,i s,i
                                                        
                                                       2,i
    The coefficient for rt in equation (11), 1,i - 1,e 2 ,e
                                                            , can be simplified as

                                                        2 2 - 2 2
                                                        s,i
                               2,i                            p,e   s,e p,i
                   1,i - 1,e       = (µ2
                                       d +  2
                                              ) 2 [( 2 +  2 )(µ2 +  2 ) +  2  2 ]
                                                                                                 (12)
                               2,e              p,e s,i     p,i   d         p,i s,i

                                                             2,i 
We derive a necessary and sufficient condition for 1,i - 1,e 2 ,e
                                                                  to be positive. The denominator
                 2     2
and the factor (µd +  ) in equation (12) are both positive so it suffices to check the sign of
 2  2 -  2  2 . The positivity of  2  2 -  2  2 is equivalent to s,i >         2      2 p,i
s,i   p,e    s,e p,i                      s,i p,e    s,e p,i                   2
                                                                              s,e       2 .
                                                                                      p,e
                                                                                             Thus, the
coefficient for rt in the investment stage is positive if and only if s increases relatively more than
p between the expectation and investment decision stages.

B      Survey Question Text
Framing of Perceived Past Home Price Returns

    1. Questions framed in terms of the levels of house prices: "You indicated that you estimate the
       current value of a typical home in your zip code to be [X] dollars. Now, think about how
       the value of such a home has changed over time. (By value, we mean how much that typical
       home would approximately sell for.) What do you think the value of such a home was one
       year ago?"

                                                   52
  2. Questions framed in terms of percentage changes: "Now, think about how the value of such
     a home has changed over time. Over the past 12 months, how has the value of such a home
     changed? (By value, we mean how much that typical home would approximately sell for.)
     [increased/decreased]" followed by "By about what percent do you think the value of such a
     home has [increased/decreased] over the past 12 months? Please give your best guess."

  3. Questions framed in terms of changes of dollar amounts: "By about what dollar amount do
     you think the value of such a home has [increased/decreased] over the past 12 months? Please
     give your best guess."

  4. Questions about confidence in past returns following the past home price return questions:
     "How confident are you in your answers?

        · 1 (Not at all confident)
        · 2
        · 3 (Somewhat confident)
        · 4
        · 5 (Very confident)"

  5. Questions about confidence in past returns (2021 subjective confidence interval procedure):
     "You stated over the next 12 months, the value of a typical home in your zip code increased
     by 5%. How certain are you in your answer?

        · (Completely certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code
          increased by 5% over the past 12 months.
        · (Very certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code changed
          between an increase of 3.0% and an increase of 7.0% over the past 12 months.
        · (Somewhat certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code changed
          between a decrease of 1.0% and an increase of 11.0% over the past 12 months.
        · (Little certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code changed
          between a decrease of 5.0% and an increase of 15.0% over the past 12 months.
        · (Very uncertain) I am not at all certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code
          changed between a decrease of 5.0% and an increase of 15.0% over the past 12 months."

     The intervals for "Very certain", "Somewhat certain", "Little certain" and "Very uncertain" are
     the perceived past return ±2%, ±6%, ±10% and beyond ±10% respectively.

Framing of Expected Home Price Returns
  1. Questions framed in terms of the level of house prices: "You estimated the current value of a
     typical home in your zip code to be [X] dollars. Now, we would like you to think about the
     future value of such a home. What do you think the value of such a home will be one year
     from today        dollars?"

  2. Questions framed in terms of percentage changes: "You estimated the current value of a
     typical home in your zip code to be [X] dollars. Now, we would like you to think about the
     future value of such a home. Over the next 12 months, what do you expect will happen to


                                                53
   the value of such a home? Over the next 12 months, I expect the value of such a home to
   ... [increase/decrease]" followed by "By about what percent do you expect the value of such
   a home to [increase/decrease] over the past 12 months? Please give your best guess."
3. Questions framed in terms of changes of dollar amount: "'You estimated the current value of
   a typical home in your zip code to be [X] dollars. Now, we would like you to think about the
   future value of such a home. Over the next 12 months, what do you expect will happen to
   the value of such a home? Over the next 12 months, I expect the value of such a home to
   ... [increase/decrease]" followed by "By about what dollar amount do you expect the value of
   such a home to [increase/decrease]over the past 12 months? Please give your best guess."
4. Questions about the distribution of expected returns framed in terms of the level of house
   prices: "You estimated the current value of a typical home in your zip code to be [X] dol-
   lars.What do you think is the percent chance that the value of such a home one year from
   today

      · less than [95%*X] dollars:       percent chance
      · between [95%*X] and [100%*X] dollars:            percent chance
      · between [100%*X] and [110%*X] dollars:            percent chance
      · more than [110%*X] dollars:         percent chance"

5. Questions about the distribution of expected returns framed in terms of percentage changes:
   "What do you think is the percent chance that the value of such a home, over the next 12
   months, will...

      · decrease by 5% or more:         percent chance
      · decrease by 0% to 5%:         percent chance
      · increase by 0% to 10%:        percent chance
      · increase by 10% or more:        percent chance"

6. Questions about confidence in expected returns (2021 subjective confidence interval proce-
   dure): "You stated over the next 12 months, the value of a typical home in your zip code will
   increase by 5%. How certain are you in your answer?

      · (Completely certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code will
        increase by 5% over the next 12 months.
      · (Very certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code will change
        between an increase of 3.0% and an increase of 7.0% over the next 12 months.
      · (Somewhat certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code will
        change between a decrease of 1.0% and an increase of 11.0% over the next 12 months.
      · (Little certain) I am certain that the value of a typical home in my zip code will change
        between a decrease of 5.0% and an increase of 15.0% over the next 12 months.
      · (Very uncertain) I am not at all certain that the value of a typical home in my zip
        code will change between a decrease of 5.0% and an increase of 15.0% over the next 12
        months."

   The intervals for "Very certain", "Somewhat certain", "Little certain" and "Very uncertain" are
   the return forecast ±2%, ±6%, ±10% and beyond ±10%, respectively.

                                              54
Housing Investment Decisions


    1. Investment in a housing fund: "Consider a situation where you have to decide how to invest
       $1,000 for one year. You can choose between two possible investments. The first is a fund
       that invests in your local housing market and pays an annual return equal to the growth in
       home prices in your area. The second is a savings account that pays 2% of interest per year.
       What proportion of the $1,000 would you invest in: The housing market fund? The savings
       account?"

    2. Probability of buying a primary residence: "And if you were to move to a different primary
       residence over the next 3 years, what is the percent chance that you (or your spouse/partner)
       would buy (as opposed to rent) your new home?"

    3. Probability of buying an investment property: "What is the percent chance that over the next
       3 years you [or your spouse/partner] will buy a home that you would NOT use as your primary
       residence (meaning you would use it as a vacation home, or as an investment property, etc.)?"

    4. Evaluating housing in their zip code as an investment: "If someone had a large sum of money
       that they wanted to invest, would you say that relative to other possible financial investments,
       buying property in your zip code today is: " with options including "A very good investment,"
       " A somewhat good investment," " Neither good nor bad as an investment," " A somewhat bad
       investment," and " A very bad investment."

Investment Decision-making
    1. Consider a situation where you have to decide how to invest $1,000 for one year. You can
       choose between two possible investments. The first is a fund that invests in your local housing
       market and pays an annual return equal to the growth in home prices in your area. The second
       is a savings account that pays 2% interest per year. Which factor do you rely on more when
       making this investment decision? Please select only one.

          · Your forecast of home price growth in your local housing market over the next 12 months
            (You reported earlier that you expect 5% growth)
          · The realized growth in home prices in your local housing market over the past 12 months
            (You reported earlier 10%)

    2. Why do you rely more on [the past OR your expected] home price growth?


C      Density Estimation
For specifications estimating the Merton (1969) model in (1) directly, we require an estimate of
the conditional variance of expected returns t  2 . To construct such an estimate, we follow the
                                                 +1
approach used by Armantier et al. (2017) to fit a parametric distribution for each respondent based
on the probabilities the respondent reported for each possible density interval using a minimum
distance procedure that minimizes the distance between the empirical and estimated parametric
distribution. We assume the underlying distribution is a generalized beta distribution when the
respondent assigns positive probability to three or more outcome intervals. We assume an isosceles



                                                  55
triangular distribution when the respondent puts all probability mass in two intervals and a uniform
distribution when the respondent puts all probability mass in one interval.
    The generalized beta distribution is a flexible four parameter unimodal distribution that allows
different values for its mean, median and mode and has the following functional form:

                        
                        0
                                                                        if x <
                 f (x) = (x - )-1 (r - x) -1 /B (,  )(r - )+ -1         if  x  r
                        
                         0                                              if x > r
                        

where B (,  ) = ()( )/( +  ) and (·) is the gamma function.
    The two parameters  and  describe the shape of the distribution and the parameters and
r fix the support of the distribution. Fitting a unique beta distribution requires a respondent to
have assigned positive probability mass to at least three (not necessarily adjacent) intervals. In the
case one or more of the intervals are unbounded, the relevant and/or r are treated as unknown
parameters that are estimated along with  and  .
    The triangular distribution, for cases when a respondent assigns positive probability to exactly
two adjacent bins, has the shape of an isosceles triangle whose base includes the interval with the
greatest probability mass and a portion of the adjacent interval. Thus, the triangle is anchored
at the outer bound of the interval with probability mass above 50 percent. Its density has the
functional form:

                                      
                                         4                      +r
                                       (r-l)2 (x - ) if  x  2
                                      
                                         4
                               f (x) = (r- )2
                                              (r - x) if + r
                                                         2 xr
                                      0               otherwise

    With the triangle being anchored at one of the other bounds, there is only one parameter (either
  or r) to fit, which fixes the center and height of the triangle. Note that an isosceles triangle is
symmetric, so the mean, median, and mode are identical to each other. If one of the two bins is
unbounded, the bounded bin is taken to be the one fully included in the support of the triangle. In
other words, the triangle is anchored at the inner bound of the bounded interval and the outer leg's
position is determined by how much mass is placed in the unbounded bin.
    Respondents who respond with probability fully within one bin, the distribution is assumed to
be uniform. The estimation for this is trivial, except in the case where the interval is unbounded.
For when probabilities include a bin that is unbounded from below or above, bounds are imposed at
-38 and 38 for bins that were unbounded below and above, respectively. These values are based on
historical maximum and minimum changes and the outcomes of the distribution fitting are generally
not sensitive to them.
    Densities are not fitted for respondents who put positive probability in only two bins that are
nonadjacent or for whom the probabilities do not sum to 100 percent."




                                                 56
D      Addressing Measurement Error through Instrumental
       Variables
Motivated by the derivations and simulations in Section 5.2, we present results that instrument for
E^t [ri,t+1 ] with forecasted fundamentals Zi,t . The logic behind these tests is that under the null
hypothesis that measurement error is the reason for our statistically significant estimated effects
of past returns on investment, we could address the resulting bias through instrumenting and the
unbiased 2SLS estimate of 2 would be 0. Under this null hypothesis of measurement error in
stated beliefs and no independent role for belief factors, any forecasted fundamental would satisfy
the exclusion restriction and be a valid instrument for stated beliefs. However, we demonstrate that
our core findings are robust to instrumenting, leading us to reject the measurement-error hypothesis
as the model generating our results.44


D.1      Instrumenting for expected returns removes bias in past re-
         turns coefficient
First, we formally derive ^2 in (10) to demonstrate how instrumenting for expected returns removes
the measurement error bias in the estimate of the coefficient on past returns. To simplify our
derivations, we assume that the empirical variance-covariance matrix is the same as the population
one. We have


                                               ^2 = Cov (ri,t , Yi,t ) ,
                                                                                                         (13)
                                                     V ar(ri,t )

where ri,t is the residual from regressing r
                                           ^i,t on the other covariate, Et [ri,t+1 ]. For Et [ri,t+1 ], by the
assumption that the empirical variance-covariance matrix is the same as the population matrix, we
have ^1 = 1 and     ^2 = 2 . Therefore


                                               ^i,t -  (1 r
                                        ri,t = r          ^i,t + 2 Zi,t ),                               (14)

where  is the coefficient from regressing Et [ri,t+1 ] on r
                                                          ^i,t , i.e.,


                               Cov (Et [ri,t+1 ], r
                                                  ^i,t )
                         =
                               V ar(Et [ri,t+1 ])
                              Cov (1 r
                                     ^i,t + 2 Zi,t , r ^i,t )
                            =
                               V ar(1 r ^i,t + 2 Zi,t )
                                       1 V ar(^  ri,t ) + 2 Cov (^    ri,t , Zi,t )
                            = 2                                                  2 V ar (Z )             (15)
                              1 V ar(^
                                     ri,t ) + 21 2 Cov (^     ri,t , Zi,t ) + 2           i,t

    Plugging (14) and (15) into (13), we have



  44
     We caveat that this instrumenting strategy applies to classical measurement error that is independent
of stated beliefs and will not be unbiased if survey noise is correlated with elicited beliefs.

                                                           57
             ^2 = Cov (ri,t , Yi,t )
             
                   V ar(ri,t )
                  1 (1 V ar(^  ri,t ) + 2 Cov (Zi,t , r
                                                      ^i,t )) 1 (1 V ar(^ri,t ) + 2 Cov (^
                                                                                         ri,t , Zi,t ))
                =                                            -
                    V ar(^ ri,t -  (1 r ^i,t + 2 Zi,t ))             ri,t -  (1 r
                                                                V ar(^            ^i,t + 2 Zi,t ))
                = 0.

Thus, the second-stage 2SLS coefficient for r
                                            ^i,t is 0 under the DGP in (8).


D.2      Instrumental Variables Results
Out of many potential belief factors that could be considered elements of Zi,t , we focus on infla-
tion forecasts and rent forecasts as instruments because belief-formation regressions suggests that
survey respondents incorporate these views into their home price forecasts. Table 2 demonstrates
that individual expectations of inflation and rent growth are incorporated into individual expected
returns, satisfying the 2SLS relevance condition (see Appendix Table A12 for the exact first stage
used in our 2SLS estimation). As an alternative to using forecasts of fundamentals as instruments
for expected housing returns, we follow Lewbel (1997) and construct an additional instrument based
on higher-order moments of the potentially mismeasured variable (E          ^t [ri,t+1 ] - E
                                                                                           ^t [ri,t+1 ])2 . Appendix
D.3 outlines the assumptions required by this approach, and Appendix Table A12 demonstrates the
strong first stage for higher-order moments of stated returns.
    Table A13 presents both OLS and IV estimates of (10) without and with individual-level controls
in columns 1-3 and 4-6, respectively. Across all columns, r     ^i,t has statistically significant coefficients in
                                                            ^
both OLS specifications and when we instrument for Et [ri,t+1 ], inconsistent with the prediction of the
null hypothesis that both r  ^i,t and Zi,t affect Yi,t only through stated forecasts E     ^t [ri,t+1 ]. At the same
time, Table A13 offers additional evidence against the null hypothesis. Under the null hypothesis,
forecasted fundamentals are excludable and valid instruments under the null hypothesis. However,
instrumenting for stated returns does not reverse any measurement-error induced attenuation bias
in Table A13. Contrary to what would be expected under the null hypothesis, instrumenting reduces
the magnitude of expected returns. While inconsistent with the null hypothesis of no independent
effect of belief factors on investment conditional on stated beliefs, we argue below that these results
are consistent with expectations surveys eliciting beliefs that differ systematically from the beliefs
used in decision making.



D.3      Justification of the Lewbel Instrument
    For detailed derivations of the Lewbel instrument, we refer to Lewbel (1997). Conceptually,
this strategy uses higher-order moments of a mismeasured variable as its instrument since it is
correlated with the signal but conditionally uncorrelated with the noise. This section presents
a concise summary of this approach. Consider the regression model similar to (8) regressing an
outcome y on controls W and a noisy scalar measure x of x

                                         Yi = 0 + 1 xi + Wi 2 + i
                                          xi = xi + i ,

where vi is the independent, mean-zero, and symmetrically distributed measurement error in xi .

                                                        58
Note that while we present the case of a scalar mismeasured x for ease of exposition, the results
generalize to multiple mismeasured variables X . Construct an instrument z for x as zi = (xi - x)2 .
For z to be a valid instrument for x, we require four assumptions:

   1. E ((1, W , x ) (1, W , x )) exists and is nonsingular

   2. E () = E ( ) = 0 and E ( 3 ) = 0

   3. v and  are independent of each other and x and W

   4. E ((x - x
              ¯  )2 x
                    ~ ) = 0 where x
                                  ~ = x - 0 - 1 W is the residual of regressing x on W

Assumption 1 requires that W and x are not collinear. Assumption 2 requires that the measure-
ment error is symmetrically distributed such that its skewness is equal to 0. See Lewbel Lewbel
(1997) for alternative instrument candidates that do not require this distributional assumption on
the measurement error v . Assumption 3 is akin to the classical measurement error assumption of
independent measurement error and the exogeneity of x and the other covariates W . This inde-
pendence condition is slightly stronger than (and implies) the condition required by Lewbel (1997)
that
           E ((x - x¯ )   k ) = E ((x - x ¯ ) )E (  )E (k ) for ,   {0, 1, 2}, k  {0, 1}.
Assumption 4 requires that, after conditioning on the included controls W , (x - x
                                                                                 ¯ )2 is still corre-
                                                              
lated with x , as would be the case provided the moments of x are correlated with each other in a
way not completely absorbed by W . Given the definition of x ~ , assumption 3 also implies that

                                E ((x - x
                                        ¯ ) x
                                            ~ ) = E (x - x
                                                         ¯ )E ( )E (~
                                                                    x )

and
                                               ~ ) = E (v 2 )E (~
                                         E ( 2 x                x ).
   Instrumenting for x using z will lead to an unbiased 2SLS estimate of 1 and 2 if E (z) = 0
                                                     ~ ) = 0 (the relevance condition).
and E (z ) = 0 (the exclusion restrictions) and E (z x
   By assumptions 2 and 3, the first exclusion restriction is

                                  ¯)2 i )
                 E (z) = E ((xi - x
                        = E ((x   ¯  + v i ) 2 i )
                               i -x
                        = E ((x   ¯ )2 i ) + 2E ((x
                               i -x                   ¯ )vi i ) + E (vi
                                                   i -x
                                                                      2
                                                                        i )
                        = E ((x   ¯ )2 )E (i ) + 2E (x
                               i -x                      ¯ )E (vi )E (i ) + E (vi
                                                      i -x
                                                                                2
                                                                                  )E (i )
                        = 0.

      By assumptions 2 and 3, the second exclusion restriction is

                                         ¯)2 vi )
                      E (zv ) = E ((xi - x
                               = E ((x   ¯ )2 vi ) + 2E ((x
                                      i -x                    ¯ )vi
                                                           i -x
                                                                  2         3
                                                                    ) + E (vi )
                               = E ((x   ¯ )2 )E (vi ) + 2E (x
                                      i -x                       ¯ )E (vi
                                                              i -x
                                                                        2         3
                                                                          ) + E (vi )
                               =0

given that E (x   ¯ ) = E (x
               i -x
                                      
                            i ) - E (xi ) = 0.




                                                     59
                                              x
    Finally, using assumptions 3 and 4 and E (~ i ) = 0, the relevance assumption is

                         ~ ) = E ((x
                    E (z x             ¯ + vi )2 )~
                                    i -x          x i)
                            = E ((xi -x    ~
                                      ¯ )2 x             
                                             i ) + 2E ((xi - x     ~
                                                             ¯ )vi x           2 
                                                                     i ) + E (vi x
                                                                                 ~i )
                            = E ((x   ¯ )2 x
                                   i -x    ~ i)
                            =0

Given these results, the conditions required for 2SLS unbiasedness hold, and instrumenting using
the Lewbel instrument--provided assumptions 1-4 hold--leads to estimates of  that are robust to
measurement error in x.


E      Open-ended Textual Response Coding Procedure
In this appendix, we explain how we code free text responses to the 2021 survey question "Why
do you rely more on [the past OR your expected] home price growth?" For each group (relying
on past or expected returns), we group them into four categories that capture the most frequently
cited rationale for relying on past or expected returns in investment decision-making, with the
remaining responses, including non-responses, assigned to an other category. When a response
contains investment decision-making rationale that could fit into multiple categories, we assign it
to the category that seemed the most prominent. See Figure 4 for the distribution of responses.

Coding for Respondents Relying More on Past Returns
    1. Consistent Trends: We assign responses to this category when they emphasize that local house
       price returns have been stable or exhibit momentum or exhibit consistent trends. Similarly,
       when answers mention that a reliance on past returns because of a strong expectation that
       past returns and local market conditions will continue as in the past.

    2. Real Data: We assign responses to this category when they emphasize that the past returns
       are based on "real" or "realized" or "actual" or "historical" or "observable" data.

    3. Uncertainty: We assign responses to this category when they emphasize that the future
       is uncertain or unknown or that anything could happen in the future or that their stated
       forecasts are just a guess. We also assign responses to this category when answers emphasize
       that they are unfamiliar with house prices or the housing market or investing.

    4. Conservative: We assign responses to this category when they emphasize that they chose to
       rely on past returns as the more conservative or safer approach given their forecast.

Coding for Respondents Relying More on Expected Returns
    1. Expectations: We assign responses to this category when they emphasize anything about
       their own returns expectations. Many respondents in this category mention that what is
       relevant for an investment decision is their expectations about the future as opposed to the
       past. Other responses in this category emphasize that their expectations for future returns
       are informed or differ from what happened in the past or that they expect returns to be high
       enough to compensate them for the risk relative to the risk-free rate of 2%.



                                                  60
2. Fundamentals: We assign responses to this category when they cite a particular reason behind
   their price belief, such as local demand for housing being high, housing inventory being low,
   interest rates being low, high expected income growth, or an expectation of a strong post-
   pandemic economic recovery.

3. Last year different: We assign responses to this category if they specifically say they use
   their expected returns in investment decision-making instead of past returns because 2020
   was a poor year to extrapolate from because it was different or unusual or dominated by the
   pandemic.

4. Past returns not guaranteed: We assign responses to this category when they state that
   there's no promise that past returns will continue. For example, multiple respondents in this
   category stated that "Past returns do not guarantee future growth."




                                             61
                  Table A1: Summary Statistics: Fundamentals Forecasts
                                                   Response Count   Mean    Std. Dev.
         Expected Inflation (p.p.)                      7,066        3.58      4.36
         Expected Rent Growth (p.p.)                    7,066        6.21      5.91
         Expected Mortgage Rate Change (p.p.)           7,066        0.35      0.70
         Expected Economic Conditions (1-5)             7,065        3.24      0.84

Notes: Table reports means, standard deviations, and counts of individual responses for one-year
ahead forecasted fundamentals. Expected economic conditions is measured on a 1-5 scale with 1
being much worse, 3 being about the same, and 5 being much better than today.




                                              62
  Table A2: Log-log Specification of Effect of Expected and Past Returns on Investment
              Dependent Variable: Log Housing Fund Share
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)

              Log(Forecasted Returns - 2%)            0.0054                   -0.011
                                                   (0.0132)                   (0.015)
              Log(1 + Perceived Past Returns)                   0.0055**     0.0062**
                                                                (0.0024)      (0.0027)
                    2
              Log(^ )                              -0.040***    -0.043***    -0.041***
                                                      (0.014)    (0.014)      (0.014)
              Log(Risk Aversion)                   -0.195***    -0.193***    -0.192***
                                                      (0.025)    (0.026)      (0.026)


              Observations                            1,605       1,605        1,605
              R-squared                               0.036       0.041        0.041


Notes: Table reports results from estimating the Merton model in (1) via a log-log specification.
Dependent variable is the log share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning
2%). Log(Forecasted Returns - 2%) takes 2% as the risk free rate Rf in (1). Perceived past
returns are transformed as Log(1 + Perceived Past Returns) to facilitate including responses that
lagged returns were less than or equal to zero. The conditional variance of expected returns        ^2
is estimated by fitting a generalized beta or triangular or uniform distribution to the respondents'
expected probability of returns falling into four intervals, as described in Appendix C. Risk aversion
is measured as (10 - Risk Tolerance), and Risk Tolerance is measured on a 1-10 scale from a question
about willingness to take risks in financial matters, where 10 is very willing. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                 63
       Table A3: Addressing Collinearity Between Expected and Perceived Past HPA
  Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)

  Forecasted Returns                 0.59***    0.61***    0.61***
                                      (0.15)     (0.16)     (0.16)
  Perceived Past Returns                                              0.52***     0.52***    0.51***
                                                                       (0.11)      (0.11)     (0.11)
  Bin FEs for Perceived HPA
  Bin FEs for Expected HPA
  Number of Bins Specified              10        100        200         10         100        200
  Number of Actual Bins                 10         43         63          9          37         58
  Probabilities Cubic
  Demographics
  Observations                        2,963      2,963      2,963       2,963      2,963      2,963
  R-squared                           0.169      0.182      0.189       0.175      0.183      0.190


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an
index of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account
earning 2%). Columns 1-3 divide the sample into targets of 10, 100, and 200 equally sized bins
according to their perceived past HPA and control for bin fixed effects. Columns 4-6 similarly
control for bin fixed effects for forecasted returns. Probabilities cubic is a vector of controls for a
cubic polynomial for each respondent's stated probability that next year's returns fall in one of
four ranges--see Section 3.1 for question framing. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                   64
           Table A4: Investment Decision Factors Using Representative Weights
   Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                     (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)

   Forecasted Returns              0.83***               0.36     0.79***                0.41*
                                    (0.23)              (0.23)     (0.20)                (0.22)
   Perceived Past Returns                    0.95***   0.83***               0.84***    0.72***
                                              (0.14)    (0.16)                (0.14)     (0.17)
   Confident in Past Returns                                      4.12**     4.33**     4.24**
                                                                   (1.77)     (1.72)     (1.72)
   Above-median Risk Aversion                                    -11.4***   -11.3***   -11.2***
                                                                   (1.81)     (1.76)     (1.77)
   Male                                                           4.96***    4.79***    4.90***
                                                                   (1.72)     (1.67)     (1.68)
   Homeowner                                                        0.48      -0.62      -0.34
                                                                   (2.08)     (2.06)     (2.08)
   Individual Controls
   Observations                     2,963     2,963     2,963      2,963      2,963      2,963
   R-squared                        0.015     0.035     0.038      0.131      0.144      0.147


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
Observations are weighted by SCE-ACS weights. One percentage point is denoted as 1. Individual
controls are controlled in columns 4 to 6. For definitions of these controls, see notes to Table 2.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                65
             Table A5: Investment Decision Factors for Incentivized Subsample
                  Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (Incentivized Stage)
                                                           (1)      (2)      (3)

                  Forecasted Returns                      0.15     0.28      0.12
                                                         (0.60)   (0.60)    (0.59)
                  Perceived Past Returns                 0.91**   0.91**    0.85**
                                                         (0.38)   (0.39)    (0.39)
                  Objective Past Returns                                    0.78**
                                                                            (0.34)
                  Individual Controls
                  Distribution of Forecasted Returns
                  Observations                            330      330       330
                  R-squared                              0.159     0.162    0.177


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
One percentage point is denoted as 1. Sample is 2015 respondents that were offered a chance at the
gross proceeds of their investment decision but were not provided any objective information about
past returns (the control group of Armona et al. (2018)). Controls for the distribution of forecasted
returns is a vector of linear controls for a respondent's stated probability of future returns falling
into four ranges. For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                 66
                     Table A6: Controlling for Forecasted Fundamentals
                   Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                                 (1)               (2)

                   Forecasted Returns          0.87***          0.53***
                                                (0.14)           (0.15)
                   Perceived Past Returns      0.55***          0.49***
                                                (0.11)           (0.11)
                   Forecasted Fundamentals
                   Individual Controls
                   Probabilities Cubic
                   Observations                 2,963            2,963
                   R-squared                    0.154            0.170


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning
2%). One percentage point is denoted as 1. Forecasted fundamentals include year-ahead forecasts
of inflation, rent growth, mortgage rates, and economic conditions, along with indicators for non-
responses and for whether an observation was trimmed at the 2nd or 98th percentile. For definitions
of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at
*p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                67
                Table A7: Actual versus Subjective Past Home Price Growth
                        Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share
                                                          (1)        (2)

                        Forecasted Returns              0.78***    0.59***
                                                         (0.15)     (0.16)
                        Actual Past Returns             0.54***    0.45***
                                                         (0.17)     (0.17)
                        Perceived Past Returns                     0.43***
                                                                    (0.12)
                        Confident in Past Returns       5.32***    5.26***
                                                         (1.32)     (1.32)
                        Above-median Risk Aversion      -8.74***   -8.54***
                                                         (1.32)     (1.32)
                        Probabilities Cubic
                        Individual Controls
                        Observations                     2,766      2,766
                        R-squared                        0.149      0.153


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
Variable units are in percentage points (one percentage point is denoted as 1). For definitions of
individual controls, see notes to Table 2 Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at
*p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                 68
    Table A8: Heterogeneity in Investment Decision-Making, Economic Characteristics
                   Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                               Owner     Renter         College   Non-Coll   Inc>$75K   Inc$75K
                                (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)
    Forecasted Returns        0.64***     0.46*         0.85***     0.32     0.91***     0.42**
                               (0.19)    (0.24)         (0.23)     (0.20)     (0.29)     (0.18)
    Perceived Past Returns    0.63***     0.17          0.45***   0.59***     0.40*     0.58***
                               (0.14)    (0.21)         (0.17)     (0.15)     (0.21)     (0.14)
    Pr(HPA< 0%)               -0.14***   -0.15**    -0.11***      -0.18***   -0.10**    -0.16***
                              (0.033)    (0.063)        (0.039)   (0.042)     (0.045)   (0.038)
    Pr(HPA< -5%)               0.0095     0.021         -0.038     0.057      -0.087     0.064
                              (0.058)    (0.089)        (0.066)   (0.068)     (0.083)   (0.059)
    Pr(HPA> 10%)               0.047      0.072          0.059     0.049      0.054      0.063
                              (0.044)    (0.074)        (0.057)   (0.051)     (0.059)   (0.049)
    Individual Controls
    Observations               2,229       734           1,700     1,263      1,305      1,633
    R-squared                  0.166      0.134          0.163     0.155      0.172      0.134


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                   69
                          Table A9: Heterogeneity in Investment Decision-Making, Other Characteristics
           Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                 Age50      Age<50       Male       Female     High Nu-    Low Nu-     Checked      Didn't
                                                                                meracy      meracy     Website      Check
                                    (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

           Forecasted Ret.       0.74***     0.43*     0.79***      0.43**      0.85***      0.090      1.02***     -0.011
                                  (0.21)     (0.22)     (0.22)      (0.20)      (0.19)      (0.23)      (0.24)      (0.27)
           Perceived Past Ret.     0.31*    0.65***    0.45***      0.52***     0.52***     0.54***      0.28       0.67***
                                  (0.16)     (0.16)     (0.17)      (0.15)      (0.14)      (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.20)
           Pr(HPA< 0%)           -0.15***   -0.14***   -0.13***    -0.13***    -0.15***     -0.094*    -0.18***     -0.083
                                  (0.043)   (0.039)     (0.043)     (0.040)     (0.034)     (0.055)     (0.049)     (0.058)
           Pr(HPA< -5%)            0.072     -0.021     -0.044       0.059      0.0022       0.013      -0.014      0.0085
                                  (0.072)   (0.064)     (0.073)     (0.064)     (0.058)     (0.085)     (0.080)     (0.090)
           Pr(HPA> 10%)            0.088     0.052      0.093*       0.025       0.031       0.12*      -0.0098      0.14*
                                  (0.057)   (0.050)     (0.054)     (0.053)     (0.047)     (0.062)     (0.056)     (0.080)
           Individual Controls
           Observations            1,377     1,586       1,565       1,398       2,184        779        1,287        744
           R-squared               0.185     0.140       0.148       0.135       0.162       0.158       0.174       0.137


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index of her local home-price appreciation
(with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%). For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.
                Table A10: Other Housing-Related Behaviors: 2015-2020 Data
 Dependent Variable:                Pr(Buy non-                                  Viewing Housing
                                   primary home)           Pr(Buy home)          Good Investment
                                    (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)

 Forecasted Returns               0.077      0.13*     -0.48***      -0.22**    0.18***     0.089*
                                 (0.048)    (0.061)     (0.081)      (0.074)    (0.039)    (0.039)
 Perceived Past Returns           0.11**    0.064*        0.18        0.039     0.19***    0.13***
                                 (0.040)    (0.028)      (0.15)      (0.074)    (0.015)    (0.016)
 Pr(HPA next year < 0%)                     0.0056                   -0.034               -0.032***
                                            (0.0093)                 (0.021)               (0.0051)
 Pr(HPA next year < -5%)                   0.059***                 -0.070**               -0.0086
                                            (0.011)                  (0.021)               (0.014)
 Pr(HPA next year > 10%)                    0.0052                   -0.056                 0.0042
                                            (0.013)                  (0.034)               (0.0055)
 Confident in past returns                  2.03***                  3.12**                1.74***
                                             (0.26)                  (0.84)                 (0.25)
 Above-median Risk Aversion                -5.25***                 -3.27***                -0.55
                                             (0.30)                  (0.41)                 (0.41)
 Homeowner                                  1.89***                 22.6***                  0.19
                                             (0.51)                  (0.62)                 (0.35)
 Individual Controls
 Observations                     6,977      6,977       4,946        4,946      6,991      6,991
 R-squared                        0.002      0.083       0.004        0.259      0.031      0.085
 Subsample                         All        All      Pr(Move)    Pr(Move)       All        All
                                                          5%          5%


Notes: One percentage point is denoted as 1. Viewing housing good investment is a discrete
variable for view of housing as an investment on a 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 scale, with 50 being a very good
investment. For definitions of individual controls, see notes to Table 2. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                 71
              Table A11: The Effect of Housing Equity on Investment Decisions
  Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)
                                         (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)

  Forecasted Returns                   0.66***   0.65***    0.64***   0.63***   0.61***   0.59***
                                        (0.20)    (0.20)    (0.20)     (0.19)    (0.20)    (0.19)
  Perceived Past Returns               0.70***   0.68***    0.75***   0.74***   0.59***   0.56***
                                        (0.14)    (0.14)    (0.15)     (0.14)    (0.16)    (0.16)
  Perceived Past Returns                -0.018   -0.022*
       × (Home Value/Equity)           (0.012)   (0.012)
  Perceived Past Returns                                    -3.07*    -3.77**
       × (Home Value/Net Assets)                            (1.69)     (1.58)
  Perceived Past Returns                                                         0.019     0.019
       × (Home Value/Income)                                                    (0.014)   (0.014)
  Probabilities
  Individual Controls
  Risk Tolerance Score × Year FEs
  Observations                          2,141     2,141      2,142     2,142     2,196     2,196
  R-squared                             0.165     0.194      0.165     0.194     0.166     0.195


Notes: Dependent variable is the share of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index
of her local home-price appreciation (with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%).
In columns 1 to 2, the sample is restricted to homeowners with a positive home equity. In columns 3
and 4, net assets is defined as home equity plus liquid assets and minus personal debt. The sample
is restricted to households with positive assets. To reduce the effects of outliers, respondents with
(Home Value/Equity), (Home Value/Net Assets), and (Home Value/Income) in the top and bottom
1% of the distribution for those variables are dropped. The results for the full sample including
the outliers are similar to results for the trimmed sample. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                 72
                     Table A12: First Stage Estimates of Expected Returns
                  Dependent Variable: 1-year HPA Expectation
                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)

                  Perceived Past Returns        0.31***    0.27***    0.29***    0.23***
                                                 (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)
                  Forecasted Rent Growth        0.14***               0.14***
                                                 (0.02)                (0.02)
                  Forecasted Inflation          0.00***               0.00***
                                                 (0.00)                (0.00)
                  Lewbel Instrument                        0.03***               0.03***
                                                            (0.00)                (0.00)
                  Individual Controls
                  Partial F-statistic            43.40      98.23      49.37     108.98
                  Observations                   2,966      2,966      2,966      2,966


Notes: The Lewbel instrument is (E                  ^t [ri,t+1 ])2 as explained in Appendix D.3. For defini-
                                     ^t [ri,t+1 ] - E
tions of individual controls, see notes to Table A13. The partial F -statistic tests the hypothesis that
the coefficients on the instruments are jointly equal to zero. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                    73
            Table A13: Instrumental Variables Estimates of Investment Decisions
                    Dependent Variable: Housing Fund Share (on a 0-100 scale)

                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                OLS          2SLS          2SLS

                    Forecasted Returns         0.87***       0.23        -0.94**
                                               (0.14)       (0.65)        (0.43)
                    Perceived Past Returns     0.55***     0.73***       1.07***
                                               (0.11)       (0.23)        (0.17)
                    Individual Controls
                                                           E(Rent)
                    Instruments                                           Lewbel
                                                         E(Inflation)
                    First Stage F-stat                       70.86        505.6
                    Observations                2,963        2,963        2,963


Notes: Table reports OLS and IV estimates of investment decisions on the predicted values of
home price forecasts and the perceived past home price growth. Dependent variable is the share
of a $1,000 investment allocated by a respondent to an index of her local home-price appreciation
(with the remainder allocated to a savings account earning 2%). The instruments in column 2
are forecasted rent growth and forecasted inflation. The Lewbel instrument used in column 3 is
 ^t [ri,t+1 ] - E
(E              ^t [ri,t+1 ])2 , as explained in Appendix D.3. First-stage coefficients are reported in
Appendix Table A12. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significant at *p <0.10, **p <0.05,
***p <0.01.




                                                  74
