                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHAT DOES CODETERMINATION DO?

                                         Simon Jäger
                                         Shakked Noy
                                       Benjamin Schoefer

                                       Working Paper 28921
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28921


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Nelson Mesker for excellent research assistance and Tommy O'Donnell for help with
the draft. We thank Markus Helfen and Ewan McGaughey for helpful comments. Jäger
thanks the MIT Policy Lab for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Simon Jäger, Shakked Noy, and Benjamin Schoefer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Does Codetermination Do?
Simon Jäger, Shakked Noy, and Benjamin Schoefer
NBER Working Paper No. 28921
June 2021
JEL No. J08,K31,M1,M5

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide a comprehensive overview of codetermination, i.e., worker representation in firms'
governance and management. We cover the institution's history, implementation, and the best
available evidence on its economic impacts. We argue that existing quasiexperimental estimates
suggest that codetermination has zero or very small positive effects on worker and firm outcomes
at the partial-equilibrium firm level. In addition, we test for general-equilibrium effects of
codetermination laws using novel cross-country event studies exploiting a series of
codetermination reforms between the 1960s and 2010s, and find no evidence that codetermination
laws shift aggregate economic outcomes or the quality of industrial relations. We offer three
potential explanations of the institution's limited impact. First, existing codetermination laws
convey relatively little authority to workers. Second, countries with codetermination laws have
high baseline levels of informal worker involvement in decision-making, independently of formal
codetermination. Third, codetermination laws may interact with other labor market institutions,
such as union representation and collective bargaining. We close by discussing implications of
these facts for recent codetermination proposals in the United States.

Simon Jäger                                    Benjamin Schoefer
Department of Economics, E52-454               Department of Economics
MIT                                            University of California, Berkeley
77 Massachusetts Avenue                        530 Evans Hall #3880
Cambridge, MA 02139                            Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA                                        and NBER
and also NBER                                  schoefer@berkeley.edu
sjaeger@mit.edu

Shakked Noy
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02140
snoy@mit.edu
1     Introduction
Firms in the United States and other liberal market economies operate under a system of
"shareholder primacy." Shareholder primacy is a model of corporate governance under which
firms are ultimately controlled by their shareholders or owners, and are governed with the
exclusive objective of maximizing the welfare of those shareholders or owners. In the past
several years, amid rising inequality, a declining labor share, and growing evidence of the
importance of employer power in the labor market, interest in alternative systems of corporate
governance has risen rapidly. In particular, the European model of "codetermination," under
which ultimate control over firms is shared between shareholders and workers, has received
a great deal of attention. Since 2018, the U.S. Democratic Party, the British Labour and
Conservative Parties, and the Australian Labour Party have proposed or expressed interest in
codetermination legislation; prominent academics have called for a democratization of the
workplace; and even the U.S. Business Roundtable and World Economic Forum have publicly
distanced themselves from shareholder primacy. This paper contributes to the ongoing
debate by providing a comprehensive overview of the European model of codetermination,
covering its history, institutional implementation, the best available evidence on its economic
impacts, and potential explanations of its apparently limited effects.
   European codetermination originated in a series of shared governance agreements signed
by German unions and employer associations in 1918 and 1919, following a surge of post-war
worker mobilization and culminating in the landmark Works Council Act of 1920 (McGaughey,
2016). In the subsequent decades, labor movements across Europe began advocating for shared
governance, and codetermination arrangements were introduced through laws or collective
agreements in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden (Adler, 1922; Hurley, 1953;
Bjorheim, 1974; Knudsen, 2006; Votinius, 2012). From the 1950s onwards, another series of
codetermination laws passed in European countries expanded and codified workers' rights to
participate in firm governance, and established the board-level and shop-floor codetermination
arrangements that exist today (ETUI, 2020).
   Under board-level codetermination, workers are allocated a share of the seats on a
company's board, and thereby participate in high-level company decision-making (Jäger,
     In the United States, the Reward Work Act and Accountable Capitalism Act, proposed by Democratic senators in
2018, would require 33% or 40% of seats on the boards of large companies to be allocated to workers. In the United
Kingdom, the Conservative leader Theresa May called for worker representation on company boards during the
2016 election campaign (The Guardian, 11/12/16), and the Labour Party's platform in 2018 included a proposal
for 33% worker representation on the boards of companies with more than 250 workers (Reuters, 09/23/2018). In
2019, the Australian Labour Party said it was considering various codetermination proposals (Sydney Morning
Herald, 11/07/2019). Academics advocating codetermination include Anderson (2017), Ferreras (2017), Autor,
Mindell, and Reynolds (2019), Piketty (2020), and Fraser, Mouffe, Sassen, Müller, Rodrik, Piketty, Zucman,
Chang et al. (2020). The Business Roundtable and World Economic Forum issued statements in 2019 expressing
support for stakeholder governance (a system of corporate governance in which firms have an obligation to serve
non-shareholder stakeholders, such as workers).


                                                        1
Schoefer, and Heining, 2021). Meanwhile, under shop-floor codetermination, workers elect
establishment-level representatives who hold information, consultation, and sometimes co-
decision-making rights with respect to decisions about employment and working conditions
(Addison, 2009). Board-level and shop-floor codetermination laws are widespread in Europe
today, but absent in liberal market economies such as the United States, United Kingdom,
Australia, and New Zealand (Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016). Yet, surveys suggest
that workers in these liberal market economies would prefer a greater voice in workplace
governance (Bryson and Freeman, 2013; Kochan, Yang, Kimball, and Kelly, 2019; Hertel-
Fernandez, Kimball, and Kochan, 2020; Mazumder and Yan, 2020).
    A priori, codetermination laws could have dramatic positive or negative effects on both
worker and firm outcomes. Opponents of codetermination argue that shared governance leads
to "hold-up" problems that deter capital investment and cause production to stagnate, leaving
shareholders worse off as profits vanish, workers worse off as wages fall, and consumers
worse off as prices rise (Jensen and Meckling, 1979). Proponents of codetermination, on
the other hand, emphasize the ability of shared governance to improve worker outcomes
by correcting for imbalances of power between workers and employers (Frege and Godard,
2014; Anderson, 2017). Proponents also argue that codetermination improves productivity,
firm performance, and worker satisfaction by incentivizing worker investment in firm-specific
human capital and facilitating information sharing (Freeman and Lazear, 1995; FitzRoy and
Nolan, 2021). In the public discourse, much of the rhetoric from both proponents and
opponents of recent codetermination proposals has characterized the institution as radical
and transformative. Senator Elizabeth Warren's Accountable Capitalism Act, which included
moderate codetermination provisions, was hailed by some commentators as a plan aimed
at "ending inequality [...] and saving capitalism" (Yglesias, 2018), and decried by others as
"utterly bonkers" (Williamson, 2018) and "[a plan to] destroy capitalism" (Shackford, 2018).
    The best available evidence, which we review here, indicates that neither of these perspec-
tives accurately reflects the impacts of actually existing codetermination institutions. Modern
empirical studies that exploit quasi-random variation in firms' exposure to codetermination
conclude that both board-level and shop-floor codetermination have limited economic impacts
at the partial-equilibrium level. From workers' perspectives, the introduction of codetermina-
tion in an individual firm results in either zero or very small positive effects on wages; it may
slightly increase job security, possibly at the cost of reduced hiring; it does not appear to reduce
the rate of voluntary separations; and recent evidence suggests that the institution may mildly
improve subjective job quality. From the perspective of employers, firm-level introductions of
codetermination either do not affect or very slightly increase productivity, capital investment,
revenue, and firm survival. In addition, there is little evidence that employers attempt to
avoid codetermination requirements, and survey evidence suggests that European managers


                                                 2
and CEOs have generally neutral or positive views of shared governance. These latter pieces
of evidence provide further confirmation that codetermination is unlikely to substantially
worsen firm performance.
    The existing evidence we review consists entirely of microeconometric estimates of the
impacts of introducing codetermination in individual firms. These estimates leave open the
possibility that codetermination laws have general-equilibrium effects that cannot be picked
up by studies exploiting firm-level variation in codetermination. For example, competition in
product or factor markets may leave wages or amenities unresponsive to the implementation of
codetermination in a specific firm, but overall job quality may rise in all firms if codetermination
is imposed at the economy-wide level.
    To address this challenge, we complement our review of existing microeconometric
studies with novel evidence from country-level event studies, in the spirit of Acemoglu,
Naidu, Restrepo, and Robinson's (2019) analysis of the effects of democratization. Drawing
on historical datasets covering aggregate economic outcomes and the aggregate quality
of industrial relations, we estimate the country-level effects of a series of codetermination
reforms in Western European countries between the 1960s and 2010s using a cross-country
difference-in-differences framework with synthetic control groups. We find no evidence
that the introduction of codetermination laws affects wages, the labor share, productivity,
capital formation, GDP, income inequality, or the quality of industrial relations as proxied by
strikes, but find suggestive evidence for increases in the share of workers belonging to a union.
We therefore conclude that there is no evidence that codetermination's general-equilibrium
effects greatly exceed its small partial-equilibrium effects. However, we cannot entirely rule
out this possibility, due to the slightly imprecise estimates and inherent limitations of our
cross-country event study design, primarily the small sample size and the possible endogeneity
of codetermination reforms.
    We offer three potential explanations for the apparently limited impacts of actually existing
codetermination institutions. First, existing codetermination laws convey relatively little
authority to workers. Typically, workers are either granted a minority share of the seats on
their company's board, meaning they can always be overruled by unanimous shareholders,
or they are given the right to form a shop-floor representative body with few substantive
decision-making rights. Surveys and interviews confirm that worker representatives believe
they lack influence over most corporate decisions, with the exception of decisions about
immediate working conditions. Since codetermination laws do not dramatically reshape
existing authority structures, it is unsurprising that their effects are limited. It remains possible
that codetermination structures involving a more significant shift of power to labor--like
recent proposals for a bicameral model of firm governance where decisions would have to
pass through both shareholder-elected and worker-elected bodies (Ferreras, 2017; Fraser et al.,


                                                 3
2020)--would produce more dramatic effects. With the exception of one limited example we
review below (the German coal, steel, and mining industries, where firms with more than
1,000 employees must adopt full parity representation at the board level), these experiments
have not been attempted so far in any of the countries with codetermination laws.
    Second, European countries with codetermination laws have very high baseline levels
of informal worker consultation and involvement in decision-making, stemming from an
overall culture of cooperative industrial relations. Surveys suggest that in non-codetermined
firms, workers are informally involved in major decisions to almost the same extent as worker
representatives are in codetermined firms. This provides another reason why formal code-
termination may not meaningfully boost workers' influence, relative to the counterfactual.
Based on our analysis of strikes, these cooperative cultures do not appear to be a consequence
of the historical introduction of codetermination laws, though our evidence does not con-
clusively rule out this channel and suggests small aggregate increases in union density as a
consequence of codetermination laws. Rather, the qualitative historical evidence suggests
that codetermination laws were more likely to arise in countries with pre-existing cultures of
industrial democracy and social partnership between workers and businesses. Notably, this
explanation of codetermination's limited effects leaves open the possibility that introducing
codetermination laws in a context like the United States, with more hostile pre-existing
industrial relations, might have different impacts.
    Third, codetermination laws coexist with other important pro-worker institutions whose
influence may leave little room for codetermination to have an impact. European countries
with codetermination laws tend to also have centralized collective bargaining systems, high
rates of union representation, and extensive labor market regulations. These institutions may
already capture most of the low-hanging fruit when it comes to affecting worker outcomes,
leaving limited scope for codetermination to further shape outcomes. Of our three proposed
explanations, this is the most speculative, since the few existing empirical tests of this
hypothesis fail to corroborate it. Additionally, it is possible that these institutions are instead
complementary to codetermination, such that codetermination's effects would be even smaller
in their absence; for example, widespread worker organization through union membership
may be necessary for workers to fully take advantage of co-decision-making rights. In any
case, this explanation once again leaves room for codetermination to have different effects if
introduced in less regulated contexts, like the United States.
    Overall, we conclude that codetermination as currently instituted is a relatively weak
institution that has largely incremental impacts. Notably, codetermination proposals in the
United States and elsewhere typically suggest replicating the European arrangements of
    Studies that test for heterogeneity in the impacts of codetermination between contexts with higher versus
lower collective bargaining coverage fail to find larger impacts of codetermination in contexts with lower collective
bargaining coverage, as we describe in Section 6.3.


                                                         4
minority board-level representation or shop-floor representation. If codetermination's anemic
impacts are explained by an inherent lack of power conveyed by these arrangements, then
these codetermination proposals are likely to have similarly limited effects if implemented.
If, by contrast, institutional features of European labor markets--like highly cooperative
industrial relations, or extensive regulation--are responsible for codetermination's limited
effects, then recent American codetermination proposals could have more significant impacts,
either positive or negative. We close the paper with an extensive discussion of the implications
of these considerations for codetermination proposals in the United States.
    This paper focuses exclusively on the economic consequences of codetermination laws.
There is a long history of advocacy and activism for codetermination from a non-consequentialist
perspective, ranging from German invocations of democratic rights to justify workplace repre-
sentation (Addison, 2009) to modern work in political philosophy condemning the arbitrary
domination of workers by employers under systems of shareholder primacy and at-will
employment (Anderson, 2017). This paper does not speak to these non-consequentialist justi-
fications, and, if anything, the finding that codetermination has few economic consequences
leaves more room for non-consequentialist considerations to influence policy-making.

Outline The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we define codetermination,
briefly discuss the key theoretical arguments for and against codetermination, and describe
existing codetermination laws and their historical relationship with labor unions. Next, we
synthesize the existing empirical evidence on the impacts of codetermination, beginning
with worker outcomes in Section 3 and moving on to firm outcomes in Section 4. In
Section 5, we address the concern that existing partial-equilibrium estimates ignore potential
general-equilibrium impacts of codetermination laws, by contributing novel estimates of the
country-level effects of codetermination reforms using a cross-country event study design.
In Section 6, we build a comprehensive characterization of codetermination that we argue
accounts for its apparently limited effects. In Section 6.1, we consider power: we draw on
extensive qualitative evidence to argue that existing codetermination laws give workers
little power. In Section 6.2, we discuss the quality of industrial relations: we point to survey
evidence suggesting the existence of a powerful culture of informal workplace involvement
that operates independently of formal codetermination. In Section 6.3, we discuss institutions:
we consider whether the presence of powerful alternative pro-worker institutions explains
codetermination's limited impact. The latter two explanations draw on features of European
labor markets that are much less present in the United States, so in Section 7 we consider what
the European evidence implies for recent American codetermination proposals. Finally, in
Section 8, we conclude.




                                               5
2     What is Codetermination?

2.1   Shareholder Primacy versus Codetermination
Codetermination is a system of corporate governance that is best defined by contrast with its
main contemporary rival, "shareholder primacy." Under shareholder primacy, the day-to-day
operations of a firm are controlled by managers, who are appointed by the firm's shareholders
or owners and are charged exclusively with maximizing the welfare of those shareholders or
owners. Typically, this is understood to mean maximizing long-term profits and ultimately
dividend payouts. By contrast, under codetermination, managers and workers share control
over the day-to-day governance of a firm, and the ultimate purpose of a firm is to serve the
interests of both its shareholders and workers. Figure 1 visualizes the differences between
shareholder primacy and codetermination.
    Shareholder primacy, understood as the idea that firms should be governed with the
exclusive purpose of maximizing the returns of shareholders or owners, is not enshrined in
United States law. Rather, it is an academic legal doctrine that has been intellectually and
culturally dominant since its popularization in the 1970s and 1980s by Milton Friedman (1970)
and others (Posner, 2019). However, United States corporate law has allocated exclusive discre-
tion over the governance of firms to managers and shareholders since the early 20th century
(Millon, 2013), and workers have been specifically banned from participating cooperatively in
corporate governance since the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (Strine Jr., Kovvali, and
Williams, 2021).

Arguments for Shareholder Primacy Shareholder primacy's intellectual dominance has
been so extreme that in 2000, a pair of Yale and Harvard law professors declared that the view
no longer has any "serious competitors" (Hansmann and Kraakman, 2000). This dominance
has in part been the result of several influential theoretical arguments for shareholder primacy
(originating from the powerful Friedman, 1970, doctrine). Proponents of shareholder primacy
argue that, as a firm's "residual claimants," shareholders or owners are the only actors properly
incentivized to grow the value of the firm, and therefore giving them control over corporate
governance creates the right conditions for economic growth (Hansmann and Kraakman,
2000). In addition, a firm's residual claimants are the only actors whose rights cannot be
adequately protected by contract (since they are entitled to the profits that remain when all of
a firm's contractual obligations have been discharged), so the only way to protect shareholders'
or owners' rights to the fruits of their investment is to give them control of the firm (Hansmann
and Kraakman, 2000; Stout, 2002). In particular, supporters of shareholder primacy warn
that involving workers in corporate governance leads to "hold-up" problems that reduce
capital investment and leave everyone worse off (Jensen and Meckling, 1979). Essentially,


                                               6
Jensen and Meckling's (1979) argument is that in the presence of codetermination, potential
investors in a firm know that once the benefits of their investment are realized, workers can
capture a significant share of the increase in surplus for themselves by increasing their own
compensation. Knowledge of this fact deters investment, leaving both investors and workers
worse off as capital investment stagnates:

     [T]he workers will begin 'eating [the firm] up' by transforming the assets of the
     firm into consumption or personal assets. [...] It will become difficult for the firm
     to obtain capital in the private capital markets. [...] The result of this process will
     be a significant reduction in the country's capital stock, increased unemployment,
     reduced labor income, and an overall reduction in output and welfare. (Jensen
     and Meckling, 1979, p.504)

Arguments for Codetermination In contrast, proponents of codetermination offer a number
of theoretical arguments in favor of shared governance. First, codetermination is one possible
antidote for power imbalances between workers and employers that arise in imperfectly
competitive labor markets. According to this view, empowering workers within firms'
governance structures can prevent exploitation, abuse, and underpayment of workers (Frege
and Godard, 2014; Anderson, 2017). This argument complements a broader tradition in labor
economics and industrial relations that highlights the importance of institutional factors,
such as worker representation, in determining wages and other aspects of worker outcomes
(Osterman, 2011; Stansbury and Summers, 2020). Second, proponents of codetermination
argue that shared governance improves productivity by fixing problems arising from the
importance of implicit contracts and investment in firm-specific human capital (Malcomson,
1983; Furubotn, 1988; Smith, 1991; Freeman and Lazear, 1995; Strine Jr., 2002). In an influential
class of models, asymmetric information or limitations on contracting force firms to rely on
implicit promises of future promotions and pay rises in order to encourage workers to expend
effort or develop their firm-specific skills (see, e.g., Lazear, 1979; Carmichael, 1983). Under
shareholder primacy, workers have no guarantee that firms will not renege on these implicit
promises, leading to a potential hold-up problem that discourages effort and investment in
skills, making both sides worse off. Codetermination can help make these implicit promises
credible, exactly because workers are involved in decision-making. Third, supporters of
codetermination argue that it facilitates and incentivizes information-sharing, which can
improve both worker satisfaction and firm performance (Hirschman, 1970; Freeman and
Lazear, 1995).
    Proponents of codetermination also offer theoretical retorts to a key challenge posed
by advocates of the shareholder primacy view: since profit-maximizing firms appear not
to voluntarily adopt codetermination in settings where it is not legally mandated, it must


                                               7
not be a surplus-maximizing institution and can only be implemented by fiat (Jensen and
Meckling, 1979). Defenders of codetermination reply that employers would not voluntarily
give up power that lets them extract rents from workers even if doing so increased the size
of the pie (Freeman and Lazear, 1995), and that "prisoner's dilemma" dynamics can prevent
firms from unilaterally adopting codetermination even if an economy-wide imposition of the
institution would be socially beneficial. Finally, as we describe in Section 7, the National
Labor Relations Act imposes stark limits on codetermination in the United States. The
absence of voluntarily adopted codetermination arrangements therefore does not support the
Panglossian conclusions by Jensen and Meckling (1979) in favor of shareholder primacy, at
least in the United States. (Turning their argument on its head, one might jokingly contend
that shareholder primacy can only be implemented by fiat.)


2.2    Codetermination Laws
Codetermination is most widely practiced in Europe, where many countries have passed
codetermination laws that apply to firms above certain size thresholds. These laws typically
require covered firms to adopt, or give their workers the right to demand, board-level worker
representation, shop-floor worker representation, or both.

Board-Level Representation Under board-level representation, a certain share of seats on a
company's board (usually 20-40%) are allocated to worker-elected representatives (Conchon,
2011). These representatives are given the same rights as other members of the board, meaning
that workers receive a say on all issues that come before a company's board, with the exception
of issues that constitute a direct conflict of interest. For example, in Sweden, board-level
representatives must recuse themselves from decisions about collective bargaining or industrial
action, as stipulated in Section 14 of the Board Representation (Private Sector Employees) Act.
    Board-level representation laws are virtually unique to Europe--as Figure 2 illustrates,
using data from the CBR Labor Regulation Index (Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016), only five
countries outside of the continent have such laws. Additionally, board-level representation
requirements typically apply only to large firms; for example, in Germany, only companies
with more than 500 employees must have worker representation on their boards (see Jäger,
    For example, Levine and Tyson (1990) point out that codetermination can lead to within-firm wage
compression that causes talented workers to leave for non-codetermined firms that offer higher wages (see
also Acemoglu, Aghion, and Violante, 2001, for a related argument regarding unions). Burdín (2016) provides
some empirical support for this claim. More broadly, Levine and Tyson argue that markets might have multiple
equilibria ­ codetermined and non-codetermined equilibria ­ and firms in a non-codetermined equilibrium
cannot unilaterally initiate a shift to the codetermined equilibrium. Hayden and Bodie (2021) argue that the
adoption of codetermination can send a negative signal to the stock market about the state of a firm's labor
relations, causing its stock price to crash. All of these dynamics might prevent unilateral voluntary adoption of
codetermination even if codetermination would be socially beneficial when imposed on all firms.



                                                       8
Schoefer, and Heining, 2021, for exceptions where codetermination is mandated in smaller
firms).
    Almost all board-level representation laws grant workers a minority position on the board.
The notable exception is Germany: while German firms with between 500 and 2,000 employees
must allocate only 33% of board seats to workers, firms with over 2,000 employees are subject
to "quasi-parity" representation, meaning that 50% of seats go to workers, but shareholders
receive a tie-breaking vote. For historical reasons going back to the introduction of board-level
codetermination in the aftermath of World War II, firms with more than 1,000 employees in
the mining, coal, and steel sectors are subject to full parity representation, where workers
receive 50% of seats and shareholders are not given a casting vote (Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining,
2021). The introduction of parity codetermination in these sectors has its roots in the desire
of the post-war occupying powers to limit the influence of Nazi-affiliated industry leaders
by imposing strong power-sharing requirements (Paster, 2012; McGaughey, 2016). Aside
from this unique setting, full parity has not been implemented in other sectors; in fact, even
quasi-parity for very large firms is unique to Germany.

Shop-Floor Representation Under shop-floor representation, elected shop-floor worker
representatives are given information, consultation, and sometimes co-decision-making
rights over questions of working conditions. Shop-floor representation laws are much more
widespread outside of Europe than board-level representation laws, as Figure 3 illustrates,
again using CBR Labor Regulation Index data. In addition, shop-floor representation laws
usually have lower size thresholds (for example, in Germany, shop-floor representation rights
apply to any establishment with 5 or more workers; Addison, 2009).
    Shop-floor representation laws vary in the formal authority they give to workers. Employers
are usually required to inform and consult shop-floor representatives in advance about
decisions regarding working hours, working conditions, or the recruitment, transfer, or
dismissal of employees (Aumayr, Stavroula, Foden, Scepanovics, and Wolf, 2011). These
information and consultation requirements do not convey any substantive authority to workers,
though they may put some implicit pressure on employers to reach a consensus with workers.
    Some countries additionally give shop-floor representatives the right to appeal to an
employment court if their advice is ignored; the employer's decision can then be overturned
by the court, though usually the grounds for overturning a decision are very narrow. For
example, Dutch shop-floor representatives have a right to provide advice on all major strategic
decisions, and if their advice is ignored they can appeal to the Enterprise Chamber of the
Amsterdam Court; however, the Court typically overturns only obviously negligent employer
decisions (Eurofound, 1997).
    Finally, a small number of countries grant shop-floor representatives co-decision-making
powers. For example, in Germany, shop-floor representatives have a right to participate

                                               9
in decisions about working hours, leave arrangements, the introduction of productivity-
monitoring technology, and performance-related pay (Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 2001).
In addition, German shop-floor representatives can veto "unwarranted" dismissals of staff, in
which case the firm must bring a case to a labor court if they wish to override the veto (as
determined in the Works Constitution Act). German shop-floor representatives also serve as the
bargaining party representing workers in establishment- or firm-level negotiations, including
over wages, when opening clauses allow for local deviations from collective bargaining
agreements. Austrian shop-floor representatives have co-decision-making rights in the areas
of working hours and disciplinary procedures (Aumayr, Stavroula, Foden, Scepanovics,
and Wolf, 2011). In the Netherlands, most changes to workplace regulations (for example,
changes to pension schemes, or hours/leave arrangements) must be approved by shop-floor
representatives (ETUI, 2020).
    Figure 4 maps the statutory powers of shop-floor representatives in European countries,
based on data from the OECD/AIAS ICTWSS database (Visser, 2021). Only Germany, Austria,
the Netherlands, and Sweden give shop-floor representatives co-decision-making powers;
the other Western European countries, with the exception of the United Kingdom, give
shop-floor representatives information and consultation rights with a possibility of judicial
redress. Elsewhere in Europe, shop-floor representatives are limited to just information and
consultation rights, or no right to shop-floor representation exists at all.

Mandates versus Rights Codetermination laws can be formulated either as a mandate,
requiring all covered firms to adopt codetermination, or a right for workers in covered firms to
take up codetermination. For example, board-level representation is a mandate in Germany
(Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, 2021) but a right in Finland (Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021),
and shop-floor representation is a right even in Germany (Addison, 2009).
    When codetermination laws are formulated as a right, take-up of codetermination among
covered firms is usually widespread but not universal. For example, across Denmark, Norway,
and Sweden, workers in about 53% of covered firms take up their right to board-level
representation (Gregoric and Rapp, 2019); in Finland, workers in about 15% of covered firms
take up formal board-level representation, and in a further 40% of covered firms workers
negotiate alternative forms of representation as permitted by Finland's codetermination law
(Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021); finally, in Germany, workers in about 20% of covered
establishments set up shop-floor representation (Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 1997). Firms
that take up codetermination tend to be larger and older than firms that do not (Fitzroy and
Kraft, 1987; Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 1997; Gregoric and Rapp, 2019). Additionally,
workers become more likely to take up codetermination rights following events that threaten
their job security, like recessions or changes in ownership (Kraft and Lang, 2008; Jirjahn, 2009;
Mohrenweiser, Marginson, and Backes-Gellner, 2011).

                                               10
2.3    Unions and Codetermination
Codetermination is a system of cooperative co-governance between employers and worker
representatives that contrasts with adversarial collective bargaining between employers and
labor unions. Unions and codetermination have a complex relationship, both presently and
historically.

Positive Correlation Between Union Strength and Codetermination As Panels (a) and (b)
of Figure 5 show, drawing on data from the OECD/IAIS ICTWSS dataset (Visser, 2021),
countries with codetermination laws tend also to have high union density and strong collective
bargaining frameworks, a point to which we return in Section 6.3. This positive correlation
between codetermination and union strength is likely explained by a couple of factors. First,
countries with a disposition towards giving workers power may tend to both empower unions
and implement codetermination laws. Second, as we now describe, unions have historically
played a major role in advocating or bargaining for codetermination.

Unions and Codetermination: a Fraught Historical Relationship In Denmark, Sweden,
Norway, and Germany, codetermination requirements initially arose not through legislation,
but through large-scale collective agreements negotiated between unions and employer asso-
ciations (Knudsen, 2006; Votinius, 2012; Bjorheim, 1974; McGaughey, 2016). Codetermination
in Sweden, for example, originated in the 1938 Saltsjöbaden Agreement, where unions and
employer associations agreed to limit their use of adversarial industrial action and instead
work cooperatively towards mutually agreeable solutions. This Agreement was followed up
by a 1946 Agreement establishing widespread shop-floor worker representation. The 1946
Agreement held until the 1970s, when the social compact between unions and employers
began to break down in the face of economic turmoil. At this point, Swedish unions began
lobbying the Swedish legislature for formal codetermination laws, efforts which culminated
in the 1976 Co-determination Act (Wheeler, 2002; Votinius, 2012).
    However, codetermination laws have also at times faced fierce opposition from unions and
labor groups, who have sometimes viewed the laws as corporatist compromises or attempts to
undermine the labor movement (McGaughey, 2018). For example, throughout the first half of
the 20th century, Norwegian unions were internally split on whether to support or oppose
codetermination. As Bjorheim (1974) writes:

      A committee on socialization set up by the Joint Committee of the Labour Party and
      Trade Union organization had in 1919 even opposed workers' representation on
    After World War II, Norwegian unions decided to advocate for codetermination, and shop-floor representation
requirements were established by a 1966 Co-operation Agreement between unions and employer associations.
This was followed up by 1973 legislation introducing board-level worker representation in Norwegian firms with
30 or more employees (Bjorheim, 1974).

                                                     11
     the boards of companies, arguing that the aim of the private capitalistic company
     is to make profit for the owners at the cost of the consumers. In the board of such
     a company the worker representative will very easily become co-responsible for
     the system he is fighting against. He will also easily become morally responsible
     for the company's management, without having a corresponding opportunity to
     exercise influence over it. (Bjorheim, 1974, p.6)

This aversion to direct cooperation with employers, and preference for adversarial industrial
action, was echoed in the 1970s by the prominent American union leader Lane Kirkland, who
reacted to codetermination proposals by declaring that:

     [The American worker] is smart enough to know, in his bones, that salvation
     lies--not in reshuffling the chairs in the boardroom or executive suite--but in the
     growing strength and bargaining power of his own autonomous organizations.
     (As quoted in Summers, 1982, p.155)

The history of German codetermination exemplifies the oft-complex relationship between
codetermination and labor unions. In Germany, the world's first codetermination law arose
in 1920 out of industry-level codetermination agreements negotiated between unions and
employer associations in 1918 and 1919 (McGaughey, 2016). However, the draft legislation was
viewed by revolutionary labor groups as an unacceptably conciliatory compromise between
their demands and the interests of employer associations, and the law's introduction was
accompanied by a bloody demonstration in front of the Reichstag involving 100,000 workers
(Weipert, 2012). Similarly, German labor groups opposed the 1952 law introducing shop-floor
representation in its present form, out of fear that it would weaken the labor movement (Thelen,
1991). In 1976, Germany introduced a law increasing the share of worker representatives on
the boards of large companies from 33% to 50%. This expansion was advanced and supported
by labor groups, but heavily opposed by German employer associations (Höpner, 2004).
    The frequent perception among labor groups that codetermination laws are insufficiently
radical is rooted in the political history of codetermination legislation. Most existing code-
termination laws, rather than being radical leftist policy victories, arose out of negotiated
compromises between left-wing and right-wing groups. This is true of the introduction of
codetermination laws in Denmark (Rose, 2008), France (Moss, 1988), Finland (Harju, Jäger,
and Schoefer, 2021), and Germany (Paster, 2012).

Conclusion Overall, despite a fraught historical relationship, virtually all modern codeter-
mination laws exist in countries with strong and widespread union representation. As we
discuss in Section 6.3, this may mean that existing evidence on the effects of codetermination
cannot be straightforwardly translated to settings like the United States, where private-sector

                                              12
unions have become weak over time. This context should be kept in mind as we move on to
reviewing the empirical evidence on the impacts of codetermination.


3    Job Quality: Do Workers Benefit from Codetermination?
Having reviewed the nature and history of codetermination, we now ask whether the available
evidence suggests that the institution improves worker welfare. This question is of major
interest for two reasons. First, one of the primary motivations for codetermination laws is their
purported ability to boost worker power and thereby prevent mistreatment or exploitation
of workers. In particular, a longstanding body of work in labor economics emphasizes
the importance of institutional factors in shaping worker outcomes (e.g. Osterman, 2011;
Stansbury and Summers, 2020). Systems of worker representation--like union representation
or codetermination--are a major focus of this body of work. For example, Stansbury and
Summers (2020) write that:

     [...] eliminating all sources of market power may not be feasible. Instead, if increases
     in the labor share are to be achieved, institutional changes that enhance workers'
     countervailing power--such as strengthening labor unions or promoting corporate
     governance arrangements that increase worker power--may be necessary (but
     would need to be carefully considered in light of the possible risks of increasing
     unemployment). (Stansbury and Summers, 2020, p.7)

And Piketty (2020) argues that:

     [Codetermination] has been one of the most highly developed and durable means of
     institutionalizing the new balance of power between workers and capital. (Piketty,
     2020, p.500)

Second, understanding codetermination's effects on worker outcomes is key to understanding
the institution's effects on firm performance and broader economic outcomes. For example,
the "hold-up" hypothesis described in Section 2 claimed that codetermination worsens firm
performance and slows economic growth by increasing the share of rents captured by workers.
Checking whether codetermination indeed increases rent-sharing with workers therefore
helps us understand its broader economic effects.
    Our overall conclusion in this section is that the existing empirical evidence points to
nonexistent or very small positive effects of codetermination on key proxies for worker welfare,
including wages, rent-sharing, voluntary and involuntary separations, health, and subjective
job quality.



                                               13
3.1    Sources of Evidence
There is a large literature studying the effects of firm-level variation in codetermination on
worker outcomes, consisting mostly of studies from the 1980s to 2000s examining German
codetermination (see Conchon, 2011, for a summary of studies of German board-level repre-
sentation and Addison, 2009, for a summary of studies of German shop-floor representation).
These studies estimate the impacts of codetermination by comparing the outcomes of workers
in firms with versus without codetermination, or in industries subject to more stringent versus
less stringent codetermination requirements, controlling for the influence of confounding
variables.
     In our view, the ideal research design to study the causal effects of codetermination would
be an experiment that randomly imposes codetermination in some firms (or some economies)
but not in others. We particularly draw on two studies that use "natural experiments" to
approximate this ideal design, by exploiting the introduction or repeal of the institution in
some firms along with large micro data sets on individual firms and workers. First, Jäger,
Schoefer, and Heining (2021) study the 1994 abolition of minority board-level representation
requirements in new shareholder corporations in Germany. Second, Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer
(2021) estimate the impacts of a 1990 introduction of minority board-level representation
rights in Finnish firms with 150 or more employees, and a 2008 expansion of shop-floor
representation rights to Finnish firms with between 20 and 30 employees. Both of these studies
exploit the selective coverage of the codetermination reforms, and compare the outcomes of
firms covered by the reforms to the outcomes of observably similar firms not covered by the
reforms in a difference-in-differences framework. In forming our conclusions from the existing
body of evidence, we place heavier weight on research designs we judge to more credibly
approximate the ideal laboratory experiment, like these reform-based difference-in-differences
studies. Additional work aiming to approximate the ideal experiment includes regression
discontinuity designs exploiting sharp variation of firms above and below the relevant
employment thresholds (see, e.g., Gorton and Schmid, 2004; Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2019;
Blandhol, Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad, 2020) and event studies of specific firms adopting
shop-floor or board-level codetermination (see, e.g., Mueller and Stegmaier, 2017; Blandhol,
Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad, 2020). These designs require different (plausibly stronger)
identification assumptions compared to reform-based difference-in-differences designs (for
a discussion, see Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021), although we view them as considerably
more compelling than the rich literature comparing firms with and without codetermination.
    For instance the regression discontinuity designs require the assumption that firms do not strategically
affect their size to evade or seek codetermination (even if codetermination had large effects). The event study
designs require the assumption that firms' decision to adopt codetermination is unrelated to panel variation in
the outcome variables. The reform-based difference-in-differences designs, by contrast, require the assumption
of parallel trends in outcomes of the treatment and control groups absent the reform, and the absence of



                                                      14
   The existing literature consists almost entirely of microeconometric studies that examine
variation in codetermination at the firm level. With the exception of a few industry-level studies
(Svejnar, 1981; Benelli, Loderer, and Lys, 1987), the existing body of evidence cannot speak to
the general-equilibrium effects of codetermination laws. To fill this gap, after reviewing the
existing microeconometric evidence on codetermination in this section and in Section 4, we
contribute novel estimates of the country-level impacts of codetermination laws in Section 5,
using cross-country event studies.


3.2    Impacts on Worker Outcomes
Wages and Rent-Sharing While most codetermination laws do not permit worker represen-
tatives to participate directly in wage setting (with wage negotiations being left to unions),
codetermination might indirectly increase wages by expanding workers' influence and thereby
boosting their bargaining power. It might also decrease wages by worsening firm performance
and reducing the size of the pie that is divided between workers and employers. Recent
studies find either no effects, or small positive effects, of minority board-level representation
and shop-floor representation on wages and the sharing of profits with workers. The evidence
on the wage effects of quasi-parity or parity board-level representation is less clear; two studies
find moderate effects on wages, but in opposite directions.
    In the German context, Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (2021) estimate that minority board-
level representation increases composition-adjusted wages by around 1.1%, and are unable
to rule out zero effects (the 95% confidence interval extends from -1.8% to 4%). They also
find no effect on the degree to which rents are shared with workers. Evidence from the
Nordic countries shows similarly limited effects of minority board-level representation on
wages. Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) find that Finnish board-level representation increases
composition-adjusted wages by about 1.6% on average (with a 95% confidence interval from
-0.2% to 3.4%). They find some suggestive evidence of pay compression, with small wage
gains concentrated among the bottom deciles of workers, and find no evidence of increased
rent-sharing with workers. A recent paper by Blandhol, Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad
(2020) studies the Norwegian context, and finds small or zero wage effects from board-level
representation using event study designs and regression discontinuity approaches.
    Shop-floor representation appears to have similarly limited wage effects. Keskinen (2017)
and Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) study a 2008 Finnish reform that extended shop-floor
representation requirements to firms with between 20 and 30 employees, and find no evidence
that the reform affected average wages in those firms. This is broadly consistent with an older
literature on German shop-floor representation, which has produced mixed results, with some
studies finding no effect on wages (Fitzroy and Kraft, 1985) and some studies finding positive
group-specific time-varying shocks confounding the variation induced by the reform.


                                                    15
effects (Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner, 2001; see Addison, Teixeira, and Zwick, 2010, for a
full overview of this literature).
    An interesting open question is whether quasi-parity and parity board-level representation
requirements, which apply to very large German firms and mandate that 50% of board seats be
allocated to workers, have more noticeable effects on wages. Kim, Maug, and Schneider (2019)
find that, compared to firms with 33% board-level representation, workers in firms subject to
quasi-parity representation earn on average 3.3% lower wages but are more insulated from
layoffs during economic downturns. The authors interpret this as an insurance arrangement
where workers in quasi-parity firms agree to earn slightly lower wages in exchange for greater
job security. Meanwhile, Svejnar (1981) studies the 1951 introduction of parity codetermination
in the German iron, steel, and mining sectors. Compared to other German sectors, he finds
wage increases of 5-6% in the iron and steel sectors and no wage effect in the mining sector.
Overall, we judge that the evidence is still inconclusive on the wage effects of quasi-parity or
parity codetermination, but existing studies leave open the possibility that these institutions
have larger effects than minority board-level or shop-floor representation.

Separations and Job Security Codetermination could plausibly reduce both voluntary
and involuntary separations. On the voluntary side, a key prediction of the "exit-voice"
framework developed by Hirschman (1970) is that giving dissatisfied workers an avenue
to change their firm from within will reduce their probability of quitting. Additionally, if
codetermination increases job quality, then we should observe fewer workers voluntarily
leaving codetermined firms. On the involuntary side, worker representatives will plausibly
strive to protect incumbent workers by advocating against layoffs.
    The existing literature suggests small, if any, effects of codetermination on the rate of
voluntary separations. Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (2021) find no effect of German mi-
nority board-level representation on the overall rate of separations, and Harju, Jäger, and
Schoefer (2021) find no effect of Finnish minority board-level representation on employment-
to-employment separations (which they use as a proxy for voluntary separations). Addison,
Schnabel, and Wagner (2001) find, by contrast, that German firms with shop-floor representa-
tion have lower rates of voluntary quits.
    There is stronger evidence that codetermination reduces the frequency of involuntary
separations. Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) find that Finnish board-level representation
causes a 2 percentage point decline in the frequency of separations into nonemployment,
which they use as a proxy for involutary layoffs. In addition, as previously mentioned, Kim,
Maug, and Schneider (2019) find that workers in German firms with quasi-parity board-level
representation are protected from layoffs in exchange for earning lower wages. Addison,
    Under quasi-parity codetermination, shareholders are given a casting vote, and under parity codetermination
they are not.


                                                      16
Schnabel, and Wagner (2001) find that German shop-floor representation is associated with
lower rates of dismissals as well as voluntary quits.
    One reason why codetermination might reduce involuntary layoffs is that shared gover-
nance could enable firms to adjust wages more flexibly in response to crises. In recessions,
firms can stabilize employment by lowering wages. However, in reality, firms tend to exhibit
downward wage rigidity (an unwillingness to lower wages), so economic downturns cause
layoffs and create unemployment (for a review, see Bewley, 2002). There is some evidence that
codetermined firms exhibit less downward wage rigidity than non-codetermined firms, and
are therefore better able to retain their employees during recessions. For example, Burdín
and Dean (2009) show that Uruguayan worker-managed firms are more likely than traditional
capitalist firms to adjust wages downwards in the face of macroeconomic shocks, and as a
result are less likely to reduce employment; Gregoric and Rapp (2019) find similar results
for Nordic firms with board-level worker representatives. Consistent with the "insurance
arrangement" results of Kim, Maug, and Schneider (2019), Rehder (2003) provides evidence
on employment pacts negotiated between German firms and shop-floor representatives that
preserve employment during crises in exchange for reductions in pay or hours. Codetermined
firms may be more able to adjust wages downwards because a seat at the table allows workers
to verify that the economic conditions genuinely necessitate wage cuts, thereby overcoming
concerns that firms may opportunistically restructure or reduce wages.
    If codetermination increases the job security of incumbent workers and causes them
to become more entrenched, this might reduce the hiring rate of codetermined firms, in
a standard insider-outsider mechanism (Lindbeck and Snower, 1989). Indeed, there is
evidence that shop-floor representation causes Finnish and German firms to reduce their
hiring rates (Keskinen, 2017; Gralla and Kraft, 2018). However, there is also evidence in the
opposite direction; Jirjahn (2010) finds that German shop-floor representation is associated
with higher employment growth, and Burdín and Dean (2012) show that worker-managed
firms in Uruguay do tend to prioritize employment growth, rather than merely maximising
the utility of incumbent workers (as many models of codetermination, perhaps uncharitably,
assume).

Health, Subjective Wellbeing, and Other Difficult-to-Observe Outcomes The empirical
literature obviously focuses on studying outcomes that are observable in commonly available
datasets, like wages or separations. However, proponents of codetermination often argue
    For example, Jensen and Meckling (1979, p.484) argue that labor-managed firms fail to make socially beneficial
investments because "New employees acquire the same claims on cash flows as those already employed by the
firm. This means that whenever investment is accompanied by additional labor old workers have to share with
new workers the anticipated cash flows from past investments. Thus, the expectation that a new project will
generate cash flows which have a positive present value to the firm will not be sufficient to induce the current
workers to undertake that project."


                                                       17
that shared governance is beneficial because it helps prevent abuse and mistreatment of
workers and improves workplace health and safety (Anderson, 2017). These outcomes are
difficult to measure and observe in standard data, but researchers can proxy for them using
data on sickness leaves and subjective job quality. Moreover, voluntary separations, which
we discussed above, are considered a standard revealed-preference catch-all measure of the
relative attractiveness of an employer.
     Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) find that both Finnish board-level and shop-floor
representation do not affect the frequency of sickness leaves, suggesting that codetermination
does not noticeably improve worker health and safety. However, they do find positive effects of
both types of codetermination on subjective job quality, by merging their sample of firms with
a unique Finnish job quality survey, suggesting that codetermination does improve aspects of
job quality that may be hard to measure with wage or separations data.
     There is also some evidence that codetermination improves the quality of workplace
amenities. For example, Heywood and Jirjahn (2009) and Burdín and Pérotin (2019) find that
the presence of shop-floor representation in a firm is associated with a greater availability of
family-friendly practices like flexible working arrangements, parental leave, and childcare
provision.
     Overall, there is some evidence that codetermination improves difficult-to-measure aspects
of job quality, but the literature in this area is sparse. More evidence is necessary before we
can confidently conclude that codetermination improves non-pecuniary aspects of job quality,
and to what extent.

Conclusion The existing microeconometric evidence suggests that codetermination has zero
or small positive effects on proxies for worker welfare. Codetermination has, at most, small
positive impacts on wages; it does not reduce the rate of voluntary separations or improve
worker health; it does seem to slightly reduce the rate of involuntary dismissals, though this
may be accompanied by a reduction in hiring; and some suggestive and limited evidence may
point towards increases in subjective job quality.


4    Firm Performance: Do Shareholders Suffer (or Benefit) from
     Codetermination?
We now discuss evidence on the effects of codetermination on firm-level outcomes, like
firm survival, productivity, revenue, and investment. This evidence is of interest for two
reasons. First, empirical evidence can help us adjudicate between the conflicting theoretical
predictions about codetermination's impacts on firm performance. Some of the theoretical
arguments discussed in Section 2 emphasized the purported negative effects of the institution

                                              18
on firm performance via hold-up problems or distortion of incentives, while other arguments
suggested that codetermination can improve firm performance by improving information
flows and increasing workers' effort and investment in human capital. Second, in addition to
affecting shareholders, codetermination's impacts on firm performance affect workers and
consumers (by modifying the size of the pie that is divided between workers and shareholders,
and by affecting prices and the broader economy).
    Overall, existing microeconometric estimates indicate that codetermination has no effects
or slight positive effects on a variety of measures of firm performance. In addition, firms do
not try to evade codetermination laws by adjusting their size, providing revealed-preference
evidence that codetermination does not substantially harm firm performance. Finally, survey
evidence shows that managers and executive directors tend to have neutral or positive views
of codetermination.


4.1    Impacts on Firm-Level Outcomes
Microeconometric Evidence Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (2021) and Harju, Jäger, and
Schoefer (2021) use reform-based difference-in-differences strategies to study the effects of
German and Finnish minority board-level representation on firm performance, and find zero or
small positive effects. Specifically, Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (2021) find a slight increase in
productivity, slightly larger capital stocks, and no reductions in revenue as a result of minority
board-level representation. Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) study a more comprehensive set
of outcomes, and find slight positive effects on firm survival, labor productivity, and capital
intensity, and no effects on profitability.
    These findings are consistent with the older, mostly correlational, literature on German
board-level representation, which produces mixed estimates that are generally close to zero.
For example, of the 30 studies of board-level representation surveyed by Conchon (2011), 10
find a positive effect on firm performance, 11 find no effect, and 9 find a negative effect.
    Shop-floor representation has similarly small effects on firm performance. Keskinen (2017)
and Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) find no effects on firm performance of Finnish shop-floor
representation. Older literature on German shop-floor representation finds mixed results,
with some studies suggesting positive effects on firm performance, others suggesting no effects
or mixed effects, and others suggesting negative effects; see Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner
(2004) and Addison (2009) for reviews of this literature.
    A few of these studies have used event study or regression discontinuity designs to analyze effects, e.g., on
stock market valuations. For example, Gorton and Schmid (2004) document a negative effect on stock market
valuation comparing firms above and below the 2,000 employee cutoff, i.e. comparing firms with one-third vs.
quasi-parity representation. By contrast, Baums and Frick (1998) find no effect on stock market valuation using
an event study methodology of court decisions regarding codetermination in individual firms (similarly, Bermig
and Frick, 2010, find no effect on firm performance or valuation controlling for firm fixed effects).



                                                      19
Revealed-Preference Evidence In many settings, codetermination requirements can be
avoided by firms determined to do so. First, codetermination laws typically apply only to
firms above a certain size threshold, meaning that firms slightly above the threshold can evade
the law by reducing their size or reporting their employment count in a way that puts them
just below the threshold. Second, as we discussed in Section 2, many codetermination laws
give workers a right to codetermination that they can voluntarily take up. Standard Coasean
bargaining frameworks predict that if codetermination worsens firm performance and thereby
reduces overall surplus, employers will bargain or pressure workers into not taking up their
right to codetermine.
     Despite firms' ability to avoid codetermination by, e.g., outsourcing employment or shifting
their organizational structure, systematic studies have found no empirical evidence that
firms manipulate their size in order to avoid codetermination requirements. For example,
Lin, Schmid, and Xuan (2018), Kim, Maug, and Schneider (2019), Redeker (2019), Blandhol,
Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad (2020), Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (2021), and Harju, Jäger,
and Schoefer (2021) plot the distributions of firm sizes in their samples, covering firms
in Germany, Norway, and Finland, and find no evidence that firms bunch just below the
relevant size thresholds. Given evidence that firm size does respond to other size-dependent
policies that impose costs (see, e.g., Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen, 2016), these facts
provide revealed-preference evidence that codetermination does not substantially harm firm
performance, at least among firms within a narrow range around the size thresholds.
     The evidence on take-up of codetermination in contexts where it is a right (rather than
a mandate) is less conclusive. As we mentioned in Section 2, usually workers in about 50%
of firms subject to codetermination rights end up taking up their statutory rights (Addison,
Schnabel, and Wagner, 1997; Gregoric and Rapp, 2019; Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021).
The Coasean bargaining framework suggests that, at least in those firms, codetermination
does not substantially harm firm performance. These 50% of covered firms account for a
disproportionate share of total employment, since, among firms large enough to be subject
to codetermination rights, firm size is positively correlated with take-up of codetermination.
For example, Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner (1997) find that although only 20% of affected
German firms take up shop-floor representation, those firms account for 75% of employment
among affected firms.
    We note a tension between the absence of bunching at the 2,000 employee policy threshold in Germany, the
threshold for quasi-parity rather than one-third board-level codetermination, documented in several papers
(Lin, Schmid, and Xuan, 2018; Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2019; Redeker, 2019) and the findings in Gorton and
Schmid (2004), who documented sharp declines in stock market valuation comparing firms above and below
the policy threshold (but had not implemented a McCrary, 2008, test). That is, if quasi-parity codetermination
indeed had sharp negative effects on profitability or stock market valuations, then one would expect significant
bunching at the 2,000 employee threshold following the results by Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen (2016). In
turn, if there were indeed no bunching at the 2,000 employee threshold, then it would be surprising to see sharp
declines in stock market valuations for firms above the threshold.


                                                      20
    However, this still leaves about 50% of firms subject to codetermination rights whose
workers do not take up their right to codetermination. As reported in Harju, Jäger, and
Schoefer (2021), when Finnish workers in above-threshold firms are asked why they have not
exercised their statutory right, the most common response is that the employer opposed it.
Since Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer (2021) find little evidence of increases in worker compensation
in above-threshold firms, it does not seem to be the case that employers bargained workers
into not taking up codetermination in exchange for additional compensation. Rather, it seems
that many employers possess enough power to block their workers' take-up of their statutory
rights, and many choose to exercise this power, perhaps because they are concerned about
effects on their firm's performance. Alternatively, perhaps workers do not value the institution
enough to demand it (or withstand their employer's opposition). In particular, workers might
be reluctant to insist on implementing an institution that they (correctly or incorrectly) fear
would threaten their job security (c.f. Friedman, 1951).
    There is also some evidence that firms attempt to minimize their exposure to codetermi-
nation through mechanisms other than manipulating their size or blocking the institution
entirely. For example, Strine Jr., Kovvali, and Williams (2021) describe how German firms
sometimes use "the selection of additional vice-chairs" and "equity-controlled subcommittees"
in order to "put formal and informal power in the hands of stockholder representatives on the
supervisory board [and minimize the power of employee representatives]." Thus, there is some
suggestive evidence that firms are sometimes concerned about the effects of codetermination
and take steps to block worker representation or reduce the power of worker representatives.

Surveys of Managers' and Directors' Attitudes If codetermination worsens firm perfor-
mance, we should expect managers and directors to have negative attitudes towards the
institution. However, when surveyed, managers and directors instead mostly express neutral
or positive attitudes.
    For example, Levinson (2000) reports that 76% of Swedish Corporate Directors hold
"positive" or "very positive" views of codetermination, with 19% having a neutral view and
only 5% having a negative view. Slovenian managers hold moderately positive views of
codetermination, giving it an average score of 3.43 on a 5-point favorability scale (Franca and
Pahor, 2014). In the Netherlands, about 80% of managers think shop-floor representation has
a neutral impact on efficiency and innovation, with 5-10% estimating a positive effect and
10-15% estimating a negative effect (Van Den Berg, Grift, and Witteloostun, 2000). Paster
(2012) reports that 71% of German executives oppose the abolition of mandatory board-level
representation.
    Perceptions of quasi-parity board-level representation are more negative than perceptions
of minority board-level representation. Paster (2012) notes that while German firms with
one-third board-level representation tend to see codetermination as an advantage (57%) rather

                                              21
than a disadvantage (19%), more firms subject to quasi-parity board-level representation see it
as a disadvantage (38%) than an advantage (34%). This is consistent with anecdotal reports
that directors in German industries subject to quasi-parity or parity codetermination dislike
the institution (Stettes, 2007).
    The positive perceptions of codetermination among individual managers stand in contrast to
employer associations' sharp opposition to expansions of codetermination rights in some cases,
e.g., in Germany in the 1970s (Höpner, 2004). On the one hand, it is possible that practical
experience with the institution may have softened managers' perceptions. Alternatively,
the presence of codetermination may have led to a selection of managers less opposed to
the institution, or managers might report positive views of codetermination out of social
desirability bias (despite the anonymized nature of the surveys). Finally, employer associations
may strategically overstate the negative impacts of codetermination (Paster, 2012; Müller and
Stegmaier, 2020).
    Overall, there is little evidence that managers or directors generally dislike codetermination,
except for quasi-parity (and, in very few firms, parity) board-level representation that exists in
Germany.

Conclusion Overall, the existing literature suggests that codetermination is a benign or at
least not substantially harmful institution from the perspective of firm performance. There is
no evidence for reductions in investment, profitability, or productivity at the firm level, and
there is revealed-preference and survey evidence that would be hard to square with managers
and directors strongly objecting to the institution.
    The fact that codetermination does not appear to worsen firm performance is less surprising
given the evidence in Section 3 that the institution does not increase the share of rents going
to workers. As we described in Section 2, one of the major mechanisms through which
codetermination is hypothesized to worsen firm performance is that workers' ability to capture
increases in surplus for themselves deters capital investment. The fact that codetermination
does not increase rent-sharing constitutes direct evidence against the existence of this hold-
up mechanism, and therefore reduces the probability that codetermination harms firm
performance. That said, there are independent mechanisms through which codetermination
could worsen firm performance--for example, by disincentivizing expansions or leading
to slow or gridlocked decision-making (Jensen and Meckling, 1979; Hayden and Bodie,
2021)--and the evidence summarized in this section allows us to additionally rule out those
mechanisms.




                                                22
5     General-Equilibrium Effects of Codetermination Laws
In this section, we contribute novel evidence on the general-equilibrium, country-level effects
of codetermination, complementing our review of the partial-equilibrium firm-level evidence.


5.1   Motivation
The microeconometric studies surveyed in the previous two sections produce estimates of
the partial-equilibrium effects of introducing codetermination in individual firms. However,
codetermination laws might also have--or even primarily work through--general-equilibrium
effects that cannot be picked up by comparisons of firms on either side of the margins of
coverage of codetermination laws. There are various plausible channels through which this
could occur, and we now review two of them.

Competition Competitive pressures from non-codetermined firms in product, factor, or
financial markets might render an individual codetermined firm unable to significantly revise
its practices. By contrast, a broad-based imposition of codetermination on the major players
in a market could alter the market's competitive equilibrium. For example, an individual
codetermined firm might be unwilling to significantly boost its wages, for fear that its share
price will crash as investors flee to its non-codetermined competitors (Hayden and Bodie,
2021). A nation-wide codetermination mandate could assuage fears about capital flight and
thereby enable large codetermined firms to change their practices, which might in turn create
competitive pressures that shift the behavior of small firms not covered by the codetermination
mandate. Levine and Tyson (1990) describe at length how an economy might have multiple
potential competitive equilibria, and how a codetermination mandate could trigger a shift to
an equilibrium that provides better outcomes for workers.

Industrial Relations Codetermination laws might affect the overall nature and quality of a
country's industrial relations, and hence influence economic outcomes. For example, formal
institutionalization of worker-management cooperation in large firms could have cultural
spillover effects that create economy-wide norms of worker participation. If these economy-
wide norms increase worker participation in all firms regardless of the presence of formal
codetermination, partial-equilibrium estimates comparing firms subject versus not subject to
formal codetermination requirements will misleadingly suggest that codetermination does
not affect firm behavior, but in fact the codetermination law will have shifted decision-making
in all firms. Similarly, by giving workers the ability to participate collaboratively in decision-
making, codetermination laws might make industrial relations friendlier overall, and reduce
adversarial conflict between employers and workers. Indeed, scholars of industrial relations


                                               23
have credited the institutions of codetermination in Germany with creating a more cooperative
industrial relations climate and enabling peaceful adjustment processes to economic shocks
and transitions (Thelen, 1991).


5.2   General Equilibrium Effects of Codetermination
To our knowledge, there is no existing empirical evidence on the general-equilibrium impacts
of codetermination laws, with the exception of a few studies examining the institution's
industry-level effects (Svejnar, 1981; Benelli, Loderer, and Lys, 1987) or analyzing its impact
in cross-sectional regressions (Hörisch, 2012). The existing literature's focus on firm-level
variation is unsurprising given the advantages of using firm-level microdata, including large
sample sizes and the ability to cleanly identify the causal effects of codetermination laws by
comparing firms on either side of the eligibility thresholds of codetermination requirements.
However, evidence on codetermination's general-equilibrium effects is vital to a full picture of
the institution's economic impacts. We therefore contribute novel estimates of the country-level
effects of codetermination laws, using a cross-country event study design exploiting major
historical codetermination reforms.

Sample and Codetermination Reforms In our main sample, we restrict our attention to
European countries that were independent and democratic between 1960 and 2019 and
for whom we have non-missing data for our main outcome variables. These countries are:
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. For right-hand side variation in
codetermination, we exploit ten introductions or expansions of codetermination occurring
in our sample countries between 1960 and 2019: introductions of minority board-level
representation in Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, and Norway; a switch from one-third
to quasi-parity board-level representation in large firms in Germany; and expansions of
shop-floor representation rights in Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden (for Finland
and Norway, we study both the board-level and shop-floor reforms as separate reforms).
Notably, this list excludes some codetermination "reforms" happening in our sample countries
between 1960 and 2019 (e.g., in Italy) that we do not consider to be substantive introductions
or extensions of codetermination. A full explanation of how we selected our sample and list
of reforms, and a table describing the details and institutional contexts of each reform, are
available in Appendix Section B.1.
    We use our main sample in all of our analyses except for the ones involving our "income
inequality" outcome variable. Data on income inequality is not available back to 1960 for
several of the countries in our main sample (Austria, Belgium, Finland, Iceland, Ireland,
and Italy). We therefore restrict to the other countries in our main sample, study only the

                                              24
seven reforms occurring in those remaining countries, and add three additional comparison
countries (Australia, Canada, and the United States) to compensate for the loss of Belgium,
Iceland, Ireland, and Italy.

Data and Outcome Variables We study two classes of outcomes: aggregate economic
outcomes and industrial relations outcomes.
    Our economic outcome variables are drawn from the European Commission's AMECO
Database and the World Inequality Database, and cover wage growth, the labor share,
productivity growth, net capital formation, growth in GDP per capita, and the share of
national income held by the bottom 90% (which we use as the most extensively available
measure of income inequality).
    In addition, we draw on three supplementary data sources to examine the effects of
codetermination laws on industrial relations. First, the International Labour Organization
(ILO) has collected annual data on strike activity at the country level since the 1920s. If
codetermination laws improve the quality and cooperativeness of industrial relations, we
can naturally expect them to reduce the intensity of destructive industrial conflict such as
strikes. We therefore draw on the ILO data, and calculate a measure of strike intensity which
represents the number of days lost to strikes in a country in a given year, normalized by the
size of the country's working-age population in that year. Since the cardinal values of this
variable are extremely volatile, we convert to an ordinal variable that ranges between 0 and 1
and ranks a country's strike intensity in year compared to its strike intensity in all of the
other years covered by the ILO data. A value of 1 represents the country's highest-ranked
year in terms of strike intensity. Our estimates effectively check whether the years following
a country's introduction of a codetermination law are ranked lower on average than the
pre-reform years in terms of strike intensity.
    Strike intensity is admittedly an imperfect proxy for the quality of industrial relations.
An increase in strikes may reflect an increase in the robustness of worker organization and
worker-management dialogue rather than a breakdown in the "quality" of industrial relations,
and conversely a decrease in strikes may reflect suppression of worker organization rather than
increased cooperation between workers and employers. In addition, strikes are an extreme
event and a very coarse-grained measure of industrial relations; the quality of industrial
relations may differ greatly even conditional on a given strike intensity level. We therefore
    We choose to specify our wage/TFP/GDP variables in terms of growth rates rather than levels because
specifications using levels are heavily affected by the accumulating effects of the sharp drop in growth rates
between 2 years pre-reform and 1 year pre-reform that are observed for each of these outcome variables in Figure
6. Thanks to Ewan McGaughey for suggesting income inequality as an outcome variable.
    Thanks to Sjaak van der Velden for sharing compiled and digitized versions of these data with us, and see
van der Velden (2018) for a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the ILO data.
    Indeed, the codetermination provisions established in Sweden's Saltsjöbaden Agreement, described in
Section 2.3, were intended to directly replace adversarial industrial action.


                                                      25
supplement our event study analysis of strikes with cross-sectional analysis of a variable that
better represents the quality of a country's industrial relations, but for which we lack historical
data: a survey item from the World Economic Forum's Executive Opinion Survey that asks
managers in different countries to evaluate the "cooperativeness" of labor relations in their
country on a 1-7 point scale. The results from this cross-sectional analysis are similar to the
results from our event study analysis of strikes, as we describe below.
    Finally, we examine the interaction between the two pillars of European industrial relations
(union representation and codetermination) by checking whether codetermination reforms
affect a country's subsequent union density. To study this, we draw on historical data on union
density at the country-year level from the OECD/IAIS ICTWSS database, compiled by Visser
(2021). This analysis is motivated by the observation that, as we show in Section 6.3, countries
with codetermination laws experienced a much less rapid decline in union density during the
1980s and 1990s compared to countries without codetermination. If this fact is attributable to a
causal effect of codetermination on union density, that would be evidence for another channel
through which codetermination laws could have general-equilibrium economic effects.
    A full description of our data sources and outcome variable definitions is available in
Appendix Sections B.2-B.5.

Methodology For each country-reform event in our sample, we construct a synthetic control
unit out of the other countries in our sample that do not experience a codetermination reform
at any point within a 10-year radius around the reform of interest. Synthetic control weights
are calculated by matching on pre-reform macroeconomic characteristics (GDP growth, wage
growth, TFP growth, the labor share, and net capital formation). Thus, for example, for the
1978 Finnish reform, we construct a "synthetic Finland" consisting of a weighted average of the
other countries in our sample that do not experience a codetermination reform between 1968
and 1988, with the weights optimized to make synthetic Finland maximally resemble actual
Finland in terms of 1968-1977 macroeconomic outcomes. A full description of the synthetic
control procedure is available in Appendix Section B.7.1.
    We then pool together all of our country-reforms and synthetic control units, aligned by
relative event time, and run difference-in-differences regressions comparing the outcomes of
the treated and control groups before and after the codetermination reforms. The regression
equation is as follows:

                                                10
                 =    +    +   Year( )   +                 Treated
                                                                     × 1[ = ] × Treated +   ,   (1)
                                             =-10 , =-1

where    denotes the outcome for country-reform in year = - reformyear relative to the
reform occurring in reformyear (the reform year for synthetic control units is set equal to


                                                      26
their respective country-reform's reform year). The are unit (country-reform) fixed effects,
   are event time fixed effects, Year( ) are calendar year fixed effects (e.g. "1975"), 1[ = ] is
an indicator for being in the th year relative to the reform, and Treated is an indicator for
unit being a treated country-reform. The Treated are the coefficients of interest, and represent
effects relative to the omitted = -1. Standard errors are clustered at the country-reform level.
    In addition to plotting the full set of dynamic coefficients Treated , we also report average
                                                           Treated       Treated
pre-reform and post-reform coefficients, which are Pre             and Post      in the following
regression:



    =    +   +             Treated
                 Year( ) + Pre     ×   1[ < -1]×Treated +   Treated
                                                            Post    ×   1[  0]×Treated +     , (2)

where notation is the same as above. Due to the small number of clusters, we report p-values
for the pre-reform and post-reform coefficients calculated using the wild bootstrap method,
following Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) and using the code developed by Roodman,
Nielsen, MacKinnon, and Webb (2019). In addition, we report average post-reform coefficients
calculated using the imputation methodology developed by Borusyak, Jaravel, and Spiess
(2021), which deals with problems arising when two-way fixed effects models are used in
contexts with heterogeneous treatment times, like the context we consider. For an explanation
of the Borusyak, Jaravel, and Spiess (2021) methodology, see our full methodological details in
Appendix Section B.7.

Results Event study results for our economic outcome variables are plotted in Panels (a)-(e)
of Figure 6. In addition, Appendix Figure A.1 presents a raw time series plot comparing
aggregate outcomes in our treated group to aggregate outcomes in our synthetic control
group; Appendix Figure A.2 checks the quality of our synthetic control fits by matching only
on a training period ( = -10 to = -6) and plotting the quality of the resulting fit in an
evaluation period ( = -5 to = -1); and Appendix Figures A.3-A.12 present time series plots
comparing each country-reform to its synthetic control unit.
    The results in Figure 6 suggest that codetermination reforms have no noticeable effects on
aggregate economic outcomes. Estimates are slightly imprecise, and pre-trends are at times
unstable, but the post-reform coefficients for all of the outcome variables cluster around zero
and none are statistically significant.
    Event study results for our strike intensity and union density outcome variables are plotted
in Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 7. The estimates suggest no effect of codetermination reforms on
strike intensity or union density, at least for the first 6 years following the reforms. Both plots
show suggestive evidence of positive treatment effects beginning 7-8 years post-reform, which
could be attributed to a delayed effect of the codetermination reforms on industrial relations.


                                                 27
In the absence of a story for how causal effects of the reforms could take 7-8 years to materialize,
these positive coefficients could instead be attributed to global changes in industrial relations
during the 1980s that differentially affected codetermined and non-codetermined countries
(most of the reforms we study occur in the mid-to-late 1970s, so 7 years post-reform is the
mid-1980s).
    In any case, the estimates certainly do not suggest that strike intensity declines following
codetermination reforms, so we fail to find evidence that codetermination laws improve
the quality of industrial relations in that dimension. The positive longer-run coefficients
for union density leave room for causal general-equilibrium effects on unionization, and
are consistent with at least some of the slower decline in unionization in countries with
codetermination laws (which we describe in Section 6.3) being causally attributable to the
presence of codetermination.
    As we have mentioned, strike intensity is not a pure measure of the quality of industrial
relations, so we supplement our event study analysis of strikes with cross-sectional analysis of
a survey item from the World Economic Forum's Executive Opinion Survey. The survey item
asks executives in different countries to assess their country's labor-management relations on
a scale from 1 ("Generally confrontational") to 7 ("Generally cooperative"). We have access to
country-level average responses to this question from 2007 onwards; Appendix Figure A.16
presents a global map of average responses.
    The poster children for codetermination--Germany, Austria, and the Nordic countries--
indeed have some of the most cooperative labor relations in the world according to the
Executive Opinion Survey metric, ranking in the 94th percentile on average (for comparison,
the United States is in the 79th percentile). But a broader analysis, including countries
like France with codetermination laws but much less cooperative industrial relations (18th
percentile), fails to find a strong relationship between codetermination laws and cooperation in
industrial relations. Panel (c) of Figure 7 presents a binned scatterplot showing the correlation
between the strength of a country's codetermination laws (as measured by the CBR Labor
Regulation Index; Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016) and the cooperativeness of the country's
labor relations (as measured by the Executive Opinion Survey item). The results show a weak
and statistically insignificant positive correlation between the strength of codetermination
laws and the cooperativeness of labor relations (correlation coefficient 0.115, p-value 0.236).
    We therefore once again do not find strong evidence for the hypothesis that codetermination
laws improve the quality of industrial relations. That said, the Executive Opinion Survey
measure of industrial relations has its own weaknesses, primarily the difficulty of comparing
responses to ordinal survey scales across countries. In addition, this is a purely cross-sectional
descriptive design that inherently cannot capture the causal effect of codetermination on
industrial relations due to potential omitted variable bias.


                                                28
Conclusion and Caveats Overall, we find no evidence that codetermination reforms affect
aggregate economic outcomes or influence overall industrial relations, with the exception of
slight evidence for increases in union density. Three important caveats apply to the results
from our cross-country event studies. First, as we have noted, the estimates from these
event studies are somewhat imprecise. Second, there are inherent limits on the credibility
of cross-country difference-in-differences analyses, since sample sizes are small and the
introduction of national legislation may be correlated with unobserved country-specific trends.
Third, most of the reforms we study are not wholesale introductions of codetermination in
contexts where no codetermination existed beforehand; rather, most reforms we study are
codifications and expansions of codetermination rights in countries where a patchwork of
informal or negotiated codetermination arrangements already existed (see Appendix Table
A.1 for a full description of the details and contexts of the reforms). Hence, our results may not
speak to the impact of introducing codetermination in contexts like the United States, where
no codetermination arrangements exist at all because of the National Labor Relations Act; we
return to this point in Section 7. That said, we do study a pair of reforms that approximate
wholesale introductions of codetermination (the 1978 Finnish reform and 1979 Dutch reform),
and the impacts of these reforms do not appear to be larger than the impacts of the other
reforms we study (see Appendix Figures A.5 and A.9).
    Despite these caveats, the almost complete absence of pre-existing evidence on the general-
equilibrium impacts of codetermination means we think these estimates constitute a valuable
contribution to our knowledge about the economic effects of codetermination. While these
results are not definitive proof that codetermination laws lack general-equilibrium impacts,
they are reasonably strong evidence against the proposition that the general-equilibrium
effects of codetermination substantially exceed its small or nonexistent partial-equilibrium
effects.


6    What Explains Codetermination's Limited Effects?
The empirical evidence we summarized and presented in Sections 3-5 suggests that codetermi-
nation has, on net, no effects, or slight positive effects, on a variety of worker and firm outcomes,
including wages, job security, overall job satisfaction, productivity, and investment. These mild
or nonexistent effects stand in contrast to the predictions of both proponents and opponents
of codetermination, who argue either that codetermination will (beneficially) shift power
towards workers and significantly increase rent-sharing, cooperation, and productivity, or that
codetermination will (harmfully) cripple firm performance and cause investment to decline.
In the remainder of this paper, we draw on qualitative evidence to build a comprehensive
description of how codetermination operates in practice, a description which we suggest


                                                 29
might help explain the institution's limited effects.


6.1     Does Codetermination Boost Labor's Power?
The first explanation we propose for codetermination's limited impact is that existing code-
termination laws do not significantly boost workers' influence. This is firstly because, as we
describe in this section, codetermination laws appear to convey relatively little authority to
workers; and secondly, as we describe in Section 6.2, because European workers seem to have
high baseline levels of influence independently of formal codetermination.

6.1.1   Formal Authority

As we described in Section 2.2, codetermination laws rarely give workers much formal
authority. Board-level representation laws outside of Germany grant workers a minority of
seats on the board, meaning workers can always be overruled by unanimous shareholders.
And shop-floor worker representatives are usually limited to information and consultation
rights, possibly with very restricted rights to judicial redress; only in a few countries (e.g.,
Austria and Germany) are they given any co-decision-making powers, and these powers are
typically narrowly defined (Aumayr, Stavroula, Foden, Scepanovics, and Wolf, 2011).
   These limited formal rights could conceivably boost workers' real authority. At the board
level, interview evidence suggests that boards with worker representatives strive to reach
unanimous decisions, meaning that shareholder representatives try to secure the consent of
worker representatives. In addition, worker representatives sometimes hold the decisive votes
when shareholder representatives disagree amongst themselves (Gold, Kluge, and Conchon,
2010). At the shop-floor level, as we have mentioned, information and consultation procedures
might put pressure on employers to reach a consensus with workers. Understanding whether
codetermination laws convey real power therefore requires investigating whether these limited
formal rights translate into more substantial real authority.

6.1.2   Real Authority

To ascertain whether codetermination increases workers' real authority, we draw on several
sources of qualitative evidence: detailed case studies of codetermination in Swedish firms by
Sandberg et al. (1992) and Wheeler (2002); interviews of European worker representatives
conducted by Gold, Kluge, and Conchon (2010); and surveys of Swedish and Finnish worker
representatives and managers discussed by Levinson (2000) and Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer
    Following Aghion and Tirole (1997), we distinguish between formal authority (the right to decide) and real
authority (the effective control over decisions).




                                                     30
(2021), respectively. Our synthesis of this qualitative evidence supports four conclusions about
the real authority conveyed by codetermination laws.

Moderate Influence on Working Conditions First, codetermination grants workers a non-
trivial amount of control over decisions about working conditions.
    Workers and managers unanimously agree that worker representatives wield more influ-
ence over decisions about working conditions than over any other kind of decision (Levinson,
2000; Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021). Decisions about working conditions are where worker
representatives focus most of their attention: for example, Swedish worker representatives
interviewed by Wheeler (2002) report spending the majority of their time participating in
decisions about working hours, health and safety, and workplace amenities, as well as using
their position to help solve problems of sexual harassment and mistreatment of workers by
managers.
    Exactly how much influence worker representatives wield in this area is ambiguous.
Finnish worker representatives are relatively pessimistic, with only 30% claiming an ability
to improve working conditions at their company (Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021). Danish
worker representatives are more optimistic, with 55% claiming a "reasonable" or "high" amount
of influence in general (Rose, 2008).
    Managers also present mixed assessments of worker representatives' influence over working
conditions. In the 2019 European Company Survey, just under 50% of managers claim that
worker representatives in their establishments wield a "moderate" or "great" amount of
influence over decisions about working conditions (see Panel (b) of Figure 8, which we will
discuss further in Section 6.2). Meanwhile, a striking 96% of Swedish Managing Directors say
that worker representatives exert a "large" or "very large" degree of influence over decisions in
this area (Levinson, 2000).
    Overall, this mixed evidence suggests that worker representatives wield some amount
of control over decisions about working conditions, with the exact extent of this control
remaining unclear, especially given the difficulty of interpreting statements like "a great
amount of influence."
    Worker representatives' ability to improve working conditions might explain the positive
impacts of codetermination on subjective job quality documented in Section 3, though the
fact that codetermination does not reduce voluntary separations or improve health and safety
suggests that worker representatives are not dramatically reshaping the workplace.
     Danish representatives are asked about their influence in general, not their influence on decisions of working
conditions specifically. Since working conditions appear to be the area where worker representatives are most
influential, this number is likely a lower bound on the relevant percentage.




                                                        31
Small Amount of Influence on Layoffs Worker representatives state that their highest
priority is protecting incumbent workers from layoffs (Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021). In
accordance with information and consultation requirements, worker representatives describe
being extensively consulted about planned layoffs, and a few worker representatives even
report successfully negotiating the prevention of layoffs. However, worker representatives
agree that managers usually override their objections to planned layoffs (Wheeler, 2002; Gold,
Kluge, and Conchon, 2010). Managers in the 2019 European Company Survey mostly agree
that worker representatives lack influence over layoff decisions (see Panel (a) of Appendix
Figure A.13).
    Anecdotal evidence suggests that worker representatives may be more able to influence
layoff decisions during economic crises. For example, as we mentioned in Section 3, Rehder
(2003) describes how German firms experiencing an economic downturn sometimes reach
agreements with worker representatives to preserve workers' jobs in exchange for cuts to
wages and hours.
    Worker representatives' (limited) ability to prevent layoffs may explain the finding described
in Section 3 that codetermination sometimes causes small reductions in involuntary separations.

Small Amount of Influence on Wage Setting Similarly to layoff decisions, worker represen-
tatives describe wielding only a small amount of influence over wage setting decisions. Just 15%
of Finnish worker representatives believe they can affect wage levels at their workplace (Harju,
Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021), and only 35% of managers in the 2019 European Company Survey
claim that worker representatives wield a "moderate" or "great" amount of influence over
payment schemes (see Panel (d) of Appendix Figure A.13). Worker representatives' general
lack of involvement in wage setting decisions is unsurprising, given that wage negotiations in
Europe are typically the domain of unions and sectoral bargaining, as we describe in Section
6.3. (An exception are works councils in Germany, which have codetermination rights over
performance pay and can serve as a bargaining party in wage negotiations if an opening clause
in the relevant collective bargaining agreement allows it; Addison, Schnabel, and Wagner,
2001). Overall, worker representatives' ability to exert some small amount of control over wage
setting may explain the very small positive wage impacts of codetermination documented in
Section 3.

No Influence on Corporate Strategy There is nearly unanimous agreement that worker
representatives have no influence on broad strategic decisions, even when they sit on company
boards. Fewer than 5% of Finnish worker representatives believe they can affect strategic
decisions (Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021), and Swedish Managing Directors report that
worker representatives are almost completely inactive during strategic discussions in board
meetings (Levinson, 2000). The general perception among worker representatives is that

                                               32
strategic decisions are made out of their view, and presented to them once management's
mind is already made up (Wheeler, 2002; Gold, Kluge, and Conchon, 2010). While this survey
evidence leaves room for equilibrium or anticipation effects of board-level representation on
the decisions of managers, this self-professed near-complete lack of influence on strategic
decisions highlights the lack of power conveyed by arrangements like minority board-level
representation. Worker representatives' inability to influence strategic decisions in particular
may help explain the absence of evidence for negative effects of codetermination on firm
performance.

6.1.3   Conclusion

The qualitative evidence paints a picture of an institution that gives workers some control over
their immediate working conditions, but grants them negligible authority beyond that. Given
this characterization, it is unsurprising that codetermination fails to significantly shift major
outcomes like wages or investment. This "limited power" explanation also accounts for the
fact that quasi-parity and parity codetermination arrangements (which convey greater formal
authority to workers) provoke more opposition from managers and directors, and possibly
have larger wage effects, as we described in Sections 3 and 4.
    Importantly, recent codetermination proposals in the United States and United Kingdom
mostly emulate existing codetermination laws, usually by proposing minority board-level
representation. If limited power conveyed by minority board-level representation is key to
explaining codetermination's lack of impact, then we should expect the codetermination
proposals in the US and UK to have similarly negligible impacts if implemented. We return to
this point in Section 7.


6.2     Quality of Industrial and Workforce-Management Relations
The surveys of worker representatives we drew on in Section 6.1 included a minority of
respondents who claimed to possess the power to influence important decisions. However,
even if these worker representatives are right that they possess this power, this does not imply
that codetermination boosts workers' impact on decision-making. First, it is possible that, in
the absence of formal codetermination, workers would wield exactly the same power over
decisions through informal participation mechanisms. Second, it is possible that worker
representatives choose to use their influence in a way that mostly aligns with the desires
of managers and directors, meaning that worker involvement does not substantially shift
decision-making. As we describe in this section, the qualitative evidence supports both of
these hypotheses. European countries appear to have a strong informal culture of worker
involvement, worker-management cooperation, and alignment of priorities, which may leave


                                               33
little room for formal codetermination to make a difference.

Worker Involvement Survey evidence indicates that European firms have a robust culture
of informal worker participation and information sharing that operates even in firms without
formal codetermination. If worker involvement in decision-making would happen regardless
of the presence of formal codetermination, it is not surprising that codetermination does not
have a noticeable impact.
    The evidence for a robust culture of informal worker involvement comes from interviews
of European managers conducted as part of the European Company Survey. As illustrated
in Figure 8, across both the 2013 and 2019 waves of the survey, managers in establishments
without formal worker representation report levels of worker involvement in decision-making
comparable to the levels of worker involvement in firms with formal codetermination. For
example, in the 2013 survey, just under 50% of managers in firms without formal worker
representation reported that workers were directly involved in the firm's most important
recent decision, compared to 60% of managers in firms with worker representation who said
that worker representatives were involved in the most important recent decision (Panel (a)
of Figure 8). In the 2019 survey, about 55% of managers in establishments without worker
representation said that workers directly exerted a "moderate" or "great" amount of influence
over decisions about working conditions, compared to 45% of managers in firms with worker
representation who said the same thing about worker representatives (Panel (b) of Figure
8). Panel (c) of Figure 8 shows that larger European firms (which are more likely to be
subject to codetermination requirements) do not involve workers in decision-making more
frequently than smaller firms; rather, the nature of the worker involvement simply shifts, from
informal direct involvement in smaller firms to formal representation in larger firms. Panel
(d) of Figure 8 shows that, in simple cross-country regressions, the strength of a country's
codetermination laws is uncorrelated with the percentage of firms in that country who report
some kind of worker involvement in decision-making. Overall, this evidence paints a picture
of widespread informal worker participation in decision-making even in firms without formal
codetermination.
    We caution that this survey evidence is far from conclusive. One obvious concern is
that managers accustomed to formal codetermination might have higher standards for what
constitutes worker involvement in a decision. In that case, although managers in firms
with and without formal codetermination might report equal rates of "worker involvement,"
workers would in fact be much more involved in codetermined firms. In addition, the results
presented above are purely descriptive, and although they suggest that codetermination laws
do not increase the amount or intensity of worker involvement in decision-making, they are
far from credible causal evidence for this hypothesis.
    Despite these caveats, the results above provide at least suggestive evidence for an

                                              34
explanation of the limited effects of codetermination: European countries have such a robust
culture of worker participation that worker involvement in decision-making happens to an
equal extent even in the absence of formal codetermination.

Harmonious Labor-Management Relations The relative warmth of labor-management
relations in Europe may also help explain codetermination's limited impact. Most of the
evidence cited in Sections 3-4 was from studies of German or Nordic codetermination; as
we noted in Section 5, while there is no evidence that codetermination laws in general are
positively correlated with cooperative industrial relations, Germany and the Nordic countries
in particular have some of the most cooperative industrial relations in the world. Ideals of
social partnership between employers and workers, and of "virtuous circles" connecting the
interests of the two parties, dominate industrial relations (Kettunen, 2012; Behrens and Helfen,
2016).
    In such a cooperative context, worker representatives may decide to exercise their powers in
mostly non-disruptive ways that line up with the plans of managers and employers. Indeed, in
in-depth interviews, German and Nordic board-level representatives report mostly acquiescing
to managers' plans and just contributing information, in recognition of the fact that workers'
interests are broadly aligned with the interests of the firm (Gold, Kluge, and Conchon, 2010).
This alignment of priorities may be another key element contributing to codetermination's
limited impact.

Impacts of Codetermination Laws on Industrial Relations One natural hypothesis is
that both of the factors outlined above are consequences of the historical introduction of
codetermination laws. As we described in Section 5, codetermination laws could normalize
worker participation in decision-making and thereby create widespread cultures of worker
involvement that end up operating independently of formal codetermination arrangements.
Similarly, allowing workers to participate cooperatively in decision-making may make the
worker-management relationship less adversarial and more friendly.
   However, our empirical tests in Section 5 failed to find evidence that codetermination laws
improve the quality or friendliness of industrial relations. Strike intensity does not appear to
decline following codetermination reforms, and in general there is no correlation between the
existence of codetermination laws and the cooperativeness of a country's industrial relations.
   Rather, in our view, a reading of the historical evidence supports a different hypothesis:
that in countries like Germany, Norway, and Sweden, codetermination laws arose because
of pre-existing cultures of worker participation, rather than causing the development of
those cultures. Germany and the Nordic countries have histories of industrial democracy,
worker mobilization, and social partnership dating back to at least the early 1900s, with the
codetermination reforms we study in the 1960s onwards being codifications and expansions of

                                              35
pre-existing ad-hoc arrangements (Adler, 1922; Bjorheim, 1974; Knudsen, 2006; Sippola, 2012;
Votinius, 2012; McGaughey, 2016). We remain agnostic about what caused these cultures to
develop in the first place, but it is implausible to suggest that, e.g., the high level of cooperation
in contemporary Swedish industrial relations is entirely attributable to the introduction of
minority board-level representation in the 1970s.

Conclusion If codetermination's limited impact is indeed explained by pre-existing cul-
tures of worker-management cooperation or friendly industrial relations, then the effects
of codetermination may well be different if implemented in contexts like the United States,
where industrial relations are more adversarial. Codetermination might boost workers'
influence by more in the absence of a pre-existing culture of informal worker involvement; and
codetermination might proceed less harmoniously if managers are negatively predisposed
towards worker representation. We return to this point in Section 7.


6.3   Other Labor Market Institutions
As we have noted, virtually all of the empirical evidence we drew on in Sections 3 and 4
comes from studies of German or Nordic codetermination. Compared to liberal market
economies like the United States, the German and Nordic labor markets feature a range
of other powerful pro-labor institutions: highly centralized collective bargaining, powerful
unions, and extensive labor market regulations. The presence of these institutions may leave
little scope for codetermination to have an impact.
     To visualize the institutional differences between European countries with codetermination
and comparable countries without codetermination (non-codetermined European countries,
and liberal market economies like the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand),
we draw on data from the OECD/IAIS ICTWSS database (Visser, 2021) and the CBR Labor
Regulation Index (Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016). Panels (a), (b), and (c) of Figure 5
compare the degree of centralization of collective bargaining, rates of union membership, and
the intensity of labor market regulation in codetermined versus non-codetermined countries,
in 1960 and in 2018.

Centralized Collective Bargaining As Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows, countries with codeter-
mination laws tend to have more centralized systems of collective bargaining than comparable
countries without codetermination, both presently and historically. In liberal market economies
like the United States, collective bargaining proceeds exclusively at the company level and
coverage is consequently very spotty (Compa, 2014). By contrast, collective bargaining in
Germany and the Nordic countries happens primarily at the sectoral level. Labor unions and
employer associations negotiate collective bargaining agreements that cover entire industries


                                                 36
or industry-regions. These agreements specify wage floors and impose other restrictions on
working conditions. Employers can deviate upwards (and sometimes even downwards) from
these wage floors, and descriptive studies confirm that employers retain plenty of flexibility in
wage setting despite the existence of these agreements (Uusitalo and Vartiainen, 2009; Card,
Heining, and Kline, 2013). Sectoral bargaining therefore does not necessarily limit the scope
for codetermination to improve wages or working conditions. Nevertheless, it is possible
that these collective bargaining agreements create significant wage compression (e.g., by
affecting pay setting norms; Western and Rosenfeld, 2011), which may dampen the effect of
codetermination on wages.
    While this is an a priori plausible explanation of codetermination's limited effects on wages
and job quality, the existing evidence does not strongly support it. For example, Jäger, Schoefer,
and Heining (2021) do not find larger wage effects of board-level representation in German
industries with lower collective bargaining coverage, suggesting that their finding of zero or
small wage effects is not driven by the presence of collective bargaining agreements. Similarly,
a large body of studies of German shop-floor representation have not found that shop-floor
representation has larger wage effects in establishments not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement (Jirjahn, 2017).
    Thus, the existence of centralized systems of collective bargaining seems unlikely to
explain the limited effects of codetermination. In Section 7, we turn our attention to potential
complementarities between sectoral collective bargaining and codetermination.

Union Representation Countries with codetermination laws have much higher rates of
union membership than comparable countries without codetermination. Panel (b) of Figure 5
shows that, in 1960, the average rate of union membership in countries that would go on to
adopt codetermination laws was 10 percentage points higher than in comparable countries
that would not adopt codetermination; by 2018, the gap between the two groups had grown
to about 20 percentage points.
    High union density could help explain codetermination's limited impacts because (despite
     In addition, as we discuss in Section 7, sectoral bargaining banishes adversarial negotiations over the
distribution of rents to the sectoral level, and may thereby alleviate hold-up problems resulting from boosts
to worker bargaining power (Acemoglu, 2001, 2019) and leave more room for cooperative labor-management
relations at the firm level.
     The fact that countries with higher union density in 1960 were subsequently more likely to adopt codetermi-
nation laws may be attributable to the fact that unions have often been the major political force advocating for
codetermination laws, as we discussed in Section 2.3. Meanwhile, as Panel (d) of Figure 5 shows, the widening of
the gap in union density between codetermined and non-codetermined countries from 1960 to 2018 is attributable
to the fact that, while union density in both groups of countries experienced a significant decline in the 1980s and
1990s, the decline was much more rapid in countries without codetermination. As Panel (b) of Figure 7 shows
using our cross-country event study design with union density as the outcome variable, this may be attributable
to a causal effect of union density, if a persuasive story can be given for how codetermination might have delayed
effects on union density.



                                                        37
lacking formal co-decision-making rights) unions might play an important role in advocating
for workers, which may render formal codetermination superfluous. For example, the Nordic
countries have histories of establishment-level union representation through "shop stewards"
that predate the introduction of formal co-decision-making arrangements (Bjorheim, 1974;
Knudsen, 2006). If these shop stewards already satisfied Nordic workers' desire for voice,
introducing additional codetermination arrangements might not have much of an effect.
    On the other hand, high union density and codetermination rights may well be comple-
ments, if an organized workforce is necessary to take full advantage of co-decision-making
rights. The fact that unions have often expended a great deal of political effort advocating
for codetermination rights (as described in Section 2.3) certainly suggests that they do not
consider co-decision-making rights to be superfluous. In any case, both of these hypotheses
suggest that codetermination might have different effects in countries with lower rates of
union representation. Again, we return to this topic in Section 7.

Labor Market Regulation The German and Nordic labor markets are tightly regulated by
global standards, and especially when compared to countries like the United States. Panel (c)
of Figure 5 shows that, on average, countries with codetermination currently sit at the 70th
percentile worldwide in terms of the intensity of labor market regulation, while comparable
countries without codetermination sit at the 25th percentile on average. German and Nordic
labor market regulations--covering everything from flexible hours to overtime to leave
entitlements to restrictions on dismissal--may leave little scope for worker representatives to
negotiate improvements in working conditions.

Conclusion Several important labor market institutions--sectoral collective bargaining,
widespread union representation, and extensive regulation--may already capture most of
the low-hanging fruit when it comes to affecting worker outcomes, leaving little room for
German and Nordic codetermination to make an impact. If this explanation is correct, then
codetermination may have larger impacts (either positive or negative) if implemented in
contexts like the United States, where these institutions are less powerful, a point to which we
return in Section 7.
   However, we caution that these hypotheses remain mostly empirically untested, and
the small amount of available empirical evidence contradicts the hypothesis that collective
bargaining is responsible for codetermination's lack of wage effects.
     For example, Kohler (1986, p.547) writes that "in the presence of a union, worker participation programs can
produce important benefits [...] In the absence of a self-organized, autonomous employee association, however,
the degree of worker participation in management decisionmaking will remain, at best, superficial." Liebman
(2017, p.15) similarly reports that "a European expert who advises companies on their European Works Councils
has made the case to me that in workplaces without a trade union the works councils are generally weak and
ineffective."


                                                       38
7     What Would Codetermination Do in the United States?
The past four years have seen a surge of interest in codetermination in the United States, driven
by an increasingly widespread belief among progressive policy-makers, commentators, and
academics that recent afflictions suffered by American workers are at least partially attributable
to a sharp decline in the power of workers relative to shareholders within corporations (see,
e.g., Liebman, 2017; Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson, 2018; Hockett et al., 2018; Yglesias,
2018; Stansbury and Summers, 2020; Strine Jr., Kovvali, and Williams, 2021). This diagnosis
has motivated policy proposals aimed at expanding or strengthening worker representation,
either by reinvigorating American unions or by introducing shared governance arrangements
modeled after European codetermination.
    Having surveyed the best available evidence on codetermination in Europe, we now
discuss more speculatively what this evidence might imply for a potential introduction
of codetermination in the United States. As we have noted, European codetermination
arrangements are nested within the broader institutional context of European "coordinated
market economies," which have long histories of worker mobilization, highly centralized
systems of collective bargaining, and industrial relations systems dominated by ideals of "social
partnership" between employers and workers (Hall and Soskice, 2001; Aguilera and Jackson,
2003). By contrast, the United States is a "liberal market economy" where large-scale worker
mobilization and collective bargaining are rare (at least in the private sector), and industrial
relations are adversarial and often actively hostile. As a result, lessons drawn from studies of
European codetermination may not straightforwardly translate to the United States. In this
section, we extend our earlier discussion of potential interactions between codetermination
and other European institutions, focusing specifically on what these interactions might imply
for the effects of codetermination in the United States.


7.1   Recent Codetermination Proposals
Board-Level and Shop-Floor Representation Proposals Board-level codetermination provi-
sions are a key element of two pieces of legislation introduced by Democratic senators in 2018.
The Reward Work Act, introduced by Senators Tammy Baldwin, Elizabeth Warren, and Brian
Schatz, would require all listed companies in the United States to adopt one-third board-level
worker representation, and would also ban stock repurchases. The Accountable Capitalism Act,
introduced later in the same year by Senator Elizabeth Warren, would require corporations
with more than $1 billion in tax receipts to adopt 40% board-level worker representation, and
more broadly would require these corporations to shift away from a governance model based
on shareholder primacy to a model rooted in the ideals of "stakeholder governance."
    Compared to board-level codetermination, shop-floor codetermination has not received


                                               39
much attention from American legislators. As Liebman (2017) describes, state-level shop-floor
codetermination mandates would arguably be illegal under the 1935 National Labor Relations
Act. However, despite this legal barrier, shop-floor codetermination laws have been informally
proposed several times in the past few years (Liebman, 2017; Cass, 2020; Strine Jr., Kovvali,
and Williams, 2021), and the possibility of establishing a German-style works council was
raised repeatedly during unionization drives in Volkswagen's Chattanooga plant in 2014
and 2019 (Silvia, 2018, 2020). Importantly, any attempt at federal shop-floor codetermination
legislation would force a much broader conversation about amending the relevant provisions
of the National Labor Relations Act, which currently stifles any local experimentation with
more cooperative forms of shop-floor representation (even if both workers and the employers
would support such experimentation).
    Recent codetermination proposals are not being advanced in isolation: they are part of a
broader legislative agenda pursued by Democratic representatives that aims to increase the
influence of American workers in corporate power structures. Related proposals include the
broader stakeholder governance provisions in the Accountable Capitalism Act, as well as the
PRO Act, which would significantly strengthen American unions by allowing them to override
right-to-work laws and restricting the ability of employers to interfere with union elections
(NPR, 03/09/21).

Recent Public Debate Board-level codetermination proposals have triggered mixed reactions
in the public discourse. The Accountable Capitalism Act was lauded by some commentators
as a necessary check on the excesses of American shareholder capitalism (Yglesias, 2018;
Vogel, 2019), and decried by others as disastrous for innovation and economic growth
(Hammond, 2018; Shackford, 2018; Williamson, 2018). The disagreement has not always fallen
along partisan lines; some conservative commentators, such as Oren Cass, have argued for
codetermination (Cass, 2020). In addition, perhaps surprisingly, the business community
has expressed support for the idea of abandoning shareholder primacy. In 2019, the U.S.
Business Roundtable and World Economic Forum released statements endorsing a "stakeholder
governance" model that would task corporations with serving the interests of non-shareholder
stakeholders, including workers and consumers. However, these announcements have been
accused of being purely performative (Cass, 2020); they do not include proposals that would
actually shift authority away from directors and managers, but simply suggest expanding the
mandate of those directors and managers in vague and unaccountable ways (The Economist,
08/24/2019).

Implementation of Codetermination Proposals As Liebman (2017) and Strine Jr., Kovvali,
and Williams (2021) emphasize, advocates of recent codetermination proposals must face
up to a long list of important practical questions concerning how codetermination would be

                                             40
implemented in the United States. These questions include: how would elections of worker
representatives be organized, and who would be eligible to vote in them? Who would bear the
associated costs? How would disputes between worker representatives and firms be resolved?
How, if at all, would middle managers be represented in codetermination arrangements?
   Additionally, critics of recent codetermination proposals, such as Dammann and Eiden-
mueller (2021), pose a number of questions that they believe highlight the unsuitability of
codetermination arrangements for American firms. These questions include: what procedures
would exist for dismissal of problematic board-level worker representatives? How would
worker representatives be involved in bankruptcy governance, or negotiations surrounding
mergers and hostile takeovers? How could corporate law be designed to prevent avoidance of
codetermination requirements?
   It is tempting to respond to all of these questions by saying that the United States
should simply imitate European arrangements. However, the European solutions to these
practical problems draw indispensably on institutional features of European labor markets,
including widespread union representation and broader frameworks of social partnership,
that are comparatively absent in the United States. This observation leads us naturally into
a discussion of interactions between European codetermination and other European labor
market institutions, and what these interactions might imply for American codetermination.


7.2   What Would American Codetermination Look Like? What Would it
      Do?
We concluded in Sections 3-5 that the best available evidence suggests limited effects of
codetermination on core economic outcomes. Moreover, we proposed three explanations for
the institution's limited impact. First, we suggested that existing codetermination laws convey
negligible authority to workers. Recent codetermination proposals like the Reward Work Act and
Accountable Capitalism Act replicate the European board-level codetermination arrangements
that we argued barely increase workers' authority, so if this explanation indeed accounts for
European codetermination's limited impacts, we should expect American codetermination
proposals to have similarly small effects. However, our second and third explanations relied
on institutional features of European labor markets that are much less present in the United
States: harmonious industrial relations, widespread unionization, centralized collective
bargaining, and extensive labor market regulation. If these explanations account for European
codetermination's limited impacts, there is room for codetermination to have different effects
in the United States. We now explore this possibility in more depth. In addition to considering
the implications of interactions between codetermination and other institutions for the causal
effects of codetermination, we also consider implications for the practical implementation of
codetermination.

                                              41
Union Representation As Panel (b) of Figure 5 illustrates, union representation in countries
with codetermination is much more extensive than in the United States. This fact has several
immediate practical implications, as Strine Jr., Kovvali, and Williams (2021) describe. European
codetermination laws typically set up shared governance procedures that explicitly refer
to unions at a number of stages (ETUI, 2020). First, when legislation prescribes a right to
codetermination that workers can voluntarily take up, company-level union representatives are
usually responsible for initiating the proceedings that establish codetermination in a particular
workplace. Second, elections of worker representatives are usually organized and monitored
by unions, or in some cases worker representatives are directly nominated by unions and
selected through internal union procedures. Third, union representatives form a ready pool of
able and willing candidates for worker representative positions. Overall, much of the practical
infrastructure of codetermination in European countries relies on the near-universal presence
and widespread legitimacy of union representatives. There is therefore little precedent for how
codetermination might be implemented in the United States, where many workplaces either
lack union representatives entirely, or lack union representatives who hold the confidence of
workers.
    In addition, low union density in the United States may mean that American codetermina-
tion would have either stronger or even weaker impacts than European codetermination. As we
described in Section 6.3, union representation could be either a substitute or complement for
codetermination. According to the "substitute" theory, union representation already caters
to European workers' demands for voice, and codetermination is therefore a superfluous
institution that has no marginal effect. This theory is hard to square with the history of
vigorous union advocacy for codetermination rights, which presumably reflects unions' belief
that codetermination rights are not redundant. By contrast, according to the "complement"
theory, union representation complements codetermination in a number of important ways.
First, worker organization through unions lets workers speak with a unified voice and thereby
take full advantage of co-decision-making rights; Liebman (2017) cites anecdotal evidence
for this mechanism. Second, unions provide an outlet for workers' adversarial demands
or grievances, leaving board-level or shop-floor worker representatives free to cooperate
harmoniously with employers. If, in the absence of union representation, American worker
representatives would be forced to be a vehicle for workers' adversarial demands, they might
find it much harder to form a working relationship with employers.
    Overall, there are important interactions between codetermination and union representation
arising from practical considerations and from union representation's potential mediation
or enhancement of codetermination's causal impacts. This has some important implications
for codetermination proposals in the United States. As we have noted, reforms to strengthen
unions are a major part of the recent Democratic legislative agenda.


                                               42
Sectoral Bargaining As Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows, European countries with codetermina-
tion have collective bargaining systems that operate primarily at the industry level. By contrast,
collective bargaining in the United States happens almost exclusively at the company level, if
at all. As we noted in Section 6.3, there is no evidence that sectoral bargaining is a substitute
for codetermination in the sense of creating wage compression that limits codetermination's
wage effects (Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, 2021). However, there are some potentially relevant
complementarities between sectoral bargaining and codetermination that we now describe.
    First, sectoral bargaining creates significant distance between high-stakes adversarial
bargaining and individual employers and their employees, which may enable warmer
employer-employee relationships and thereby make shared governance proceed more smoothly.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that American managers are encouraged to fear and obstruct
unionization (Lafer and Loustaunau, 2020), perhaps in part because the costs of unionization
are so salient to employers when collective bargaining happens at the company level. When
collective bargaining is more centralized and remote from the firm, as it frequently is in
Europe, employers may be more amenable to the idea of worker representation. Additionally,
the European practice of legislatively "extending" sectoral agreements to cover employers
not initially party to the negotiations removes much of the incentive of employers to resist
unionization, since they cannot thereby escape collective bargaining. This may again make
employers less hostile to worker representation.
    Second, at a practical level, sectoral collective agreements usually contain provisions
mandating the appointment of establishment-level union representatives who are responsible
for locally implementing the sectoral agreements (ETUI, 2020). This is an important mechanism
through which European countries achieve near-universal union representation, which matters
for the reasons we discussed above.
    Thus, there may also be important complementarities between codetermination and
industry-level systems of collective bargaining in Europe. Several Democratic candidates in
the 2020 presidential primaries included sectoral bargaining proposals in their platforms,
including Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Pete Buttigieg, and Beto O'Rourke (Marketplace,
11/01/2019).

Quality of Industrial Relations Cooperative industrial relations may be a crucial comple-
ment to codetermination. A long-standing hypothesis is that the effects of increasing worker
power crucially hinge on the pre-existing quality of labor-management relationships (Freeman
and Medoff, 1984; Kochan and Kimball, 2019). In a hostile atmosphere, boosting workers'
authority might simply intensify negative-sum conflict between workers and managers, con-
sistent with negative effects of unionization on firm performance in the United States, at
least on average (Lee and Mas, 2012; Frandsen, forthcoming). By contrast, giving workers
co-decision-making rights in a cooperative atmosphere might produce less harmful results.

                                               43
    As we mentioned in Section 5, results from the Executive Opinion Survey indicate that
managers consider labor relations in Germany and the Nordic countries to be more harmonious
and cooperative than labor relations in the United States. In addition, we described above how
other institutional differences between the United States and Europe--the relative absence of
union-based outlets for adversarial grievances, and the proximate threat of company-level
collective bargaining--may lead to a more hostile relationship between employers and worker
representatives if codetermination was introduced in the United States.

Conclusion Given the plethora of institutional differences between American and European
labor markets, it is hard to draw conclusions from the existing European evidence about the
likely effects of American codetermination proposals. American codetermination could have
smaller or larger effects than the European variant; if the effects are larger, they might be
positive, negative, or a combination of the two. For example, American codetermination could
have a larger positive effect on rent-sharing with workers, but this could then cause hold-up
problems to kick in and lead to reductions in investment and economic growth.
    If there is one conclusion that is clear from this discussion, it is that codetermination is
not a standalone institution. Rather, it is part of a broader institutional and cultural package
whose other elements complement codetermination and supply its practical infrastructure.
The recent American policy discourse has seen several proposals to introduce other elements
of the European package, including stronger union representation and sectoral collective
bargaining.


8    Overall Conclusions
The available evidence indicates that the European model of codetermination is neither a
panacea for all of the problems faced by 21st-century workers, nor a destructive institution
that is dramatically inferior to shareholder primacy. Rather, as currently implemented, it is
a moderate institution with, on net, nonexistent or small positive effects. Board-level and
shop-floor worker representation cause at most small increases in wages, possibly lead to
slight increases in job security and satisfaction, and have largely zero or small positive effects
on firm performance. The small size of these effects may reflect limited power conveyed by
existing codetermination arrangements, cultures of informal worker-management cooperation,
or the influence of other pro-labor institutions. If cultural or institutional features of European
labor markets are key to explaining codetermination's limited impacts, codetermination
might have more noticeable effects if introduced in the United States. Moreover, there are
important practical complementarities between codetermination and other European labor
market institutions. Recent codetermination proposals in the United States sit alongside


                                                44
proposals to adopt other features of the European institutional package, including strong
union representation or sectoral bargaining.
    There are a number of promising directions for future work on codetermination. First, as we
have noted, it remains an open question whether codetermination arrangements that convey
greater power to workers, such as quasi-parity or parity board-level representation in Germany,
have more substantial positive or negative impacts (Svejnar, 1981; Kim, Maug, and Schneider,
2019). Second, while we provide country-level event study analyses, a promising avenue for
future work on general-equilibrium effects of codetermination may be to leverage treatment
variation at the level of industries or local labor markets. Third, beyond a few correlational
tests or heterogeneity analyses, there is a paucity of evidence speaking to the interaction
of codetermination with other labor market institutions (see Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining,
2021, for heterogeneity by collective bargaining prevalence). Fourth, while codetermination
appears to have near-zero effects on average, it remains possible that formal codetermination
rights are more impactful in particular contexts or during particular periods of time--for
example, during economic crises or firm shutdowns (see, e.g., Rehder, 2003). Fifth, due to
data limitations, we lack estimates of the effects of shared governance on intangible outcomes
like worker alienation or feelings of domination or insecurity (a plausible pathway for this
line of work would be merged administrative and individual-level survey data, see Harju,
Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021, for effects on subjective measures of job quality). Sixth, we lack a
thorough body of evidence on the effects of industrial democracy and worker representation
on workers' political engagement and attitudes (for recent work in this area, see Budd, Lamare,
and Timming, 2017, Feigenbaum, Hertel-Fernandez, and Williamson, 2018, and Frymer
and Grumbach, 2021). Seventh, we lack quantitative evidence on the relationship between
codetermination and heterogeneity in management practices (c.f. Bloom et al., 2019, on the
relationship between union strength and management quality in the United States). Eighth,
further examination of the interaction between worker representation and decisions about
outsourcing, nonstandard work arrangements, and the structure of work might yield deeper
insights into the institution's impacts (Burdín and Pérotin, 2019; Katz and Krueger, 2019;
Drenik, Jäger, Plotkin, and Schoefer, forthcoming). Finally, looking forward, systems of worker
representation may interact importantly with technological change, including the spread of
automation, workplace monitoring technologies, and algorithmic decision-making (Autor,
Mindell, and Reynolds, 2019; Belloc, Burdín, and Landini, 2020; Kasy and Abebe, 2021).
    We close by reiterating that our paper focuses solely on the economic consequences of
codetermination. Addison (2009) observes that, perhaps surprisingly, economic considerations
have not historically been at the forefront of the German public debate about codetermination.
Rather, the conversation has been dominated by non-consequentialist justifications of codeter-
mination rooted in principles of economic democracy and the dignity of work (see, e.g., the


                                              45
1971 Freiburger Thesen, the party platform of the classically-liberal FDP, which shaped the 1976
expansion of board-level codetermination during its time as a junior coalition partner of the
SPD). In 2001, the German government dismissed concerns that its drafted extension of the
Works Council Act would be costly to businesses by declaring:

     Democracy is not cost neutral. This principle also applies to democracy at the
     workplace and to the resulting system of establishment-level codetermination. (As
     quoted in Addison, 2009, p.22; see Bundestag, 2001)

The idea that democratic political principles should be extended to the realm of private
business has recently regained popularity in analytic political philosophy (Anderson, 2017;
Frega, Herzog, and Neuhäuser, 2019; Herzog, 2020; Walters, 2021). Elizabeth Anderson writes:

     Government is everywhere, not just in the form of the state, but even more
     pervasively in the workplace. [...] The vast majority [of workers] are subject to
     private, authoritarian government, not through their own choice, but through laws
     that have handed nearly all authority to their employers. (Anderson, 2017, p.70-71)

She adds that, once we recognize this fact, we are forced to conclude that:

     [...] There is no adequate substitute for recognizing workers' voice in their
     government. (Anderson, 2017, p.69)

Much of the existing empirical research does not directly speak to these important non-
consequentialist questions. However, our conclusion--that codetermination in its current
form appears to have limited consequences for core economic outcomes--may shift the focus
of the debate to such non-consequentialist arguments.




                                              46
References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2011. "SYNTH: Stata Module to
 Implement Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies." Statistical Software
 Components .

Acemoglu, Daron. 2001. "Good Jobs versus Bad Jobs." Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1):1­21.

------. 2019. "It's Good Jobs, Stupid." Economics for Inclusive Prosperity Research Brief .

Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Giovanni Violante. 2001. "Deunionization, Technical
  Change and Inequality." In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 55.
  Elsevier, 229­264.

Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James Robinson. 2019. "Democracy
  Does Cause Growth." Journal of Political Economy 127 (1):47­100.

Adams, Zoe, Louise Bishop, and Simon Deakin. 2016. "CBR Labor Regulation Index (Dataset
 of 117 Countries)." Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge .

Addison, John. 2009. The Economics of Codetermination: Lessons from the German Experience.
 Palgrave Macmillan.

Addison, John, Claus Schnabel, and Joachim Wagner. 1997. "On the Determinants of Mandatory
 Works Councils in Germany." Industrial Relations 36 (4):419­445.

------. 2001. "Works Councils in Germany: Their Effects on Establishment Performance."
  Oxford Economics Papers 53 (4):659­694.

------. 2004. "The Course of Research into the Economic Consequences of German Works
  Councils." British Journal of Industrial Relations 42 (2):255­281.

Addison, John, Paulino Teixeira, and Thomas Zwick. 2010. "German Works Councils and the
 Anatomy of Wages." ILR Review 63 (2):247­270.

Adler, Emanuel. 1922. "The Works Council Act in Austria." International Labour Review 5 (3).

Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Formal and Real Authority in Organizations." Journal
 of Political Economy 105 (1):1­29.

Aguilera, Ruth and Gregory Jackson. 2003. "The Cross-National Diversity of Corporate
 Governance: Dimensions and Determinants." Academy of Management Review 28 (3).

Anderson, Elizabeth. 2017. Private Government: How Employers Rule Our Lives (and Why We
 Don't Talk about It). Princeton University Press.

                                               47
Aumayr, Christine, Demetriades Stavroula, David Foden, Vera Scepanovics, and Felix Wolf.
 2011. "Employee Representation at Establishment Level in Europe." Eurofound Report .

Autor, David, David Mindell, and Elisabeth Reynolds. 2019. "The Work of the Future: Shaping
 Technology and Institutions." .

Baums, Theodor and Bernd Frick. 1998. "Co-determination in Germany: the Impact of Court
  Decisions on the Market Value of Firms." Economic Analysis London 1:143­162.

Behrens, Martin and Markus Helfen. 2016. "The Foundations of Social Partnership." British
  Journal of Industrial Relations 54 (2):334­357.

Belloc, Filippo, Gabriel Burdín, and Fabio Landini. 2020. "Robots and Worker Voice: An
  Empirical Exploration." IZA DP #13799 .

Benelli, Giuseppe, Claudio Loderer, and Thomas Lys. 1987. "Labor Participation in Corporate
  Policy-Making Decisions: West German's Experience with Codetermination." The Journal of
  Business 60 (4):553­575.

Bermig, Andreas and Bernd Frick. 2010. "Board Size, Board Composition, and Firm Perfor-
  mance: Empirical Evidence from Germany." Working Paper .

Bewley, Truman. 2002. Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession. Harvard University Press.

Bjorheim, Lars. 1974. "The Development of Industrial Democracy in Norway." Conference
  Paper .

Blandhol, Christine, Magne Mogstad, Peter Nilsson, and Ola Vestad. 2020. "Do Employees
  Benefit from Worker Representation on Corporate Boards?" NBER Working Paper .

Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Megha Patnaik, Itay Saporta-
  Eksten, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "What Drives Differences in Management Practices?"
  American Economic Review 109 (5):1648­1683.

Borusyak, Kirill, Xavier Jaravel, and Jann Spiess. 2021. "Revisiting Event Study Designs:
  Robust and Efficient Estimation." Working Paper .

Bryson, Alex and Richard Freeman. 2013. "Employee Perceptions of Working Conditions
  and the Desire for Worker Representation in Britain and the US." Journal of Labor Research
  34:1­29.

Budd, John, J. Ryan Lamare, and Andrew Timming. 2017. "Learning About Democracy
  at Work: Cross-National Evidence on Individual Employee Voice Influencing Political
  Participation in Civil Society." ILR Review 71 (4):956­985.

                                            48
Bundestag. 2001. "Begründung zum Entwurf eines Gesetzes zur Reform des Betriebsverfas-
  sungsgesetzes (Translation: "Justification for the draft law to reform the Works Constitution
  Act")." .

Burdín, Gabriel. 2016. "Equality Under Threat by the Talented: Evidence from Worker-
  Managed Firms." The Economic Journal 126 (594):1372­1403.

Burdín, Gabriel and Andrés Dean. 2009. "New Evidence on Wages and Employment in
  Worker Cooperatives Compared with Capitalist Firms." Journal of Comparative Economics
  37 (4):517­533.

------. 2012. "Revisiting the Objectives of Worker-Managed Firms: An Empirical Assessment."
  Economic Systems 36 (1):158­171.

Burdín, Gabriel and Virginie Pérotin. 2019. "Employee Representation and Flexible Working
  Time." Labour Economics 61.

Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2008. "Bootstrap-Based Improvements
  for Inference with Clustered Errors." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3):414­427.

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
  West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3):967­1015.

Carmichael, Lorne. 1983. "Firm-Specific Human Capital and Promotion Ladders." The Bell
  Journal of Economics :251­258.

Cass, Oren. 2020. "Constraining the Corporation." URL https://americancompass.org/
  essays/constraining-the-corporation/.

Compa, Lance. 2014. "An Overview of Collective Bargaining in the United States." In El derecho
  a la negociación colectiva: Monografías de temas laborales, edited by Juan Gorelli Hernández.
  Seville: Consejo Andaluz de Relaciones Laborales, 91­98.

Conchon, Aline. 2011. "Board-Level Employee Representation Rights in Europe: Facts and
 Trends." European Trade Union Institute Report 121 .

Dammann, Jens and Horst Eidenmueller. 2021. "Codetermination: A Poor Fit for U.S.
 Corporations." Columbia Business Law Review 2020 (3).

Drenik, Andres, Simon Jäger, Pascuel Plotkin, and Benjamin Schoefer. forthcoming. "Paying
  Outsourced Labor: Direct Evidence from Linked Temp Agency-Worker-Client Data." Review
  of Economics and Statistics .



                                              49
ETUI. 2020. "National Industrial Relations." URL https://www.worker-participation.eu/
  National-Industrial-Relations/Countries.

Eurofound. 1997. "Amendment of the Dutch Works Councils Act: a few surprises."
  URL https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/article/1997/amendment-of-
  the-dutch-works-councils-act-a-few-surprises.

Feigenbaum, James, Alexander Hertel-Fernandez, and Vanessa Williamson. 2018. "From the
  Bargaining Table to the Ballot Box: Political Effects of Right to Work Laws." NBER Working
  Paper .

Ferreras, Isabelle. 2017. Firms as Political Entities: Saving Democracy Through Economic Bicameral-
  ism. Cambridge University Press.

Fitzroy, Felix and Kornelius Kraft. 1985. "Unionization, Wages and Efficiency." Kyklos
  38 (4):537­554.

------. 1987. "Efficiency and Internal Organization: Works Councils in West German Firms."
  Economica 54 (216):493­504.

FitzRoy, Felix and Michael Nolan. 2021. "The Inefficiency of Employment: The Case for
  Workplace Democracy." Working Paper .

Franca, Valentina and Marko Pahor. 2014. "Influence of Management Attitudes on the
  Implementation of Employee Participation." Economic and Industrial Democracy 35 (1):115­
  142.

Frandsen, Brigham. forthcoming. "The Surprising Impacts of Unionization: Evidence from
  Matched Employer-Employee Data." Journal of Labor Economics .

Fraser, Nancy, Chantal Mouffe, Saskia Sassen, Jan-Werner Müller, Dani Rodrik, Thomas Piketty,
  Gabriel Zucman, Ha-Joon Chang et al. 2020. "Humans Are Not Resources: Coronavirus
  Shows Why We Must Democratise Work." The Guardian, May 15, 2020 .

Freeman, Richard and Edward Lazear. 1995. "An Economic Analysis of Works Councils." In
  Works Councils: Consultation, Representation, Cooperation in Industrial Relations, edited by Joel
  Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck. NBER Comparative Labor Markets Series.

Freeman, Richard and James Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? Basic Books.

Frega, Roberto, Lisa Herzog, and Christian Neuhäuser. 2019. "Workplace Democracy--The
  Recent Debate." Philosophy Compass 14 (4).



                                                50
Frege, Carola and John Godard. 2014. "Varieties of Capitalism and Job Quality: The Attainment
  of Civic Principles at Work in the United States and Germany." American Sociological Review
  79 (5).

Friedman, Milton. 1951. The Impact of the Union, chap. Some Comments on the Significance of
  Labor Unions for Economic Policy. Harcourt Brace & Company.

------. 1970. "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits." The New York
  Times Magazine .

Frymer, Paul and Jacob Grumbach. 2021. "Labor Unions and White Racial Politics." American
  Journal of Political Science 65 (1):225­240.

Furubotn, Eirik. 1988. "Codetermination and the Modern Theory of the Firm: A Property-
  Rights Analysis." The Journal of Business 61 (2):165­181.

Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. 2016. "Firm Size Distortions and the
 Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France." American Economic Review 106 (11):3439­
 79.

Gold, Michael, Norbert Kluge, and Aline Conchon. 2010. `In the Union and on the Board':
 Experiences of Board-Level Employee Representatives across Europe. European Trade Union
 Institute.

Gorton, Gary and Frank Schmid. 2004. "Capital, Labor, and the Firm: A Study of German
 Codetermination." Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (5):863­905.

Gralla, Rafael and Kornelius Kraft. 2018. "Separating Introduction Effects from Selectivity
  Effects: The Differences in Employment Patterns of Codetermined Firms." Labour 32 (1):93­
 111.

Greenwald, Daniel, Martin Lettau, and Sydney Ludvigson. 2018. "How the Wealth Was Won:
  Factor Shares as Market Fundamentals." NBER Working Paper .

Gregoric, Aleksandra and Marc Steffen Rapp. 2019. "Board-Level Employee Representation
 (BLER) and Firms' Responses to Crisis." Industrial Relations 58 (3):376­422.

Hall, Peter and David Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of
 Comparative Advantage. Oxford University Press.

Hammond, Samuel. 2018.     "Elizabeth Warren's Corporate Catastrophe."                   URL
 https://www.nationalreview.com/2018/08/elizabeth-warren-accountable-
 capitalism-act-terrible-idea/.

                                             51
Hansmann, Henry and Reinier Kraakman. 2000. "The End of History for Corporate Law." The
 Georgetown Law Journal 89:439­468.

Harju, Jarkko, Simon Jäger, and Benjamin Schoefer. 2021. "Voice at Work." NBER Working
 Paper .

Hayden, Grant M. and Matthew T. Bodie. 2021. "Codetermination in Theory and Practice."
 Florida Law Review 73 (2):1­42.

Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander, William Kimball, and Thomas Kochan. 2020. "What Forms of
 Representation Do American Workers Want? Implications for Theory, Policy, and Practice."
 ILR Review .

Herzog, Lisa. 2020. "Citizens' Autonomy and Corporate Cultural Power." Journal of Social
 Philosophy 51 (2):205­230.

Heywood, John and Uwe Jirjahn. 2009. "Family-Friendly Practices and Worker Representation
 in Germany." Industrial Relations 48 (1):121­145.

Hirschman, Albert. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.

Hockett, Robert, Kaushik Basu, Dan Alpert, Jennifer Taub, Robert Frank, Saule Omarova,
 Gautam Mukunda, Fadhel Kaboub, K. Sabeel Rahman, Pavlina Tcherneva, Stephen Lubben,
 Thomas Herndon, Jeff Madrick, and William Lazonick. 2018. "Letter to Elizabeth Warren in
 Support of the Accountable Capitalism Act." .

Höpner, Martin. 2004. "Unternehmensmitbestimmung unter Beschuss. Die Mitbestimmungs-
 debatte im Licht der sozialwissenschaftlichen Forschung." Industrielle Beziehungen/The
 German Journal of Industrial Relations :347­379.

Hörisch, Felix. 2012. "The Macro-Economic Effect of Codetermination on Income Equality."
 SSRN Working Paper 2187264 .

Hurley, Michael. 1953. "The Belgian Enterprise Councils, 1948-1953." The American Catholic
 Sociological Review 14 (4):218­229.

Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, and Jörg Heining. 2021. "Labor in the Boardroom." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 136 (2):669­725.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. 1979. "Rights and Production Functions: An Applica-
  tion to Labor-Managed Firms and Codetermination." The Journal of Business 52 (4):469­506.

Jirjahn, Uwe. 2009. "The Introduction of Works Councils in German Establishments - Rent
   Seeking or Rent Protection?" British Journal of Industrial Relations 47 (3):521­545.

                                            52
------. 2010. "Works Councils and Employment Growth in German Establishments." Cam-
  bridge Journal of Economics 34 (3):475­500.

------. 2017. "Works Councils and Collective Bargaining in Germany: A Simple Theoretical
  Extension to Reconcile Conflicting Empirical Findings." Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
  Economics 173 (2):322­346.

Kasy, Maximilian and Rediet Abebe. 2021. "Fairness, Equality, and Power in Algorithmic
  Decision-Making." In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
 Transparency. 576­586.

Katz, Lawrence and Alan Krueger. 2019. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrange-
  ments in the United States, 1995-2015." ILR Review 72 (2).

Keskinen, Maa. 2017. "Workplace Cooperation and Firm Performance ­ Evidence from
  Finland." Aalto University Master's Thesis .

Kettunen, Pauli. 2012. "Reinterpreting the Historicity of the Nordic Model." Nordic Journal of
  Working Life Studies 2 (4):21­43.

Kim, Han, Ernst Maug, and Christoph Schneider. 2019. "Labor Representation in Governance
  as an Insurance Mechanism." Review of Finance 22 (4):1251­1289.

Knudsen, Herman. 2006. "Workplace Representation in Denmark ­ Structure and Role."
 HIVA-EZA Conference Paper .

Kochan, Thomas and William Kimball. 2019. "Unions, Worker Voice, and Management
  Practices: Implications for a High-Productivity, High-Wage Economy." RSF: The Russell Sage
 Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 5 (5):88­108.

Kochan, Thomas, Duanyi Yang, William Kimball, and Erin Kelly. 2019. "Worker Voice in
 America: Is There a Gap between What Workers Expect and What They Experience?" ILR
 Review 72 (1):3­38.

Kohler, Thomas. 1986. "Models of Worker Participation: The Uncertain Significance of Section
  8(a)(2)." Boston College Law Review 27 (3):499­551.

Kraft, Kornelius and Julia Lang. 2008. "The Causes and Consequences of Adopting a Works
  Council." Journal of Economics and Statistics 228 (5-6):512­532.

Lafer, Gordon and Lola Loustaunau. 2020. "Fear at Work." URL https://www.epi.org/
  publication/fear-at-work-how-employers-scare-workers-out-of-unionizing/.



                                               53
Lazear, Edward. 1979. "Why is there Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political Economy
  87 (6):1261­1284.

Lee, David and Alexandre Mas. 2012. "Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evidence
  From Financial Markets, 1961-1999." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1):333­378.

Levine, David and Laura D'Andrea Tyson. 1990. Paying for Productivity, chap. Participation,
  Productivity, and the Firm's Environment. Brookings Institution.

Levinson, Klas. 2000. "Codetermination in Sweden: Myth and Reality." Economic and Industrial
  Democracy 21:457­473.

Liebman, Wilma. 2017. "Does Federal Labor Law Preemption Doctrine Allow Experiments
  With Social Dialogue?" Harvard Law and Policy Review .

Lin, Chen, Thomas Schmid, and Yuhai Xuan. 2018. "Employee Representation and Financial
  Leverage." Journal of Financial Economics 127 (2):303­324.

Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis Snower. 1989. The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and
  Unemployment. MIT Press Books.

Malcomson, James. 1983. "Trade Unions and Economic Efficiency." Economic Journal 93:51­65.

Mazumder, Soumyajit and Alan Yan. 2020. "What Do Americans Want From (Private)
 Government? Experimental Evidence Demonstrates that Americans Want Workplace
 Democracy." Working Paper .

McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
 Design: A Density Test." Journal of Econometrics 142 (2):698­714.

McGaughey, Ewan. 2016. "The Codetermination Bargains: The History of German Corporate
 and Labor Law." Columbia Journal of European Law 23 (1):1­43.

------. 2018. "Votes at Work in Britain: Shareholder Monopolisation and the 'Single Channel'."
  Industrial Law Journal 47 (1).

Millon, David. 2013. "Radical Shareholder Primacy." University of St. Thomas Law Journal
 10 (4):1013­1044.

Mohrenweiser, Jens, Paul Marginson, and Uschi Backes-Gellner. 2011. "What Triggers the
 Establishment of a Works Council?" Economic and Industrial Democracy 33 (2):295­316.

Moss, Bernard. 1988. "Industrial Law Reform in an Era of Retreat: The Auroux Laws in France."
 Work, Employment & Society 2 (3):317­334.

                                             54
Mueller, Steffen and Jens Stegmaier. 2017. "The Dynamic Effects of Works Councils on
 Labour Productivity: First Evidence from Panel Data." British Journal of Industrial Relations
 55 (2):372­395.

Müller, Steffen and Jens Stegmaier. 2020. "Why Is There Resistance to Works Councils in
 Germany? An Economic Perspective." Economic and Industrial Democracy 41 (3):540­561.

Osterman, Paul. 2011. "Institutional Labor Economics, The New Personnel Economics and
 Internal Labor Markets: A Reconsideration." ILR Review 64 (4):635­651.

Paster, Thomas. 2012. "Do German Employers Support Board-Level Codetermination? The
  Paradox of Individual Support and Collective Opposition." Socio-Economic Review 10 (3):471­
  495.

Piketty, Thomas. 2020. Capital and Ideology. Harvard University Press.

Posner, Cydney. 2019. "So Long to Shareholder Primacy." URL https://corpgov.law.
  harvard.edu/2019/08/22/so-long-to-shareholder-primacy/.

Redeker, Nils. 2019. The Politics of Stashing Wealth: The Demise of Labor Power and the Global Rise
  of Corporate Savings. Working Paper.

Rehder, Britta. 2003. Betriebliche Bündnisse für Arbeit in Deutschland: Mitbestimmung und
  Flächentarif im Wandel. Campus Verlag.

Roodman, David, Morten Nielsen, James MacKinnon, and Matthew Webb. 2019. "Fast and
  Wild: Bootstrap Inference in Stata using boottest." The Stata Journal 19 (1):4­60.

Rose, Caspar. 2008. "The Challenges of Employee-Appointed Board Members for Corporate
  Governance: The Danish Evidence." European Business Organization Law Review 9 (2):215­235.

Sandberg, Ake, Gunnar Broms, Arne Grip, Lars Sundström, Jesper Steen, and Peter Ullmark.
  1992. Technological Change and Codetermination in Sweden. Temple University Press.

Shackford, Scott. 2018. "Elizabeth Warren Plans to Destroy Capitalism By Pretend-
  ing to 'Save' It." URL https://reason.com/2018/08/15/elizabeth-warren-plans-to-
  destroy-capita/.

Silvia, Stephen. 2018. "The United Auto Workers' Attempts to Unionize Volkswagen Chat-
   tanooga." ILR Review 71 (3):600­624.

------. 2020. "The UAW Attempts to Organize Volkswagen Chattanooga: The Sequel." Working
  Paper .


                                                55
Sippola, Markku. 2012. "Local Bargaining and Codetermination: Finnish Experience in
  Comparative Perspective." European Journal of Industrial Relations 18 (1):53­69.

Smith, Stephen. 1991. "On the Economic Rationale for Codetermination Law." Journal of
 Economic Behavior and Organization 16 (3):261­281.

Stansbury, Anna and Lawrence Summers. 2020. "The Declining Worker Power Hypothesis:
  An Explanation for the Recent Evolution of the American Economy." NBER Working Paper .

Stettes, Oliver. 2007. "Die Arbeitnehmermitbestimmung im Aufsichtsrat: Ergebnisse einer
  Unternehmensbefragung." IW-Trends-Vierteljahresschrift zur empirischen Wirtschaftsforschung
  34 (1):17­30.

Stout, Lynn A. 2002. "Bad and Not-so-Bad Arguments for Shareholder Primacy." Cornell Law
  Faculty Publications Paper 448:1189­1210.

Strine Jr., Leo. 2002. "The Social Responsibility of Boards of Directors and Stockholders in
  Charge of Control Transactions: Is There Any "There" There?" Southern California Law
  Review 75 (5):1169­1188.

Strine Jr., Leo, Aneil Kovvali, and Oluwatomi Williams. 2021. "Lifting Labor Lifting Labor's
  Voice: A Principled Path Toward Greater Worker Voice And Power Within American
  Corporate Governance." Faculty Scholarship at Penn Law .

Summers, Clyde. 1982. "Codetermination in the United States: A Projection of Problems and
  Potentials." Journal of Comparative Corporate Law and Securities Regulations 4:155­191.

Svejnar, Jan. 1981. "Relative Wage Effects of Unions, Dictatorship and Codetermination:
  Econometric Evidence from Germany." The Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (2):188­197.

Thelen, Kathleen Ann. 1991. Union of Parts: Labor Politics in Postwar Germany. Cornell University
  Press.

Uusitalo, Roope and Juhana Vartiainen. 2009. "Finland: Firm Factors in Wages and Wage
 Changes." In The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison, edited by Edward Lazear
 and Kathryn Shaw. NBER, University of Chicago Press, 149­178.

Van Den Berg, Annette, Yolanda Grift, and Arjen Van Witteloostun. 2000. "Collective Decision
  Making: Toward a Relational Perspective." American Behavioral Scientist 43 (8):1301­1315.

van der Velden, Sjaak. 2018. "Strike Statistics and their Calculation: Remarks on a New Data
  Collection Project." .



                                               56
Visser, Jelle. 2021. "OECD/AIAS ICTWSS Database: Detailed Note on Definitions, Measure-
  ment, and Sources." OECD .

Vogel, Steven. 2019.   "Elizabeth Warren Wants to Stop Inequality Before It
  Starts."  URL https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/03/opinion/elizabeth-warren-
  economic-policy-democrats.html.

Votinius, Jenny. 2012. "Employee Representation at the Enterprise: Sweden." Bulletin of
  Comparative Labour Relations .

Walters, Jordan David Thomas. 2021. "On the Efficiency Objection to Workplace Democracy."
 Ethical Theory and Moral Practice .

Weipert, Axel. 2012. JahrBuch für Forschungen zur Geschichte der Arbeiterbewegung (Translation:
 "Yearbook for Research on History of the Labor Movement", chap. Vor den Toren der Macht. Die
 Demonstration am 13. Januar 1920 vor dem Reichstag (Translation: "At the Gates of Power:
 The Demonstration on January 13, 1920, in Front of the Reichstag.

Western, Bruce and Jake Rosenfeld. 2011. "Unions, Norms, and the Rise in US Wage Inequality."
 American Sociological Review 76 (4):513­537.

Wheeler, Jeff. 2002. "Employee Involvement in Action: Reviewing Swedish Codetermination."
 Labor Studies Journal 26 (4):71­97.

Williamson, Kevin. 2018. "Elizabeth Warren's Batty Plan to Nationalize... Every-
 thing."   URL https://www.nationalreview.com/2018/08/elizabeth-warren-plan-
 nationalize-everything-woos-hard-left/.

Yglesias, Matthew. 2018.   "Elizabeth Warren Has a Plan to Save Capitalism."
  URL     https://www.vox.com/2018/8/15/17683022/elizabeth-warren-accountable-
  capitalism-corporations.




                                              57
9     Figures

                          Figure 1: Shareholder Primacy versus Codetermination


                     (a) Shareholder Primacy                             (b) Codetermination
                 Shareholders                                                      Workers and Shareholders
                                                                 Board-Level
                                                                Codetermination



        Appoint                 Serve the                             Appoint             Serve the          Shop-Floor
       and control              interests of                         and control          interests of     Codetermination
                     Managers                                              Managers                Shop-Floor Committees
                                                        Elect



                                                                              Control, Information, Consultation
              Control

                                                                                                                        Elect
                     Workers                                                             Workers




Note: This figure compares the structure of corporate governance under shareholder primacy (Panel (a)) versus
codetermination (Panel (b)).


                          Figure 2: Board-Level Representation Worldwide (2015)




Note: This map displays the existence and strength of laws mandating board-level worker representation, as of
2015. A country is assigned a value of 1 if workers in all companies above some size threshold have a right to
board-level representation, and 0 if there is no set of companies where workers have this right. Scores between 0
and 1 reflect weaker laws, for example laws requiring only that formerly state-owned companies have board-level
worker representatives. Data are from the "Codetermination: board membership" variable in the CBR Labor
Regulation Index dataset; see Adams, Bishop, and Deakin (2016) for a complete description of the dataset.


                                                       58
                       Figure 3: Shop-Floor Representation Worldwide (2015)




Note: This map displays the existence and strength of laws giving workers rights to shop-floor representation, as
of 2015. A country is assigned a value of 1 if a right to shop-floor representation exists and the shop-floor
representatives are given co-decision-making powers; a value of 0.67 if a right to shop-floor representation exists
but councils do not have co-decision-making powers; a value of 0.5 if a right to shop-floor representation exists
except in cases where employers can point to pre-existing alternative arrangements; and a value of 0.33 if
workers have rights to information and consultation but not rights to shop-floor representation. There is scope
for further idiosyncratic variation between 0 and 1 based on the strength of the laws. Data are from the
"Codetermination and information and consultation of workers" variable in the CBR Labor Regulation Index
dataset; see Adams, Bishop, and Deakin (2016) for a complete description of the dataset.


                 Figure 4: Powers of Shop-Floor Representatives in Europe (2019)




Note: This map displays the powers of shop-floor representatives in European countries, as of 2019. A value of 0
indicates that no right to shop-floor representation exists; a value of 0.33 says that a right to shop-floor
representation exists, and shop-floor representatives have information and consultation rights, but with no
possibility of judicial redress; a value of 0.66 says that shop-floor representatives have a right to information and
to provide advice, and can appeal to employment courts if their advice is ignored; and a value of 1 says that
shop-floor representatives have co-decision-making powers on certain issues. Data are from the "WC_rights"
variable in the OECD/AIAS ICTWSS database; see Visser (2021) for a full description of the dataset.

                                                         59
Figure 5: Institutional Differences Between Codetermined and Non-Codetermined Countries
             (a) Primary Level of Collective Bargaining                                                                                                                                                                (b) Union Density
                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                          DNK            NLD                                                                                                      90
                                                        National                 SWE




                                                                                                                                                        Union Membership as % of Workforce
                                                                          ITA            NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                         Industry-National                BEL    AUS     AUT                                       BEL                                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  60     NOR     AUT       DNK                                      FIN         SWE
                                                                                                                                   NOR                                                                           AUS
                                                                                                          Mean                                                                                                                     Mean
                                                                          CHE    NZL     FIN
                                                                                                                          FIN      FRA       ITA                                                  50                                                                NOR         BEL
                                                         Industry         GBR    DEU     FRA
                                                                                                                          NLD      DEU       CHE                                                                 IRL                               Mean
                                                                                                                          AUT      DNK       SWE                                                         GBR     BEL       NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         DEU
                                                                                                Mean                                                                                                           USA   CHE   FIN     Mean                                   ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  30     CAN               ITA                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AUT         IRL
               Company-Industry                                                                                                    AUS                                                                                                                        GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20             FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean       AUS     NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DEU
                                                                                                          Mean                                                                                    10                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                          CAN                USA
                                                        Company           USA    IRL     CAN
                                                                                                                          IRL
                                                                                                                                   NZL
                                                                                                                                             GBR                                                   0
                                                                                       1960                               2018                                                                                         1960                                   2018

                                                                           Codetermined Countries        Non-Codetermined Countries                                                                            Codetermined Countries            Non-Codetermined Countries


                                                   (c) Labor Market Regulation Intensity                                                                                                                  (d) Union Density Over Time



                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                  100



                                                                                                                                                        Union Membership as % of Workforce
                                                   90
       Percentile of Labor Regulation Intensity




                                                                    ITA                                             ITA          FRA
                                                                                                              NLD                        BEL
                                                   80                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                          FRA
                                                             NLD                                                                       NOR
                                                                                                       Mean                SWE
                                                   70                     DEU
                                                             NOR
                                                   60                                                                            DEU
                                                                                         Mean
                                                                                                                                                                       40




                                                   50                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                             AUT
                                                                          BEL
                                                   40
                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                   30        CHE
                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                          SWE
                                                                    CAN                                                                GBR
                                                   20      GBR                  DNK      Mean          Mean                CHE
                                                         IRL        NZL
                                                   10               AUS                                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                 AUS         NZL
                                                                    USA                                             USA
                                                    0                                                                                                                                             1960                      1980                       2000                           2020
                                                                            1960                                    2018                                                                                                                  Year

                                                              Codetermined Countries              Non-Codetermined Countries                                                                                   Codetermined Countries                 Non-Codetermined Countries




Note: This figure displays institutional differences between European countries with codetermination laws and
comparable countries without codetermination laws. The sample of countries consists of the European
democracies included in our cross-country event studies (as explained in Appendix Section B.1), as well as the
liberal market economies of the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. Panel (a) displays the
degree of centralization of collective bargaining in each country in 1960 and in 2018, on a 1-5 point scale. Panel
(b) displays union density (the percentage of workers who belong to a union) in each country in 1960 and 2018,
and Panel (d) presents a time-series plot of the unweighted mean union density in the codetermined versus
non-codetermined groups. Data for Panels (a), (b), and (d) are drawn from the OECD/IAIS ICTWSS dataset
(Visser, 2021). Panel (c) presents each country's percentile ranking worldwide in terms of the overall intensity of
labor regulations, in 1970 and 2013. The overall intensity of labor regulations is measured by the sum of all the
labor regulation variables in the CBR Labor Regulation Index (Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016), excluding the
variables about codetermination and unionization. The global sample within which our sample of countries are
ranked consists of the 84 countries in the CBR dataset with nonmissing data back to 1970. Across all panels,
within the "1960" and "2018" columns, horizontal dispersion in the dots does not signify anything; it is just to
make the dot labels readable. The same holds for, in Panel (a), the slight vertical dispersion around the
"Industry" and "National" collective bargaining levels.




                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                Figure 6: Effects of Codetermination Reforms on Aggregate Outcomes
                                                      (a) Wage Growth (ppt)                                                                                                           (b) Labor Share (ppt)

                                            Pre-Reform Coef = 0.813 (SE 0.793) Post-Reform Coef = 0.146 (SE 0.841)                                                         Pre-Reform Coef = -0.394 (SE 0.779)Post-Reform Coef = 0.250 (SE 1.078)
                                            Bootstrapped p-value = 0.267       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.875                                                                Bootstrapped p-value = 0.586       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.778
                                                                               BJS Coef = -0.547 (SE 0.436)                                                                                                   BJS Coef = 0.630 (SE 1.124)
       Effect on Wage Growth (ppt)




                                                                                                                     Effect on Labor Share (ppt)
                                     4                                                                                                                              4


                                     2                                                                                                                              2


                                     0                                                                                                                              0


                                     -2                                                                                                                             -2


                                     -4                                                                                                                             -4
                                          -10              -5                 0                5                10                                                       -10               -5                0                5                10
                                                                   Year Relative to Reform                                                                                                        Year Relative to Reform


                                                       (c) TFP Growth (ppt)                                                                                         (d) Net Capital Formation (ppt of GDP)

                                            Pre-Reform Coef = 0.937 (SE 0.562) Post-Reform Coef = 0.310 (SE 0.691)                                                         Pre-Reform Coef = -0.317 (SE 0.948)Post-Reform Coef = -1.722 (SE 1.146)
                                            Bootstrapped p-value = 0.076       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.628


                                                                                                                     Effect on Net Capital Formation (ppt of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                           Bootstrapped p-value = 0.707       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.096
                                     4                                         BJS Coef = -0.541 (SE 0.427)                                                         4                                         BJS Coef = -1.396 (SE 1.011)
       Effect on TFP Growth (ppt)




                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                     2

                                                                                                                                                                    0

                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                    -2


                                     -2                                                                                                                             -4


                                                                                                                                                                    -6
                                     -4
                                          -10              -5                 0                5                10                                                       -10               -5                0                5                10
                                                                   Year Relative to Reform                                                                                                        Year Relative to Reform


                                            (e) GDP per Capita Growth (ppt)                                                                                         (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (ppt)
                                     6      Pre-Reform Coef = 1.308 (SE 0.817) Post-Reform Coef = 0.473 (SE 0.947)                                                         Pre-Reform Coef = 0.121 (SE 0.789) Post-Reform Coef = -0.002 (SE 0.617)
                                            Bootstrapped p-value = 0.091       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.581
                                                                                                                     Effect on Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (ppt)




                                                                               BJS Coef = -0.535 (SE 1.286)                                                                Bootstrapped p-value = 0.865       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.995
                                                                                                                                                                    4                                         BJS Coef = -0.081 (SE 1.032)
                                     4
       Effect on GDP Growth (ppt)




                                     2                                                                                                                              2



                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                    0

                                     -2


                                                                                                                                                                    -2
                                     -4
                                          -10              -5                 0                5                10                                                       -10               -5                0                5                10
                                                                   Year Relative to Reform                                                                                                        Year Relative to Reform




Note: These panels present coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions where the outcome variable is
an aggregate economic outcome, the coefficients represent the effects of codetermination reforms, and the
sample is our full list of country-reforms and their respective synthetic control units (the sample in Panel (f)
differs from the sample in the others, for reasons described in Appendix Section B.6). In Panel (a), the dependent
variable is wage growth in year (compared to year - 1, in %); in Panel (b), the dependent variable is labor
income as a share of GDP in year (in %); in Panel (c), it is total factor productivity growth in year (in %); in
Panel (d), it is net capital formation in year as a % of year GDP; in Panel (e), it is growth in GDP per capita in
year (%); and in Panel (f), it is the share of national income held by the bottom 90%. Standard errors are
clustered at the country-reform level. We report average pre-reform and average post-reform coefficients, and
report bootstrapped p-values for those coefficients due to the small number of clusters. In addition, we report
post-reform coefficients estimated using the imputation   61methodology developed by Borusyak, Jaravel, and
Spiess (2021). See Appendix Sections B.1-B.7 for a full description of the sample, data, and methodology.
                                                                            Figure 7: Codetermination and Industrial Relations
                                                           (a) Event Study: Strike Intensity                                                                                        (b) Event Study: Union Density Growth
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pre-Reform Coef = -0.400 (SE 1.298)Post-Reform Coef = 1.202 (SE 1.384)
                                                       Pre-Reform Coef = -0.041 (SE 0.102)Post-Reform Coef = 0.081 (SE 0.112)                                                              Bootstrapped p-value = 0.723       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.346
                                                       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.653       Bootstrapped p-value = 0.453
                                                                                          BJS Coef = 0.115 (SE 0.083)                                                                                                         BJS Coef = 1.563 (SE 0.861)




                                                                                                                                             Effect on Union Density Growth (ppt)
                                               .5
       Effect on Strike Intensity Rank (0-1)




                                                                                                                                                                                    5




                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                               -.5
                                                     -10              -5                              0                   5        10                                                    -10              -5                 0                5                10
                                                                                           Year Relative to Reform                                                                                                Year Relative to Reform


                                                                        (c) Cross-Sectional: Codetermination Laws and Cooperative-
                                                                        ness in Industrial Relations

                                                                                                          7
                                                                           Labor-Management Cooperation




                                                                                                          6


                                                                                                          5


                                                                                                          4


                                                                                                          3


                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                  Slope = 0.141 (SE 0.137)
                                                                                                                  Corr = 0.115 (p-value 0.236)
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                              0               .5                     1                                                   1.5                      2
                                                                                                                        Strength of Codetermination Laws


Note: Panels (a) and (b) plot coefficients from our standard cross-country event study specifications (see Note to
Figure 6), for industrial relations outcome variables. The dependent variable in Panel (a), strike intensity, is a
continuous variable between 0 and 1, with a value of 1 representing the highest-ranked year in that country (the
year with the most intense strike activity). A positive coefficient means an increase in strike intensity, and a
negative coefficient represents a decrease in strike intensity. The dependent variable in Panel (b) is union density
growth in year relative to year - 1, in %. Panel (c) is a binned scatter plot displaying the cross-sectional
correlation between the strength of a country's codetermination laws (as measured by the CBR Labor Regulation
Index) and the degree of cooperativeness in the country's industrial relations (as measured by a 1-7 point survey
item from the World Economic Forum's Executive Opinion survey, described in Appendix Section B.3). We
report the slope of the relationship, a robust standard error, and a correlation coefficient and p-value.




                                                                                                                                        62
  Figure 8: Informal Worker Involvement in the 2013 and 2019 European Company Survey


                            (a) Worker Involvement (2013 ECS)                                                                                                            (b) Worker Influence (2019 ECS)
                      100                                                                                                                                       50


                        80                                                                                                                                      40
       % of Firms




                                                                                                                           % of Firms
                        60                                                                                                                                      30


                        40                                                                                                                                      20


                        20                                                                                                                                      10


                            0                                                                                                                                    0
                                        Informed              Asked to Give View               Involved in Decision                                                       Not at All            Small Extent        Moderate Extent       Great Extent

                                           Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)                                                                                Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)
                                           Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)                                                                                   Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)
                                           Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)                                                                             Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)


                      (c) Involvement by Firm Size (2013 ECS)                                                               (d) Codetermination Laws vs Involvement
                                                                                                                                                                                             Turkey


                                                                                                                           % of Firms with Worker Involvement
                                         Consulted                                             Involved                                                         80
                      100                                                        100

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Romania
                       80                                                         80                                                                            70                 Iceland                                            Austria

                                                                                                                                                                                             Macedonia                    Sweden                        Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lithuania                           Netherlands       Germany
         % of Firms




                                                                    % of Firms




                       60                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                60                        Montenegro                          France Denmark     Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Latvia                     Slovakia Croatia Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                   Malta Ireland Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                          CyprusSpain
                       40                                                         40                                                                                               Bulgaria      Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                          GreecePoland
                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                   United Kingdom
                       20                                                         20                                                                                                                  Estonia

                                                                                                                                                                40                                                             Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Portugal
                        0                                                          0
                                Small      Medium     Large                            Small    Medium       Large                                                   Slope = -0.667 (SE 2.663)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hungary
                                          Firm Size                                            Firm Size                                                             Corr = -0.041 (p-value 0.822)
                                                                                                                                                                30
                                         Neither                                          Workers Directly                                                           0                  .5                      1            1.5                    2
                                         Worker Representatives                           Both                                                                                         Strength of Codetermination Laws



Note: Panel (a): the 2013 ECS asks managers if, in the past 3 years, their firm underwent a major change in any of
a list of areas (remuneration, use of technology, work organization/allocation, recruitment policies, and working
time arrangements). The 68% of managers who say "yes" are asked which one was the most important change,
and then asked whether workers were directly (1) informed in advance about that change, (2) consulted about
that change, or (3) involved in decision-making about that change. Managers in establishments with worker
representation are additionally asked whether worker representatives were informed, consulted, or involved
in the decision. The dark red bars plot responses about direct involvement from managers in firms without
formal worker representatives. Light red bars plot responses about direct involvement from firms with worker
representatives, and blue bars plot responses about worker representative involvement in firms with worker
representation. Panel (b): in the 2019 ECS, managers are asked how much influence workers directly exercise over
decisions about the organization of work. Managers in firms with worker representation are also asked about
the influence of worker representatives. Responses are plotted in dark red, light red, and blue bars analogous to
those in Panel (a). The same questions are also asked about decision-making in four other areas; responses in
those four areas are plotted in Appendix Figure A.13. Panel (c) plots responses to the same questions as Panel (a),
split up by firm size (small firms are those with fewer than 50 workers; medium firms are between 50 and 250;
large firms are 250+). Grey bars represent firms where workers were not involved at all in the last major decision,
red bars represent firms where workers were directly involved (and worker representatives were not involved),
blue bars represent firms where worker representatives were involved (and workers were not directly involved),
and purple bars represent firms where both workers directly and worker representatives were involved. All
firms, including those without formal worker representation, are included. Panel (d): presents a scatterplot from
a regression of the percentage of firms in a country who involved workers or worker representatives in their last
major decision (from the same questions as Panels (a) and (c)) on a measure of the strength of board-level and
shop-floor representation laws (calculated from the CBR Labor Regulation Index, Adams, Bishop, and Deakin,
2016).
                                                                                                                      63
                                 Online Appendix of:
                      What Does Codetermination Do?
           Simon Jäger, Shakked Noy, Benjamin Schoefer

Contents
A Appendix Figures                                                                                               65

B Event Studies: Data and Empirical Methodology                                                                  78
  B.1 Sample Construction and Identifying Codetermination Reforms                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   78
  B.2 Strikes Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   86
  B.3 Cooperative Industrial Relations Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   88
  B.4 Union Density Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   89
  B.5 Macroeconomic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   89
  B.6 Income Inequality Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   90
  B.7 Empirical Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   90

Online Appendix References                                                                                       93




                                                64
A      Appendix Figures

                                                                  Figure A.1: Aggregate Synthetic Control Plots


                                                           (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                         (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                             5                                                                                                            63
                                                                                            Treated Countries                                                                                                  Treated Countries
                                                                                            Synthetic Controls                                                                                                 Synthetic Controls

                                             4                                                                                                            62
          Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                       Labor Share (%)
                                             3                                                                                                            61



                                                                                                                                                          60
                                             2


                                                                                                                                                          59
                                             1


                                                                                                                                                          58
                                             0
                                                 -10         -5              0              5                10                                                 -10          -5                0               5                10
                                                                  Year Relative to Reform                                                                                           Year Relative to Reform


                  (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                                                (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                             13
                                                                                            Treated Countries                                                                                                  Treated Countries
                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                            Synthetic Controls                                                                                                 Synthetic Controls
          Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                             12
                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                       TFP Growth (%)




                                             11
                                                                                                                                                           2


                                             10
                                                                                                                                                          1.5


                                                 9                                                                                                         1



                                                 8                                                                                                         .5
                                                     -10     -5              0              5                10                                                 -10          -5                 0              5                10
                                                                  Year Relative to Reform                                                                                            Year Relative to Reform


                                                      (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                       (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                             12                                                                                                           72
                                                                                            Treated Countries                                                         Treated Countries
                                                                                            Synthetic Controls                                                        Synthetic Controls
                                                                                                                       Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                                          71

                                             10
          GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                          70



                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                          69




                                                                                                                                                          68
                                                 6
                                                     -10     -5              0              5                10                                                 -10          -5                0               5                10
                                                                  Year Relative to Reform                                                                                           Year Relative to Reform




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in our group of treated
country-reforms and our group of synthetic control units. The blue (solid circle) line represents the outcome
variable averaged across our treated country-reforms, and the red (hollow triangle) line is averaged across our
synthetic control units.




                                                                                                                  65
                                                         Figure A.2: Validation Check for Aggregate Synthetic Control Plots


                                                              (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                                 (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                          6                                                                                                                      64
                                                                                                    Treated Countries                                                                                                   Treated Countries
                                                                                                    Synthetic Controls                                                                                                  Synthetic Controls
                                                   Training Period                                                                                                          Training Period
                                          5                                                                                                                      63
       Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                              Labor Share (%)
                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                 62



                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                 61



                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                  -10          -8        -6             -4           -2            0                                                   -10          -8           -6             -4       -2            0
                                                                      Year Relative to Reform                                                                                                 Year Relative to Reform


                                          (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                                  (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                          15                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                    Treated Countries                                                                                                   Treated Countries
                                                                                                    Synthetic Controls                                                 Training Period                                  Synthetic Controls
       Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                          14            Training Period
                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                              TFP Growth (%)




                                          13



                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                 2


                                          11


                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                          10

                                                   -10          -8           -6             -4       -2            0                                                  -10          -8        -6             -4           -2            0
                                                                          Year Relative to Reform                                                                                         Year Relative to Reform


                                                   (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                                     (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                          14                                                                                                                     76
                                                                                                    Treated Countries                                                                                                   Treated Countries
                                                                                                    Synthetic Controls                                                                                                  Synthetic Controls
                                                        Training Period
                                                                                                                              Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                                                 74
                                          12
       GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                                 72

                                          10                                                                                                                                Training Period
                                                                                                                                                                 70


                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                 68



                                              6                                                                                                                  66
                                                   -10          -8           -6             -4       -2            0                                                   -10          -8           -6             -4       -2            0
                                                                          Year Relative to Reform                                                                                             Year Relative to Reform




Note: This figure replicates Figure A.1, but matches the synthetic control units only on the first half of the
pre-reform period, and plots the results in the second half of the pre-reform period, to check the quality of the
synthetic control fits. The 1966 Norwegian reform is excluded from this plot because we only have 6 years of
pre-period data for that reform.




                                                                                                                         66
                                                                Figure A.3: Synthetic Control Plots (Austria 1975)


                                                        (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                        (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         8                                                                                                      66
                                                                                                     Austria                                                 Austria
                                                                                                     Synthetic Austria                                       Synthetic Austria


                                         6
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                64




                                                                                                                              Labor Share (%)
                                         4


                                                                                                                                                62
                                         2




                                         0                                                                                                      60
                                             1965        1970       1975                           1980             1985                             1965           1970            1975   1980             1985
                                                                    Year                                                                                                            Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                    (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                         20                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                     Austria                                                                                 Austria
                                                                                                     Synthetic Austria                                                                       Synthetic Austria
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                4

                                         15
                                                                                                                              TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                2



                                         10
                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                -2
                                             5
                                                 1965    1970       1975                           1980             1985                             1965           1970            1975   1980             1985
                                                                    Year                                                                                                            Year


                                                                                                          (e) GDP Growth (%)
                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                              Austria
                                                                                                                                                              Synthetic Austria




                                                                                       15
                                                                      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                       10




                                                                                        5
                                                                                            1965           1970            1975                             1980             1985
                                                                                                                           Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Austria (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Austria's 1975
codetermination reform. There is no Panel (f) because Austria is missing data back to 1960 for our "income
inequality" outcome variable and is therefore excluded from the income inequality analyses.




                                                                                                                         67
                                                                Figure A.4: Synthetic Control Plots (Denmark 1973)


                                                       (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                     (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         8
                                                                                  Denmark                                                                    Denmark
                                                                                  Synthetic Denmark                                           66             Synthetic Denmark

                                         6

                                                                                                                                              64
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                           Labor Share (%)
                                         4


                                                                                                                                              62
                                         2


                                                                                                                                              60
                                         0



                                         -2                                                                                                   58
                                              1965            1970         1975   1980           1985                                                 1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                                    Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                 (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                         15
                                                                                                                                                                                          Denmark
                                                                                                                                              6                                           Synthetic Denmark
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                              4
                                         10
                                                                                                           TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                              2

                                          5

                                                                                                                                              0


                                                     Denmark
                                                     Synthetic Denmark
                                          0                                                                                                   -2
                                              1965            1970         1975   1980           1985                                                 1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                                    Year


                                              (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                        (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                                                                                                                              74
                                                     Denmark                                                                                                 Denmark
                                         15          Synthetic Denmark                                                                                       Synthetic Denmark
                                                                                                           Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                              72
      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                              70
                                         10



                                                                                                                                              68




                                          5                                                                                                   66


                                              1965            1970         1975   1980           1985                                                 1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                                    Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Denmark (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Denmark's 1973
codetermination reform.




                                                                                                      68
                                                          Figure A.5: Synthetic Control Plots (Finland 1978)


                                                     (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                              (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         15
                                                                                             Finland                                    68                                           Finland
                                                                                             Synthetic Finland                                                                       Synthetic Finland


                                                                                                                                        66
                                         10
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                      Labor Share (%)
                                                                                                                                        64



                                          5                                                                                             62



                                                                                                                                        60

                                          0
                                                                                                                                        58
                                              1970      1975     1980                        1985             1990                           1970             1975            1980   1985           1990
                                                               Year                                                                                                         Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                        (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                         20
                                                                                             Finland                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                             Synthetic Finland                          6                                            Synthetic Finland
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                        4
                                         15
                                                                                                                      TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                        2

                                         10

                                                                                                                                        0




                                          5                                                                                             -2
                                              1970      1975     1980                        1985             1990                           1970             1975            1980   1985           1990
                                                               Year                                                                                                         Year


                                                                                      (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)
                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                                                                                    Synthetic Finland


                                                                                 15
                                                                GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                 10




                                                                                  5




                                                                                  0
                                                                                      1970             1975            1980                         1985             1990
                                                                                                                     Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Finland (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Finland's 1978
codetermination reform. There is no Panel (f) because Finland is missing data back to 1960 for our "income
inequality" outcome variable and is therefore excluded from the income inequality analyses.




                                                                                                                 69
                                                             Figure A.6: Synthetic Control Plots (Finland 1990)


                                                     (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                       (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         6                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                                 Synthetic Finland

                                                                                                                                            65
                                         4
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                          Labor Share (%)
                                                                                                                                            60

                                         2

                                                                                                                                            55


                                         0
                                                                                                                                            50

                                                                                                                                                         Finland
                                                                                                                                                         Synthetic Finland
                                         -2                                                                                                 45
                                              1980    1985       1990                          1995             2000                             1980           1985            1990   1995   2000
                                                                 Year                                                                                                           Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                         20
                                                                                                 Finland                                                 Finland
                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                 Synthetic Finland                                       Synthetic Finland
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                         15                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                          TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                            2
                                         10


                                                                                                                                            0
                                          5

                                                                                                                                            -2


                                          0
                                                                                                                                            -4
                                              1980    1985       1990                          1995             2000                             1980           1985            1990   1995   2000
                                                                 Year                                                                                                           Year


                                                                                           (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)
                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                          Finland
                                                                                                                                                          Synthetic Finland


                                                                                   15
                                                                  GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                   10




                                                                                    5




                                                                                    0


                                                                                        1980          1985             1990                             1995             2000
                                                                                                                       Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Finland (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Finland's 1990
codetermination reform. There is no Panel (f) because Finland is missing data back to 1960 for our "income
inequality" outcome variable and is therefore excluded from the income inequality analyses.




                                                                                                                     70
                                                                        Figure A.7: Synthetic Control Plots (France 2013)


                                                           (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                  (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                          3
                                                                                      France
                                                                                      Synthetic France                                           58

                                          2
       Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                              Labor Share (%)
                                          1

                                                                                                                                                 56

                                          0



                                          -1

                                                                                                                                                 54          France
                                                                                                                                                             Synthetic France
                                          -2
                                               2000           2005          2010    2015            2020                                              2000         2005         2010   2015   2020
                                                                            Year                                                                                                Year


                                          (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                                (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                          10                                                                                                     6
                                                                                      France                                                                 France
                                                                                      Synthetic France                                                       Synthetic France
       Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                           8                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                              TFP Growth (%)




                                           6                                                                                                     2




                                           4                                                                                                     0




                                           2                                                                                                     -2


                                               2000           2005          2010    2015            2020                                              2000        2005          2010   2015   2020
                                                                            Year                                                                                                Year


                                                      (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                   (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                                                                                                                                 70
                                          10             France                                                                                              France
                                                         Synthetic France                                                                                    Synthetic France
                                                                                                              Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                                 69
                                           5
       GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                 68

                                           0


                                                                                                                                                 67


                                          -5

                                                                                                                                                 66
                                               2000           2005          2010    2015            2020                                              2000         2005         2010   2015   2020
                                                                            Year                                                                                                Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in France (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the period surrounding France's 2013
codetermination reform.




                                                                                                         71
                                                                  Figure A.8: Synthetic Control Plots (Germany 1976)


                                                         (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                               (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         8
                                                                                 Germany                                                     66          Germany
                                                                                 Synthetic Germany                                                       Synthetic Germany

                                         6
                                                                                                                                             64
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                          Labor Share (%)
                                         4

                                                                                                                                             62
                                         2


                                                                                                                                             60
                                         0



                                         -2                                                                                                  58
                                              1965        1970        1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970            1975     1980          1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                   Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                             (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                 Germany                                                                                                Germany
                                         14
                                                                                 Synthetic Germany                                                                                      Synthetic Germany
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                             4
                                         12
                                                                                                          TFP Growth (%)




                                         10                                                                                                  2




                                          8
                                                                                                                                             0



                                          6
                                                                                                                                             -2
                                              1965         1970       1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970            1975     1980          1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                   Year


                                                     (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)

                                                                                                                                                         Germany
                                         15                                                                                                  74
                                                                                                                                                         Synthetic Germany
                                                                                                          Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                             73
      GDP Growth (%)




                                         10
                                                                                                                                             72



                                                                                                                                             71
                                          5

                                                                                                                                             70

                                                                                 Germany
                                                                                 Synthetic Germany
                                          0                                                                                                  69
                                              1965         1970       1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970            1975     1980          1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                   Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Germany (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Germany's 1976
codetermination reform.




                                                                                                     72
                                                        Figure A.9: Synthetic Control Plots (Netherlands 1979)


                                                     (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                               (b) Labor Share (pct)

                                                                       Netherlands                                                     70
                                         6
                                                                       Synthetic Netherlands



                                         4
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                       65




                                                                                                    Labor Share (%)
                                         2



                                                                                                                                       60
                                         0



                                         -2                                                                                                          Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                     Synthetic Netherlands
                                                                                                                                       55
                                              1970     1975     1980      1985            1990                                                1970           1975             1980      1985            1990
                                                               Year                                                                                                          Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                         (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                       Netherlands                                                                                                   Netherlands
                                         15                            Synthetic Netherlands                                                                                         Synthetic Netherlands
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                    TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                       2


                                         10
                                                                                                                                       1



                                                                                                                                       0



                                          5                                                                                            -1
                                              1970     1975     1980       1985           1990                                               1970           1975              1980      1985            1990
                                                               Year                                                                                                          Year


                                               (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                         20                                                                                            76
                                                                       Netherlands                                                                                                   Netherlands
                                                                       Synthetic Netherlands                                                                                         Synthetic Netherlands
                                                                                                    Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                       74
                                         15
      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                       72

                                         10

                                                                                                                                       70


                                          5
                                                                                                                                       68



                                          0                                                                                            66
                                              1970     1975     1980       1985           1990                                                1970           1975             1980      1985            1990
                                                               Year                                                                                                          Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in the Netherlands (blue, solid
circles) compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding the
Netherlands' 1979 codetermination reform.




                                                                                               73
                                                                Figure A.10: Synthetic Control Plots (Norway 1966)


                                                       (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                          (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                                                                                                                     68
                                         10          Norway                                                                                      Norway
                                                     Synthetic Norway                                                                            Synthetic Norway

                                                                                                                                     66
      Wage Growth (%)




                                          5




                                                                                                  Labor Share (%)
                                                                                                                                     64



                                                                                                                                     62

                                          0

                                                                                                                                     60



                                                                                                                                     58
                                         -5
                                              1960            1965             1970   1975                                                1960             1965            1970   1975
                                                                        Year                                                                                        Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                     (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                     6
                                                     Norway                                                                                      Norway
                                         20          Synthetic Norway                                                                            Synthetic Norway
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                  TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                     2
                                         15



                                                                                                                                     0




                                         10                                                                                          -2
                                              1960            1965             1970   1975                                                1960            1965             1970   1975
                                                                        Year                                                                                        Year


                                                       (e) GDP Growth (%)                                                                 (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                         20                                                                                          74
                                                     Norway                                                                                      Norway
                                                     Synthetic Norway                                                                            Synthetic Norway
                                                                                                  Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                     72
                                         15
      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                     70


                                         10
                                                                                                                                     68




                                          5                                                                                          66

                                              1960            1965             1970   1975                                                1960             1965            1970   1975
                                                                        Year                                                                                        Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Norway (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Norway's 1966
codetermination reform.




                                                                                             74
                                                                Figure A.11: Synthetic Control Plots (Norway 1973)


                                                       (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                           (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                                                                                                                    70
                                                     Norway2                                                                                       Norway2
                                         10
                                                     Synthetic Norway2                                                                             Synthetic Norway2


                                                                                                                                    65
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                 Labor Share (%)
                                          5

                                                                                                                                    60



                                          0
                                                                                                                                    55




                                         -5                                                                                         50
                                              1965            1970         1975   1980   1985                                               1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                          Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                       (d) TFP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                    6
                                                     Norway2                                                                                                                    Norway2
                                         20          Synthetic Norway2                                                                                                          Synthetic Norway2
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                 TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                    2
                                         15



                                                                                                                                    0




                                         10                                                                                         -2
                                              1965            1970         1975   1980   1985                                               1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                          Year


                                              (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                              (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                         20                                                                                         74
                                                     Norway2                                                                                       Norway2
                                                     Synthetic Norway2                                                                             Synthetic Norway2
                                                                                                 Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                                                                                                                    72
                                         15
      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                    70


                                         10

                                                                                                                                    68



                                          5
                                                                                                                                    66
                                              1965            1970         1975   1980   1985                                               1965            1970         1975   1980           1985
                                                                         Year                                                                                          Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Norway (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Norway's 1973
codetermination reform.




                                                                                            75
                                                                  Figure A.12: Synthetic Control Plots (Sweden 1976)


                                                         (a) Wage Growth (%)                                                                                (b) Labor Share (pct)
                                         6                                                                                                   70
                                                                                  Sweden                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                  Synthetic Sweden                                                       Synthetic Sweden


                                         4                                                                                                   65
      Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                          Labor Share (%)
                                         2
                                                                                                                                             60



                                         0
                                                                                                                                             55


                                         -2
                                                                                                                                             50
                                              1965        1970        1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970           1975     1980   1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                  Year


                                         (c) Net Capital Formation (pct of GDP)                                                                             (d) TFP Growth (%)

                                         15                                       Sweden                                                     4
                                                                                  Synthetic Sweden
      Net Capital Formation (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                             2
                                         10
                                                                                                          TFP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                             0


                                          5

                                                                                                                                             -2


                                                                                                                                                         Sweden
                                                                                                                                                         Synthetic Sweden
                                          0                                                                                                  -4
                                              1965         1970       1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970           1975     1980   1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                  Year


                                                     (e) GDP per Capita Growth (%)                                                                (f) Bottom 90%'s Share of Income (%)
                                         20
                                                                                  Sweden                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                  Synthetic Sweden                                           74          Synthetic Sweden
                                                                                                          Bottom 90% Share of Income (pct)




                                         15                                                                                                  72
      GDP Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                             70

                                         10

                                                                                                                                             68




                                          5                                                                                                  66
                                              1965         1970       1975     1980          1985                                                 1965       1970           1975     1980   1985
                                                                        Year                                                                                                  Year




Note: For each of our dependent variables, this figure plots the raw time series in Sweden (blue, solid circles)
compared to its synthetic control unit (red, hollow triangles), in the 21-year period surrounding Sweden's 1976
codetermination reform.




                                                                                                     76
                                      Figure A.13: Worker Influence in Other Areas (2019 ECS)


                                        (a) Dismissals                                                                               (b) Training
                   50                                                                                          50


                   40                                                                                          40
      % of Firms




                                                                                                  % of Firms
                   30                                                                                          30


                   20                                                                                          20


                   10                                                                                          10


                    0                                                                                           0
                         Not at All       Small Extent    Moderate Extent     Great Extent                          Not at All       Small Extent    Moderate Extent     Great Extent

                                Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)                                     Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)
                                Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)                                        Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)
                                Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)                                  Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)


                        (c) Working Time Arrangements                                                                        (d) Payment Schemes
                   50                                                                                          50


                   40                                                                                          40
      % of Firms




                                                                                                  % of Firms


                   30                                                                                          30


                   20                                                                                          20


                   10                                                                                          10


                    0                                                                                           0
                         Not at All       Small Extent    Moderate Extent     Great Extent                          Not at All       Small Extent    Moderate Extent     Great Extent

                                Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)                                     Workers Directly (Firms without Worker Representation)
                                Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)                                        Workers Directly (Firms with Worker Representation)
                                Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)                                  Worker Representatives (Firms with Worker Representation)




Note: Panel (b) of Figure 8 plots responses to a 2019 European Company Survey question about workers'
influence on decisions regarding workplace organization. The same question is also asked about workers' influence
in four other areas: dismissals, training, working time arrangements, and payment schemes. The four panels of
this Figure plot the responses for those four areas.




                                                                                             77
B     Event Studies: Data and Empirical Methodology

B.1    Sample Construction and Identifying Codetermination Reforms
In our main event study analyses, we restrict our attention to countries satisfying the following
criteria:

    · They are European (since our paper studies European codetermination in particular).
    · We have non-missing data for at least some of our outcome variables for the period
      1960-2019 (notably, this excludes former Soviet Bloc countries, for whom we lack data
      before the 1990s; it also excludes Cyprus and Malta, whose macroeconomic data series
      are not available until the 1990s).
    · They are democracies across the entire period we study (this excludes Portugal, Spain,
      Greece, and Turkey).
We also exclude Luxembourg because we consider it to be economically unrepresentative.
Imposing these restrictions leaves us with the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Den-
mark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. As we describe in Section B.6, we further narrow
down our sample when analyzing our "income inequality" outcome variable.
     Next, among these countries, we identify reforms that introduced or extended codetermi-
nation (either legislatively or through collective agreements). To search for codetermination
reforms, we begin by examining all changes in the "codetermination" variables in the CBR
Labor Regulation Index historical dataset (Adams, Bishop, and Deakin, 2016), and supple-
ment this with detailed country-by-country internet searches. Based on this searching and
qualitative evaluations of the "substantiveness" of reforms, we narrow down to the list of
codetermination reforms visualized in Figure A.14.
     Institutional details of these reforms are summarized in Table A.1. We exclude from this
list several reforms which we do not consider to be substantive introductions or extensions of
codetermination; these excluded reforms, and our reasons for excluding them, are summarized
in Table A.2.




                                               78
                             Figure A.14: Codetermination Reforms

                 Austria

             Denmark

                 Finland

                 France

            Germany

          Netherlands

                 Norway

             Sweden
                              1970        1980        1990         2000          2010
                                                      Year

                                     Board-Level Reform      Shop-Floor Reform




                 Table A.1: Institutional Details of Codetermination Reforms

Country                    Description of Reform and Institutional Background

Austria (1975)             The Labour Constitution Act 1975 introduced one-third board-level
                           representation in firms with 40 or more workers, and gave works
                           councils the power to nominate these representatives (Adams, Bishop,
                           and Deakin, 2016; ETUI, 2020).
                           Works councils in Austria have existed since the Works Council Act
                           of 1919, and have had extensive shop-floor codetermination powers
                           since then (Adler, 1922). Their powers were slightly extended and
                           clarified in the 1975 Labour Constitution Act, but the introduction
                           of board-level representation was the Act's primary expansion of
                           codetermination.

                                                                       Continued on next page




                                                 79
                        Table A.1--continued from previous page

Country                Description of Reform and Institutional Background

Denmark (1973)         The Danish Companies Act 1973 introduced one-third board-level
                       representation rights in firms with 35 or more employees. Take-up of
                       this right has been moderate-to-high; about 55% of Danish workers
                       are employed in a company with board-level representation (ETUI,
                       2020).
                       Shop-floor representation has existed in Denmark since the early
                       1900s, through large-scale collective agreements between unions and
                       employer associations. An agreement in 1900 established official
                       shop stewards, and an agreement in 1947 established co-operation
                       committees (similar to works councils). Denmark had no official
                       legislation on shop-floor representation until 2005, when an EU
                       Directive required the introduction of legislation (Knudsen, 2006).

Finland (1978, 1990)   A 1978 Cooperation Act introduced shop-floor representation rights
                       in firms with 30 or more employees. In addition, a 1990 Act estab-
                       lished board-level representation rights in firms with 150 or more
                       employees. These reforms are both substantive, so we study each
                       of them separately. Take-up of shop-floor representation is very
                       high, while take-up of board-level representation has been moderate
                       (Harju, Jäger, and Schoefer, 2021).
                       Prior to 1978, codetermination did not really exist in Finland, though
                       there was high collective bargaining coverage and high union density.
                       Finnish unions were powerful, but favored adversarial bargaining
                       and negotiation over codetermination. During the economic disrup-
                       tions of the 1960s and 1970s, Finnish unions changed their minds and
                       began advocating for industrial democracy. Their lobbying efforts
                       culminated in the 1978 Cooperation Act (Sippola, 2012).

                                                                   Continued on next page




                                            80
                 Table A.1--continued from previous page

Country         Description of Reform and Institutional Background

France (2013)   A 2013 reform introduced mandatory board-level worker represen-
                tation in share-based firms with 5,000 or more workers, a threshold
                that was lowered to 1,000 in 2015. Data from a top group of French
                companies indicates that the reform had substantial bite. Prior to
                2013, only state-owned or formerly state-owned French companies
                tended to have board-level worker representation (ETUI, 2020).
                France has had mandatory shop-floor representation in firms with
                50 or more workers since 1945. The Auroux Laws of 1982 slightly
                extended the rights of shop-floor representatives and clarified their
                ability to coexist with establishment-level union representation, but
                did not substantially increase the strength of shop-floor representa-
                tion (Fairris and Ashkenazy, 2010).

                                                           Continued on next page




                                     81
                  Table A.1--continued from previous page

Country          Description of Reform and Institutional Background

Germany (1976)   The 1976 Mitbestimmungsgesetz increased the board-level represen-
                 tation requirements for firms with more than 2,000 employees not
                 in the mining, coal, or steel sectors from one-third to quasi-parity
                 representation. As we describe in Sections 2.3 and 4, this was a major
                 change that was heavily opposed by employer associations, and the
                 evidence indicates that quasi-parity board-level representation is a
                 significantly stronger institution than one-third board-level repre-
                 sentation. In addition, our calculations from Bureau van Dk data
                 indicate that more than 30% of German workers are employed in
                 firms with more than 2,000 workers, so this reform had substantial
                 coverage.
                 Board-level representation requirements were originally introduced
                 in Germany in 1952, with firms in the mining, coal, and steel sectors
                 required to adopt parity representation, and firms with over 500
                 employees in other sectors required to adopt one-third representation.


                 Shop-floor representation in Germany has a long history dating
                 back to the early 1900s. The pre-Nazi works council system was
                 re-established in Germany in 1946 by the occupying powers, but
                 works councils were voluntary and had no co-decision-making
                 powers. In 1952, the Works Constitution Act mandated works
                 councils in establishments with 5 or more employees, and gave them
                 co-decision-making rights. This reform is too early for us to study
                 given our data. A 1972 Act "expanded the coverage and duties of
                 works' councils," but was not a particularly substantive extension of
                 shop-floor representation (Havlovic, 1990).

                                                             Continued on next page




                                      82
                      Table A.1--continued from previous page

Country              Description of Reform and Institutional Background

Netherlands (1979)   A 1979 amendment to the Works Councils Act gave previously
                     toothless Dutch works councils much broader scope and powers.
                     Prior to the 1950s, the Netherlands had an extensive union presence
                     but no codetermination. In the post-war reconstruction of the 1950s,
                     workers began advocating for co-decision-making rights. In 1950,
                     the Dutch Works Council Act required all establishments with 50
                     or more workers to set up a works council. However, the works
                     councils were chaired by managers, and had only information and
                     discussion rights, without co-decision-making powers. In 1979, the
                     Act underwent a huge amendment, which removed managers from
                     the works councils, broadened the works councils' scope, gave works
                     councils consultation rights on all major decisions, and gave them
                     a right to appeal to an employment court if the employer did not
                     follow their advice (Eurofound, 1997).
                     The Netherlands has also technically had one-third board-level
                     representation rights since 2004, but the rights are not substantive.
                     As van het Kaar (2007) writes:

                          [...] because the individuals nominated by the works
                          council may not be employees or trade union officials
                          dealing with the company, they are in no sense direct
                          representatives of the workforce. Dutch law requires
                          all supervisory board members to act in the interests of
                          the company as a whole; individual supervisory board
                          members may not represent specific interests, such as the
                          workforce or a major shareholder.


                                                                Continued on next page




                                          83
                       Table A.1--continued from previous page

Country               Description of Reform and Institutional Background

Norway (1966, 1973)   A 1966 Co-operation Agreement between union associations and
                      employer associations mandated works councils in establishments
                      with 100 or more employees, and gave those councils information
                      and consultation rights. In addition, the Limited Liability Companies
                      Act 1973 introduced one-third board-level representation rights in
                      firms with 30 or more employees.
                      Codetermination in Norway originated with a 1945 collective agree-
                      ment establishing joint consultation committees; this was followed
                      up by a 1957 agreement strengthening the rights of shop-floor union
                      representatives, and the 1966 agreement, which significantly ex-
                      panded shop-floor representation by establishing works councils
                      (Bjorheim, 1974).

                                                                  Continued on next page




                                           84
                         Table A.1--continued from previous page

 Country                Description of Reform and Institutional Background

 Sweden (1976)         The 1976 Co-determination Act gave Swedish unions exten-
                       sive consultation, negotiation, and co-decision-making powers.
                       Establishment-level union representation is the primary channel
                       for codetermination in Sweden; although the country also has board-
                       level representation (introduced by a 1973 law) and works council
                       representation, these institutions are secondary to the primary insti-
                       tution of codetermination through union representation. As Anders
                       Victorin writes:

                             [Neither board-level representation nor works councils]
                             form the focal point of the Swedish system of industrial
                             democracy [...] The Swedish system is rather based on
                             negotiations, information and collective bargaining. [...]
                             [Through the Co-determination Act] the employer has
                             extensive duties to inform the trade unions with which he
                             has a collective relationship [...] it is in such negotiation
                             that important conflicts [...] are to be resolved, not board
                             meetings. (Victorin, 2000, p.4)
                             Board representation in Sweden represents a side-track
                             in the development of industrial democracy [...] the
                             unions look upon minority board representation more
                             as a means of gaining information than as a means of
                             exercising substantive influence on the decisions of a
                             company. (Victorin, 1979, p.117)



   In Table A.2, we describe European codetermination "reforms" that occur in our sample
countries between 1960 and 2019 and that we exclude because we do not believe they constitute
substantive introductions or extensions of codetermination.




                                             85
                                Table A.2: Excluded Reforms

 Country                Description of Reform and Institutional Background

 France (1982)          Excluded for reasons described in the "France" entry of Table A.1.

 Germany (1972)         Excluded for reasons described in the "Germany" entry of Table A.1.

 Greece (1988, 1990)    Two Greek reforms in 1988 and 1990 established rights to form works
                        councils, and Greece was democratic for a 10-year period preceding
                        the 1988 reform, so we could include Greece as a treated country
                        in our analyses despite excluding undemocratic countries from our
                        sample. However, take-up of the right to form a works council has
                        been virtually nonexistent due to a lack of enthusiasm on the part
                        of both employers and workers--fewer than 2% of workplaces have
                        an established works council (Carley, Baradel, and Welz, 2005). We
                        therefore exclude the Greek reform, since it has not had any bite.

 Italy (1970)           The 1970 Workers' Statute gave unions the right to form shop-floor
                        representative bodies; this right was extended by collective agree-
                        ments in 1993 and 2014 (ETUI, 2020). However, these bodies lack
                        substantive codetermination rights and the real worker power in
                        Italian workplaces lies with unions, through collective bargaining
                        and adversarial negotiations (Degrauwe et al., 2018).

 Luxembourg (1974)      Luxembourg introduced board-level and shop-floor representation
                        laws in 1974, but we exclude it from our analysis because of its
                        economic unrepresentativeness.

 Netherlands (2004)     Excluded for reasons described in the "Netherlands" entry of Table
                        A.1.



B.2    Strikes Data
Our data on strikes and work stoppages are drawn from the International Labour Organization's
(ILO's) Yearbooks of Labour Statistics, which have been published annually since 1936. We
thank Sjaak van der Velden for sharing compiled and digitized versions of these data with us.
The data are only available until 2008, so the 2013 French reform is excluded from our analysis
of strikes.
    The ILO collects data on strikes from national statistical agencies, and strives to make these


                                               86
data as consistent as possible across countries, though some cross-country inconsistencies
remain (for example, there is some variation in the criteria for a strike to be recorded).
    The main variable we draw on is the "number of working days lost" to strikes and work
stoppages. We apply a pair of transformations to this variable. First, we normalize it by the
size of the country's working-age population in that year, using World Bank population data.
Next, we transform it into an ordinal variable. The motivation for this is that the cardinal
values of the variable are extremely volatile, with massive outliers. For example, consider the
raw time series for Germany, plotted in Panel (a) of Figure A.15. The variable is so volatile
that even log transformations or winsorizations are insufficient to prevent outlier values from
driving results.
    To transform from a cardinal strikes variable to an ordinal one, we use the following
procedure. Within each country, we rank all years with nonmissing strikes data according
to the cardinal "working days lost divided by working-age population" variable. We divide
this rank by the number of years with nonmissing strikes data, to yield a variable that ranges
between 0 and 1. A value of 0 represents the year with the lowest strike intensity and a value
of 1 represents the year with the highest strike intensity. We use this 0-to-1 rank variable
as the outcome variable in our event study specifications, so our specifications effectively
test whether the years following a codetermination reform are ranked lower or higher in
terms of strike intensity than the years preceding a codetermination reform. As Panel (b)
of Figure A.15 illustrates by plotting the time series of Germany's strike intensity rank, the
strike rank variable is still fairly volatile but does not have large cardinal outliers that could
singlehandedly drive our results.
    World Bank population data is only available back to 1960, so prior to 1960 we use total population data
from the ILO, which we have in roughly 10-15 year intervals. We linearly interpolate the ILO variable between
the years for which we have values, and multiply it by the percentage of the population who are working-age in
1960 in the World Bank data.
    A value of exactly 0 can only be reached as  .




                                                     87
                                                                Figure A.15: Germany Strikes Time Series

                       100000                    (a) Cardinal Strike Intensity                                              (b) Strike Intensity Rank




                                                                                                        1
                                  80000




                                                                                                        .8
          Days Lost Per Million People




                                                                                             Strike Intensity Rank
                        60000




                                                                                                             .6
              40000




                                                                                                  .4
      20000




                                                                                                        .2
                       0




                                                                                                        0
                                          1950       1960      1970     1980     1990                                1950      1960     1970     1980   1990
                                                                 Year                                                                     Year




B.3                 Cooperative Industrial Relations Data
To measure cross-country differences in the cooperativeness of industrial relations, we draw
on an item in the World Economic Forum's Executive Opinion Survey. Conducted annually
in about 140 countries, the Executive Opinion Survey contains the following question, with
responses on a 1-7 scale:

      In your country, how do you characterize labor-employer relations?
      Generally confrontational                                           1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                     Generally cooperative

    Country-level averages from the Executive Opinion Survey are published biannually in
the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report; we have access to this data
biannually since the 2007-2008 Report.
    Figure A.16 maps the average cooperativeness of labor relations in each country in 2015
(the year we use for calculating the correlation between cooperativeness and codetermination
laws, since our data on codetermination laws from the CBR Labor Regulation Index ends in
2015).




                                                                                        88
                 Figure A.16: Cooperativeness of Industrial Relations (2015)




   (4.77,6.11]
   (4.32,4.77]
   (3.99,4.32]
   [2.47,3.99]
   No data




B.4    Union Density Data
Our data on union density are drawn from the OECD/IAIS dataset compiled by Visser (2021),
which contains information about union density at the country-year level for all countries in
our sample except Iceland extending back to 1960. "Union density" is defined as the percentage
of a country's workers who belong to a union. Many of the countries in our sample are missing
union density information for a small number of years between 1960 and 2019; we fill in these
gaps using linear interpolations of the variable.


B.5    Macroeconomic Data
Our aggregate economic variables (wage growth, the labor share, net capital formation, and
total factor productivity) are drawn from the European Commission's AMECO Database,
which contains macroeconomic statistics at the country-year level for European Union and
some OECD countries since 1960. All currency amounts in the database are presented in
Euros. The variables we use are defined as follows:

   · Wage growth in year is the percentage growth in average real wages in year compared
     to year - 1, i.e. 100 × ( - -1 )/ -1 if we let    denote average wages in year .

   · The labor share is total compensation of employees as a percentage of GDP.

   · Net capital formation is net formation of fixed capital as a percentage of GDP.

   · TFP growth is the percentage growth in total factor productivity in year compared to
     year - 1, defined identically to growth in real wages.


                                             89
   · GDP growth is the percentage growth in GDP per capita in year compared to year
      - 1, defined identically to growth in real wages.
   We choose to specify our wage, TFP, and GDP variables in terms of growth rates rather
than levels for reasons explained in Footnote 10.


B.6     Income Inequality Data
Our data on income inequality are drawn from the World Inequality Database. We draw on
the most extensively available measure of income inequality in the database, which is the
share of a country's national income held by the bottom 90%, where the population consists
of equal-split adults.
    Data back to 1960 are available only for some of the countries in our main sample: Denmark,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom,
covering 7 of our 10 codetermination reforms. In our analyses of income inequality, we
restrict to these countries, and add the Australia, Canada, and the United States as additional
comparison countries to compensate for our loss of countries.


B.7     Empirical Methodology
B.7.1   Constructing Synthetic Control Groups

For each country-reform and each outcome variable, we construct a synthetic control group
using the following procedure. For ease of exposition, suppose we are constructing a synthetic
control group for Austria's 1975 reform, for the wage growth variable.
    We begin by identifying all other countries in our sample that do not experience a
codetermination reform between 1965 (10 years pre-reform) and 1985 (10 years post-reform).
Recall that, as described in Appendix Section B.1, our sample consists of European countries that
were independent and democratic from 1960-2019 and that have non-missing macroeconomic
data for most of that period (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom).
    Notably, the pool of comparison countries for Austria includes both countries that never
have codetermination laws across this 21-year period, and countries that always have codeter-
mination laws over this period but do not experirence a reform in this period. In the case of
the 1975 Austrian reform, the comparison countries are the United Kingdom, Italy, and Ireland
(which never have codetermination), as well as Belgium (which has shop-floor representation
from 1948 onwards; Hurley, 1953) and France (which has shop-floor representation from 1945
onwards, and does not have board-level representation until 2013--see Appendix Table A.1).
Iceland is not included because its data on wage growth start only in 1970, halfway through
the pre-treatment period.

                                               90
    We select synthetic control weights for the comparison countries by matching on the
pre-reform levels of the following aggregate outcome variables: wage growth, the labor share,
net capital formation, TFP growth, and GDP growth (i.e., exactly the outcome variables we
study). This method of selecting weights gives us a synthetic control unit that resembles the
treated country in terms of pre-reform growth in GDP, productivity, and wages, and in terms
of the pre-reform levels of the labor share and capital formation.
    In the case we're considering, the matching procedure assigns a weight of 0.026 to Belgium,
a weight of 0.527 to France, a weight of 0.059 to Ireland, a weight of 0.357 to Italy, a weight of
0.031 to the United Kingdom, and weights of zero to the other control countries.

B.7.2   Difference-in-Differences Specifications

This section reiterates and expands on the explanation of our regression specifications given
in Section 5.
    After constructing a synthetic control unit for each country-reform, we then pool together
all of our country-reforms and synthetic control units, and run difference-in-differences
regressions comparing the outcomes of the treated and control groups before and after the
codetermination reforms. The regression equation is as follows:

                                                10
                 =    +     +   Year(   )+
                                                           Treated
                                                                     × 1[ = ] × Treated +   ,   (A.1)
                                             =-10 , =-1

where       denotes the outcome for country-reform in year = - reformyear relative to the
reform occurring in reformyear (the reform year for synthetic control units is set equal to
their respective country-reform's reform year). The are unit (country-reform) fixed effects,
   are event time fixed effects, Year( ) are calendar year fixed effects (e.g. "1975"), 1[ = ] is
an indicator for being in the th year relative to the reform, and Treated is an indicator for
unit being a treated country-reform. The Treated are the coefficients of interest, and represent
effects relative to the omitted = -1. Standard errors are clustered at the country-reform level.
    In addition to plotting the full set of dynamic coefficients Treated , we also report average
                                                           Treated       Treated
pre-reform and post-reform coefficients, which are Pre             and Post      in the following
regression:



   =    +    +             Treated
                 Year( ) + Pre     ×    1[ < -1] × Treated +       1[  0] × Treated + ,
                                                                         Treated
                                                                         Post    ×
                                                                                       (A.2)
where notation is the same as above. Due to the small number of clusters, we report p-values
for the pre-reform and post-reform coefficients calculated using the wild bootstrap method,
   Using the synth command in Stata (Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2011).


                                                      91
following Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) and using the code developed by Roodman,
Nielsen, MacKinnon, and Webb (2019).
    In addition, we report average post-reform coefficients calculated using the imputation
methodology developed by Borusyak, Jaravel, and Spiess (2021), which deals with problems
arising when two-way fixed effects models are used in contexts with heterogeneous treatment
times, like the context we consider. The imputation methodology proceeds as follows. First,
we obtain estimated unit and time effects ^ and ^ from a regression of the outcome variable
on unit and time fixed effects, for untreated observations only:

                                         =    +    +    ,                                (A.3)

    where notation is as above, and the regression is restricted to observations that satisfy
Treated = 0 or < 0.
    These estimated unit and time effects are used to impute a potential outcome in the absence
of treatment for each treated observation , equal to ^ + ^ . This imputed potential outcome
is converted into an imputed treatment effect        - ^ - ^ , using observation 's actual
outcome. An overall treatment effect for each post-reform period is then calculated by taking
the average of the unit-specific treatment effects for that period. Standard errors for these
coefficients are calculated using a methodology that clusters at the country-reform level.
Coefficients and standard errors calculated using this method are printed in the panels of
Figure 6.




                                              92
Online Appendix References
Adams, Zoe, Louise Bishop, and Simon Deakin. 2016. "CBR Labor Regulation Index (Dataset
 of 117 Countries)." Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge .

Adler, Emanuel. 1922. "The Works Council Act in Austria." International Labour Review 5 (3).

Borusyak, Kirill, Xavier Jaravel, and Jann Spiess. 2021. "Revisiting Event Study Designs:
  Robust and Efficient Estimation." Working Paper .

Carley, Mark, Annalisa Baradel, and Christian Welz. 2005. "Works Councils: Workplace
  Representation and Participation Structures." Eurofound Report .

Degrauwe, Jef, Gerlind Wisskirchen, Gabriella Ormai, Fabrizio Spagnolo, François Cotard,
 Katja van Kranenburg, Katarzyna Dulewicz, Christian Gersbach, Bernhard Hainz, César
 Navarro, Döne Yalçin, Melanie Lane, Tomás Matejovský, and Martina Novysedláková. 2018.
 "Employee Representation and Information, Consultation and Co-Determination Rights in
 Europe." Thomson Reuters Practical Law .

ETUI. 2020. "National Industrial Relations." URL https://www.worker-participation.eu/
  National-Industrial-Relations/Countries.

Eurofound. 1997. "Amendment of the Dutch Works Councils Act: a few surprises."
  URL https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/article/1997/amendment-of-
  the-dutch-works-councils-act-a-few-surprises.

Fairris, David and Philippe Ashkenazy. 2010. "Works Councils and Firm Productivity in
  France." Journal of Labor Research 31 (3):209­229.

Harju, Jarkko, Simon Jäger, and Benjamin Schoefer. 2021. "Voice at Work." NBER Working
 Paper .

Havlovic, Stephen. 1990. "German Works Councils: A Highly Evolved Institution of Industrial
 Democracy." Labor Studies Journal 15 (2):62­73.

Hurley, Michael. 1953. "The Belgian Enterprise Councils, 1948-1953." The American Catholic
 Sociological Review 14 (4):218­229.

Knudsen, Herman. 2006. "Workplace Representation in Denmark ­ Structure and Role."
 HIVA-EZA Conference Paper .

Sippola, Markku. 2012. "Local Bargaining and Codetermination: Finnish Experience in
  Comparative Perspective." European Journal of Industrial Relations 18 (1):53­69.


                                            93
van het Kaar, Robbert. 2007. The Forgotten Resource: Corporate Governance and Employee
  Board-Level Representation. The Situation in France, the Netherlands, Sweden and the UK, chap.
  Corporate Governance and Employee Board-Level Representation in the Netherlands:
  Executive Summary. Hans B

Victorin, Anders. 1979. "Co-Determination in Sweden: The Union Way." Journal of Comparative
  Corporate Law and Securities Regulation 2:111­140.

------. 2000. "Employee Participation on the Company Board: The Swedish Experience."
  Company Law Reform in OECD Countries: A Comparative Outlook of Current Trends .




                                              94
