                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MACRO NEWS AND MICRO NEWS:
                            COMPLEMENTS OR SUBSTITUTES?

                                       David Hirshleifer
                                         Jinfei Sheng

                                      Working Paper 28931
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28931


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021


We thank Markus Baldauf, Jan Bena, Vincent Bogousslavsky, Oliver Boguth, Murray
Carlson, Nuno Clara (discussant), Jack Favilukis, Adlai Fisher, Ron Giammarino, Thomas
Gilbert, Will Gornall, Alexander Hillert (discussant), Shiyang Huang, Kai Li, Russell
Lundholm, Christoph Meinerding (discussant), Carolin Pflueger, Pavel Savor (discussant),
Yushui Shi, Eric Swanson, Joshua Thornton, Selim Topaloglu (discussant), Wanyi Wang,
Liyan Yang, Alminas Zaldokas (discussant), and seminar and conference participants at the
University of British Columbia, University of Sydney, European Finance Association
Conference, RCFS/RAPS Conference, Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting
(Tulane University), American Finance Association Conference Poster Session, Northern
Finance Association Conference, Yale Whitebox Advisor Behavioral Finance Conference,
LBS TADC, and Financial Management Association Conference for helpful comments. We
thank Michael Drake for sharing the daily Google Search Volume data. We thank Yichun
He, Joshua Thornton, Yushui Shi, and Wanyi Wang for excellent research assistance. Jinfei
Sheng gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the Canadian Securities Institute
Research Foundation. Earlier versions of this paper were circulated under the title "Macro
News, Micro News, and Stock Prices." The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Hirshleifer and Jinfei Sheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Macro News and Micro News: Complements or Substitutes?
David Hirshleifer and Jinfei Sheng
NBER Working Paper No. 28931
June 2021
JEL No. E44,G02,G12,G14,G4

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how the arrival of macro-news affects the stock market's ability to incorporate the
information in firm-level earnings announcements. Existing theories suggest that macro and firm-
level earnings news are attention substitutes; macro-news announcements crowd out firm-level
attention, causing less efficient processing of firm-level earnings announcements. We find the
opposite: the sensitivity of announcement returns to earnings news is 17% stronger, and post-
earnings announcement drift 71% weaker, on macro-news days. This suggests a complementary
relationship between macro and micro news that is consistent with either investor attention or
information transmission channels.


David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu

Jinfei Sheng
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4293 Pereira Dr
Irvine, CA 92617
jinfei.sheng@uci.edu
1. Introduction

      To understand how the market processes multiple signals that are relevant for pricing a security,

there are possible informational and attentional interactions. For example, investors often face both

economy-wide (macro) and firm-specific (micro) news. To provide insight into interactions

between information signals, we study here how the arrival of macro news affects the stock

market's ability to incorporate the information in firm-level earnings announcements.

      Existing theories suggest that macro news will impede the processing of earnings news. In

theories of optimal attention allocation, investors with limited attention face a tradeoff between

allocating time or cognitive resources to macro versus firm-level news. For instance, in the model

of Peng and Xiong (2006), investors tend to process market- and sector-wide information before

processing firm-specific information owing to economies of scale in processing the market- and

sector-wide information.

      This theory emphasizes the substitution between attention to macro versus firm-level news.

The arrival of macro news distracts investors, reducing the attentional resources available to

process firm-level earnings news. Theoretical models have shown that limited investor attention

induces firm-level mispricing, including underreaction to earnings surprises (Hirshleifer and Teoh

2003; Peng and Xiong 2006; Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh 2011), consistent with evidence from

empirical studies suggesting that investor inattention delays the incorporation of earnings news

into stock prices.1 So if investor attention is limited, macro news that causes investors to shift

attention from the firm level to the aggregate level will make the market less efficient in processing


  1
   It is well-documented that market prices incorporate the information in earnings surprises sluggishly, post-earnings
announcements drift, or PEAD (uall and urown 1968; uernard and Thomas 1989, 1990). Other studies find that prices
react more sluggishly when there is greater distraction from other firms' same-day earnings announcements
(Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh 2009), and when the earnings news is released on a Friday (DellaVigna and Pollet 2009).

                                                          1
firm-level earnings news. Specifically, the market will react more sluggishly, increasing

underreaction.

    Motivated by the limited attention theory, we examine the sensitivity of stock market reactions

to earnings news on days either with or without major macroeconomic announcements. We test

for the effects of macro news on both the initial stock price reaction to earning news, and the

subsequent post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD). Specifically, we study whether

macroeconomic announcements on a given day causes weaker incorporation by the stock market

of firm-specific earnings news on that day.

    Surprisingly, we find that the effects of macro news are opposite to the theoretical prediction:

macro news is associated with greater incorporation of firm-level news into stock prices. We find

that the immediate price reaction to a firm's earnings surprise is stronger and the drift is weaker

when the macro news is released on the same day. This suggests that earnings information released

on macro-news days is incorporated into stock prices faster, leading to more efficient stock

valuation. In other words, our findings suggest a complementary relationship between macro news

and firm-level news. The complementary relationship remains after controlling for existing

determinants of market reactions to earnings news, such as the number of earnings news, the day

of the week, and the level of market returns. The magnitude of the complementary relationship is

economically large. Firms with the largest earnings surprises on macro-news days experience a

17% higher immediate price reaction and a 71% lower post-earnings announcement drift compared

to reactions to earnings surprises on other days.

    The complementary relationship between macro and micro news can be exploited to form a

profitable trading strategy. In general, a trading strategy based upon PEAD buys firms that have

positive earnings surprises and sells firms with negative surprises. Consistent with past research



                                                    2
on the PEAD anomaly, in our sample a PEAD trading strategy generates about 1% abnormal

returns per month among earnings announcements released on non-macro-news days. However,

we further find that the abnormal returns to a PEAD strategy are small and statistically insignificant

for earnings released on macro-news days. This finding is consistent with the conclusion that on

macro-news days, earnings information is incorporated more rapidly, eliminating the opportunity

to profit by trading based on earnings surprises.

      Why is the processing of earnings news more efficient on macro-news days? We explore four

potential explanations. These explanations are not mutually exclusive. The first possible

explanation derives from the fact that investors allocate attention across more than just the two

margins of macro and micro news about stocks, and that macro news draws attention away from

other activities to analysis of stocks. Investors, in their daily lives, must devote time and effort to

activities unrelated to the immediate processing of stock market news. For retail investors, this

includes their leisure and work activities. For institutional investors such as fund managers, in

addition to leisure activities, this also includes a major portion of their work activities.2 Investment

managers have administrative and human resource tasks, marketing and client-networking tasks,

and general investment management tasks such as research about possible trading strategies.

      It follows that on a given day an investor can potentially devote more or less attention to both

macro- and firm-level news, trading off against the other targets of investor attention. The arrival

of important macro news, such as a Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, can trigger

a shift in investor attention simultaneously toward studying macroeconomic implications and the

implications for the fundamentals of individual firms. If so, at such times the market may

incorporate firm-specific news more efficiently as well. Although this third margin for attention


  There is evidence that even institutional investors are distracted by competing information (e.g., Corwin and
  2

Coughenour 2008; Kempf, Manconi, and Spalt 2017).

                                                      3
allocation is economically intuitive and compelling, it has received much less emphasis in the

existing literature.3

      A possible objection to this argument is that only trivial firm-specific analysis is needed in

response to a macro event, so that there is no reason for such an event to trigger extra firm-level

attention.4 However, the incorporation of macro information is complicated by the fact that firms'

betas and factor loadings continually evolve over time. 5 So incorporating major macro-news

accurately requires examination of firms' evolving fundamentals. Such a reexamination is likely

to be complementary with incorporating the information in earnings news.

      To test whether macro-news does indeed trigger greater investor attention to firm-specific

news, we use a measure of abnormal institutional investor attention (AIA) from uloomberg (uen-

Rephael, Da, and Israelsen 2017). We find that AIA is higher on macro-news days in general and

that AIA to firms with earnings announcements is higher when macro news is released on the same

day. Furthermore, attentional tradeoffs seem to be important for institutional investors; we find

that the effect of macro-news on AIA is concentrated among firms with high institutional

ownership. These results are consistent with the attention explanation that the effect of macro news

on market reactions to earnings announcements derives from investor attention.

      An alternative possible explanation for our findings is that macro news may contain

information that affects rational interpretations of firm-level earnings news. In particular, the



  3
     Goldstein and Yang (2015) provide theoretical evidence that the presence of complementarities between two firm-
level signals facilitates information acquisition and improves price informativeness.
   4
     If firm and macro fundamentals were multivariate normal, then a firm would inherit any fundamental consequences
of macro news in proportion to its loading on the relevant fundamental factor. So if, in addition, investors perfectly
knew beta and loadings, they would be able to calculate in a straightforward way the implications of macro news for
firm fundamentals.
   5
     This is in part due to leverage, which shifts loadings in response to fluctuations in firm value and borrowing. It is
in part due to fluctuations in the value and moneyness of firms' real options. Furthermore, in conglomerates, different
divisions have different loadings, and the value weights on different divisions are continually fluctuating (see e.g.,
uoguth, Duchin, and Simutin 2020).

                                                            4
presence of macro news might potentially make firm-level news more informative about value,

resulting in stronger reactions to earnings announcements. We call this the information

transmission effect. Theoretical research suggests that investors rationally react more to the same

firm-specific news more when revealed in downturns than in upturns (e.g., Schmalz and Zhuk

2018). This suggests that the macro news may sometimes contain information that makes stock

prices more sensitive to earnings announcements.

    To explore this possibility, we conduct tests on analyst forecasts. If information from macro

news complements firm-specific news in the sense of making firm-specific news more informative,

analysts forecast revisions should be more sensitive to firm-level earnings news. Consistent with

this argument, we find analysts revise their forecasts more frequently, and provide more accurate

forecasts, when earnings announcements are released on macro-news days.

    The limited attention explanation for the complementary relationship has the appealing feature

that it also explains why post-earnings announcement drift is weaker when there is macro-news:

because more earnings information is incorporated quickly into price. It is not obvious whether

the information transmission explanation for the complementary relationship of macro news to the

immediate price reaction to earnings news also explains the effect on post-earnings announcement

drift, but we do not rule out this possibility.

    Estimates of the complementarity or substitutive relationship between macro and earnings

news could potentially be influenced by firms strategically choosing to announce their earnings on

macro-news versus no-macro-news days. uased on past studies, we categorize firms as

strategically changing their earnings announcement dates if the announcement date differs from

their previous same-quarter date by more than five days. We find that the complementary

relationship is concentrated among firms that do not strategically change their earnings



                                                  5
announcement dates. This suggests that strategic timing does not drive the complementary

relationship.

      Finally, we consider the possibility that the complementary relationship between macro and

micro news is driven by a firm's liquidity premium. Previous studies find that the earnings

announcement premium is associated with liquidity risk (Sadka 2006; Frazzini and Lamont 2007).

It is possible that firms with a positive earnings surprise have greater liquidity on macro-news days.

Using two measures of liquidity, we find that liquidity is higher on macro-news days in general.

However, firms with high earnings surprises do not have more liquidity on days with macro news

compared to firms with low earnings surprises. These findings suggest that it is unlikely that

liquidity explains the complementary relationship.

      This paper bears upon several strands of literature, including theories of rational inattention

(e.g., Sims 2003) discussed earlier.6 The literature on the determinants of investors' reactions to

earnings announcements finds evidence of lower investor attention to firm-level earnings

announcements when earnings are announced on Fridays (DellaVigna and Pollet 2009), when there

is a greater number of distracting same-day earnings announcements from other firms (Hirshleifer,

Lim, and Teoh 2009), and when the market return is low (Gulen and Hwang 2012). Our paper

differs in documenting how macro news affects price reactions to firm-level earnings

announcements, and in particular documents how macro news can attract attention rather than

distract.

      This paper extends the literature on how macro news affects stock markets in two ways (e.g.,

uoyd, Hu, and Jagannathan 2005; Gilbert 2011; Gilbert et al. 2017).7 First, we provide a more


  6
     This paper is also related to the literature on the determinants and asset pricing implications of investor attention
(e.g., Da, Engelberg, and Gao 2011; uen-Rephael, Da, and Israelsen 2017; Liu, Peng, and Tang 2019).
   7
     More generally, this paper also relates to the literature on media coverage and stock market anomalies (Chan 2003;
Hillert, Jacobs, and Muller 2014; Engelberg, McLean, and Pontiff 2018).

                                                            6
direct test of the effect of macro news on market efficiency. Our results suggest that the stock

market is more efficient on macro-news days in the sense that earnings information is incorporated

into stock price faster.

    There are past studies that provide indirect evidence that the presence of macro-news is related

to efficient processing of firm-level information. For instance, Savor and Wilson (2014) find that

CAPM fits stock returns better on macro-news days, suggesting that the stock market is more

efficient on macro-news days. Their approach to testing how macro-news affects market efficiency

therefore relies on the validity of the asset pricing model (Fama 1970). Our approach does not

make strong assumptions about the underlying asset pricing model.

    Second, this paper speaks to the debate on the underlying mechanisms through which macro

news affects asset prices. While some studies offer risk-based explanations for their findings

(Savor and Wilson 2013, 2014), others suggest that imperfect rationality is important (Lucca and

Moench 2015; Cieslak, Morse, and Vissing-Jogensen 2019; Fisher, Martineau, and Sheng 2021).

Our findings suggest that investor attention allocation and information transmission both may play

a role in explaining how macro news affects the market for individual stocks.



2. Data

2.1 Macroeconomic announcements

    We first select a set of important macro announcements from a list of 40 macro announcements

by uloomberg Econoday. This data has macro announcements since 1997. We define a day to be

a macro-news day (hereafter, Macroday) if one of the following four announcements happens on

this day: the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI, and

Personal Consumption. These days make up 23% of all trading days. The rationale for selecting


                                                 7
these four announcements is given below.

    Following Savor and Wilson's (2013) method, we test whether the market excess return

(market return minus riskfree rate) is significantly higher on announcement days for each type of

macroeconomic announcement. The announcements that have statistically and economically

significant impacts on the market excess return include FOMC, Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI, and

Personal Consumption. The results are provided in the Internet Appendix. The importance of the

FOMC announcement is well documented (see, e.g., Lucca and Moench 2015). Gilbert et al. (2017)

find that macroeconomic announcements, including Nonfarm payroll, ISM PMI, and Personal

consumption, are important for financial markets.


2.2 Earnings news

    We obtain quarterly earnings release data from Compustat and I/u/E/S as micro news from

1997 to 2014. Following Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009), we measure earnings surprise ()

using Equation (1). It is the difference between actual earnings ( ) for the quarter recorded

by I/u/E/S and the median forecast () included in the I/u/E/S detail file during the 30

days before the quarterly earnings announcements scaled by the stock price () at the end of

the corresponding quarter.


                                     - 
                               =                                                             (1)
                                    


    Stock price response to earnings news is measured by cumulative abnormal return ( ) for

each stock, which is the raw buy-and-hold return adjusted using estimated beta from the market

model. For each earnings announcement date  of quarter , we define the cumulative abnormal

return over time period ( + ,  +  ) [, ] as follows


                                               8
                              +                                  +
           [, ] = [                 (1 + , ) - 1] - , [                (1 + , ) - 1]             (2)
                              =+                                 =+



where , is the stock return of company  on day , , is the market return on day j, and

, is obtained from the market model regression , = , + , , +  for days j from


 - 300     to  - 46.

    For the immediate stock price reaction, we use  over a 2-trading-day window [0, 1]. For

drift, we use  over a 60-trading-day window [2, 61]. In Section 3.1, we show that the results

are robust to alternative choices of windows. We exclude the penny stocks, observations in which

actual or forecast earnings are greater than stock price, and those with a missing earnings surprise.

The final sample includes 158,399 observations.


2.3 Summary statistics

    Table 1 Panel A reports summary statistics based on the full sample. It shows that, on average,

there are 118 earnings announcements per day. The mean immediate reaction to an earnings

announcement ([0,1]) is 0.1 %, and the mean of the drift ([2,61]) is 1%. Panel u shows

the same statistics, conditional on being on a Macroday, compared to all other days. On average,

Macrodays have a significantly fewer number of earnings announcements and higher market return.

Firms that release their earnings announcements on macro-new days have significantly higher

immediate reaction to earnings news ([0,1]), and lower drift ([2,61]).



3. Macro news and the processing of firm-level earnings news

    We next describe tests of whether there is a complementary or substitute relationship between

macro news and market sensitivity to micro news. Then, in Subsection 3.2 we test the relationship

                                                 9
using a portfolio trading strategy.


3.1 Main results

    We test whether reactions to earnings announcements on days with macro news are different

from reactions on other days. Following existing literature, we rank firms' earnings surprises and

assign them into 11 quantiles for each year. Firms with negative surprises are equally assigned to

quantiles 1 to 5, and firms with positive surprises are equally assigned to quantiles 7 to 11. Firms

with zero surprises are labeled as quantile 6. In general, the earnings announcement literature uses

earnings surprise quantiles rather than the raw value of earnings surprise because raw earnings

surprises do not result in a well-specified linear regression (uernard and Thomas 1989). In Section

6, we show that the results are robust to alternative choices of earnings surprise partitions, such as

decile sorting.

    We first focus on the top and bottom groups, quantiles 1 and 11, because this makes it easy to

interpret the magnitude of the effect. To test for the effect of macro news on the processing of

earnings news, we run the following regression


              = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 ( × ) +
                       

                      [  +  ( ×  )] +                                                           (3)
                      =1



where  is either  [0, 1] for immediate reaction, or  [2, 61] for drift. ESTOP

equals to 1 if the earnings surprise quantile is 11 and 0 if the earnings surprise quantile is 1.

 is a dummy variable equaling 1 if that day is an announcement day for any FOMC,

Nonfarm payroll, ISM PMI, or Personal consumption news.  contains various control variables.

Previous research shows that stock response to earnings news varies with firm size, analyst

                                                 10
coverage, day of the week, the number of the same-day earnings announcements, and the aggregate

stock market return (e.g., uernard and Thomas 1989; DellaVigna and Pollet 2009; Hirshleifer, Lim,

and Teoh 2009; Gulen and Hwang 2012). Thus, we include size deciles, analyst coverage, share

turnover, day of week/month/year dummies, the number of earnings announcements per day, and

market returns as control variables.

    We consider two hypotheses. The first, motivated by past theoretical models, holds that

attention to macro news draws attention away from processing the earnings announcements of

individual firms. We call this Substitution Hypothesis. Alternatively, motivated by the discussion

in the introduction, that macro news may increase the sensitivity of price reactions to firms'

earnings announcements. We call this Complementarity Hypothesis.

    The key coefficient for testing between Substitution Hypothesis and Complementarity

Hypothesis is 3 . Under Complementarity Hypothesis, the market's immediate reaction to

earnings announcements is stronger, and the drift is weaker when macro news is released on the

same day. Thus, 3 > 0 for  [0, 1] and 3 < 0 for  [2, 61] . In contrast, under

Substitution Hypothesis, we expect that 3 < 0 for  [0, 1] and 3 > 0 for  [2, 61].

    Table 2 Panel A reports the results of this test. Column (1) presents the result from a

parsimonious specification without including any control variables. The coefficient on the

interaction term (  ×  ) is positive (1.277) and significant at the 1% level,

suggesting that the price reaction to a large earnings surprise is stronger on macro-news days than

on other days. The economic magnitude is also significant. Compared to the coefficient on the

stock reaction to a top earnings surprise () on other days (8.352), the reaction on Macroday

is greater by 15% (1.277/8.352). When control variables are included, the economic magnitude

increases by 17% (1.373/8.127) in this comparison. The size of this effect is comparable to the 15%



                                                11
reduction for Friday announcements documented in DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), and the 13%

reduction for high-news-day earnings announcements documented in Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh

(2009).

      For post-earnings announcement drift, the coefficient on the interaction term is negative

(3.682 with controls) and significant at the 5% level, suggesting that post-earning announcement

drift is smaller for top surprise earnings announcements released on macro-news days compared

to other days' earnings news. Column (4) shows that our estimates indicate 71% (3.458/4.846)

smaller drift for earnings announcements released on macro-news days. Again, the economic

magnitude is substantial, and is comparable to prior studies.8 Overall, these results support the

Complementarity Hypothesis.

      To further understand how macro announcements affect drift, we compare the drift differences

over various horizons in Figure 1. Here the drift difference is defined as the difference between

average cumulative abnormal returns of the top group and of the bottom group. The drift difference

between Macroday and non-Macroday announcements becomes evident on the 10th trading day

after the earnings announcement, and continues to increase during the next 60 trading days.

Specifically, the drift on Macroday announcements increases quickly during the first 10 trading

days after announcements and decreases slightly until the 50th trading day. In contrast, the drift on

non-Macroday announcements displays a completely different pattern. It increases quickly during

the first 10 trading days and continues to increase until the 60th trading day. These patterns suggest

that earnings news released on macro-news days is almost fully incorporated in prices within 10

trading days following the announcement, whereas earnings news released on non-Macroday



  8
    Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) report that the post-earnings announcement drift is 75% greater for high-news-
day earnings announcements compared to low-news day announcements. DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) find that the
drift is 69% greater for Friday earnings announcements compared to other weekday earnings announcements.

                                                        12
requires much more time to be incorporated into stock prices.

    In the analysis above, we restricted our attention to extreme earnings surprise quantiles in

which effects should be strongest. While this approach is simple and easy to interpret, it does not

take advantage of the entire sample. We next examine how macro news affects investors' reactions

to earnings announcements across all earnings surprises quantiles. To empirically test this effect,

we estimate the following regression



                    = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 ( × )
                              

                          + [  +  ( ×  )] +                                                       (4)
                             =1



where  is the earnings surprise quantile, which equals 1 to 11, and other variables are defined

as in Equation (3). Again, the coefficient on the interaction term (in this case, 3 ) is the key

parameter of interest.

    Table 2 Panel u reports the regression results. Consistent with Panel A, the coefficient on the

interaction term (  ×  ) is positive and significant for [0, 1] , suggesting that

immediate stock response to earnings news is stronger on Macrodays than on other days. As for

the economic magnitude, compared to the coefficient on the stock reaction to earnings surprise on

other days (0.842), the sensitivity to earnings news is greater by 11% (0.092/0.842) on Macrodays

(Column (2)). For the drift, the coefficient on the interaction term is negative and significant at the

1% level, which indicates that the drift is smaller for earnings news released on Macrodays than

for earnings news on other days. Column (4) indicates a 52% (0.201/0.388) smaller drift for

earnings announcements released on Macrodays.

    The controls in these tests derive from previously-studied effects. First, consistent with


                                                  13
DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), we find that the immediate price reaction to earnings

announcements is much smaller if the news is released on Friday. Second, we verify that earnings

announcements released on days with a high number of earnings news releases experience much

weaker immediate reaction and much stronger drift, consistent with Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh

(2009). Third, we verify that earnings released on days with high market returns have much

stronger immediate reactions, which is consistent with Gulen and Hwang (2012).

    The complementary relationship between macro news and earnings announcements is present

after controlling for these effects; macro news is distinct from these determinants of short- or long-

horizon price reactions to earnings. Macro-news can be announced on any day of the week, so our

results are not just driven by the Friday inattention effect. Macro news is also a different type of

information from the occurrence of a large number of firm-level earnings announcements. Like

market return, macro news is a market-wide variable. However, macro news is pre-scheduled and

is associated with information release, while the market return is unpredictable ex-ante. We provide

several additional robustness tests controlling for these effects in Section 5.

    Most studies use [0,1] to measure immediate price reaction to earnings announcements,

but different studies use different measures to capture drift. Most use [2,61] as the measure

of drift as in uernard and Thomas (1989), but some studies use longer horizons such as [2,75]

(e.g., DellaVigna and Pollet 2009). To verify robustness of the findings in Table 2, we conduct

tests based upon Equation (4) using different drift windows. Table 3 Panel A presents the result

and demonstrates that the conclusion is robust.

    To assess the effects of macro news on the processing of earnings news, we also look at the

longevity of the drift. In our sample, there is no indication of drift beyond 240 trading days. Thus,

we use the 240-day drift as the benchmark. Following uernard and Thomas (1989), we then look



                                                  14
at the drift over different time horizons as a fraction of 240-day drift. The longevity of the drift is

measured as the number of days until approximately 100% of the 240-day drift occurs.

    Table 3 Panel u shows that the longevity of the drift is shorter for earnings announcements

released on macro news days than for earnings announcements released on other days. For example,

approximately 100% of the drift occurs within 210 days if earnings announcements are on macro-

news days, while only 89% occurs within 210 days if earnings announcements are on days without

macro news. For earnings released on non-macro-news days, the drift may last up to 240 trading

days. To test whether difference in longevity of the drifts is significant, we examine the effect of

macro news on the 210-day drift, which is crucial in measuring the longevity. Panel A Column (6)

of Table 3 shows that the effect is statistically significant and substantial. This finding provides

further support for the complementary relationship between macro and micro news. Macro news

not only makes the drift of earning announcements smaller, but also shorter in terms of duration.


3.2 Portfolio trading strategy

    An alternative way to test the effect of macro news on investors' reaction to earnings

announcements is to design a trading strategy to exploit the fact that drift is greater for non-

Macroday announcements than for Macroday announcements. This provides insight about whether

sophisticated professionals understand the effects of macro-news on firm-level market efficiency.

If they understand these effects well, then a trading strategy should have limited profitability for

investors who trade at large scale. In other words, its profitability should either be low or

concentrated in illiquid firms. Large trading profits to a liquid strategy would suggest that even

sophisticated professionals are generally unaware of the effects we document.

    A standard post-earnings announcement drift hedge portfolio goes long stocks with good

earnings news and short stocks with bad earnings news. Owing to market underreaction to earnings

                                                  15
news, stocks with good earnings news will enjoy high returns within the following quarter.

Similarly, stocks with bad earnings news will experience subsequent low returns within the

following quarter.

    The new drift trading strategy based on macro news is as follows. In month , it purchases

firms that, in month  - 1 made announcements on a non-macro-day in the top quantile and sells

short firms that made an announcement on a non-macro-day in the bottom quantile. Therefore, the
                                                   11   1
return for the non-macro-day drift portfolio is  =    -   . We construct the macro-day

drift portfolio for month  following a similar procedure except that we only include firms that

made an earnings announcement on a macro-news day in previous month. The return for this
                11   1
portfolio is  =    -   . The long-short portfolio of buying the non-macro-day drift portfolio
                                                       
and selling the macro-day portfolio has return, - =  -  . The intuition here is that

conducting the traditional drift trading strategy on a macro-news day is not profitable or has

negative profit. Thus, shorting the macro-day drift portfolio and longing the non-macro day drift

portfolio will be profitable if macro-news indeed impacts investors' reactions to earnings

announcements.

    Table 4 presents the results of this trading strategy. Column 1 shows that a non-macro-day

drift portfolio earns a return of 0.970% per month, while the return on the macro-day portfolio is

much smaller and statistically insignificant (Column 2). The long-short portfolio earns 0.891% per

month (Column 3). Standard risk factors, such as Fama-French three-factor are controlled in the

regression (Fama and French 1993). A similar conclusion is reached using an equally-weighted

method for portfolio construction (Columns 4-6). Overall, these results are also consistent with a

complementary relationship between macro and micro news.




                                               16
4. Explanations

    So far, we have documented a complementary relationship between macro news and earnings

announcements which is not explained by existing theoretical literature. We next explore four

potential explanations. These explanations are not mutually exclusive.


4.1 Investor attention

    The first potential explanation is investor attention. As discussed in the introduction, a leading

explanation for PEAD is that investors do not pay full attention to the information in earnings news.

Thus, one possible explanation for increased reactions to earnings announcements when macro

news is released is that investors pay more attention to earnings news on macro-news days. Macro

news events such as FOMC announcements are attention-grabbing, which can encourage investors

to focus on immediate valuation in stock markets rather than other activities. As a result, the

fraction of investors who update their beliefs based upon earnings news increases.

    To test the attention explanation, we use two direct measures of attention. One measure is

abnormal institutional investor attention (AIA), which captures the news-searching and news-

reading activity for specific stocks on uloomberg terminals. uloomberg assigns a raw score based

on the number of ticker searches and the number of clicks on related articles for each firm. The

AIA is a relative index compared to the previous month's average of the raw score and has a value

from 0 to 4. The majority of the uloomberg terminal users are institutional investors, so AIA is

predominantly a measure of attention of institutions (see uen-Rephael, Da, and Israelsen 2017 for

more details). The other measure is Google Search Volume Index (SVI), which captures the ticker-

searching activity for each firm. Prior studies show that SVI is more informative about the attention

of retail investors (Da, Engelberg, and Gao 2011; Drake et al. 2012).



                                                 17
    We first examine whether investors pay more attention to stocks with earnings announcements

on macro-news days than on days without macro-news. In Table 5 Column (1), the coefficient on

 is positive and significant at the 1% level, indicating that institutional investor

attention to all firms is higher on macro-news days than on other days. We define  as a

dummy for whether there is an earnings announcement for each firm. The coefficient on  is

positive and significant, suggesting that attention to firms is higher when firms have earnings

announcements.

    Turning to the primary variable of interest, the coefficient on the interaction term

(  ×  ) is positive and significant at the 1% level (Column 2). The economic

magnitude is also large. The attention to earnings announcements is about 10% higher if major

macro announcements are released on the same day. This indicates that institutional investors pay

more attention to firms when earnings announcements are released on macro-news days compared

to when earnings announcements are released on non-macro-news days. Interestingly, we find no

evidence that retail investor attention to the stock market is higher on macro-news days (Column

3) and attention to firms with earnings announcements is even lower on macro-news days (Column

4). This is consistent with the study of Liu, Peng and Tang (2019), who also find that retail investor

attention gets crowded out by macro news. Overall, our findings strongly suggest that the

complementary relationship between macro-news and earnings announcements is related to

institutional investors' attention.

    As discussed in the introduction, it is not obvious on basic conceptual grounds whether

attention substitution should be increasing or decreasing in investor sophistication. Since

institutional investors are very important for the pricing of individual stocks, we further test

whether the complementary relationship is concentrated among firms with high institutional



                                                 18
ownership.

    In general, it is plausible that investors pay more attention to stocks that they hold than stocks

that they do not hold. This suggests two possibilities. On the one hand, if retail investors are more

subject to attention limits, the effects could be stronger when retail holdings of a stock are high

(i.e., institutional holdings of a stock are low). On the other hand, institutional investors tend to

trade more actively than retail investors, and therefore are likely to be more important for price

setting. This suggest that it is the attention of institutional investors that matters most, so that

effects will be stronger in firms with high institutional holdings.

    To test whether this is the case, we partition the sample of firms into low, medium, and high

institutional ownership groups, and re-estimate regression Equation (4) separately for these three

subsamples. Table 10 Panel C shows that the complementary relationship is only significant for

firms with high institutional ownership. The economic magnitude is greater than that in Table 2.

This finding again suggests the importance of institutional investors. This result does not have to

hold for merely mechanically reasons. Although AIA is a good measure for institutional attention,

it only captures the activities by institutional investors who use uloomberg terminals. Institutional

ownership is based on holdings of all institutional investors. Therefore, this finding provides

further support for the AIA result.


4.2 Information transmission

    Another possible source of the complementary relationship between macro and micro news

derives from complementarity of information content. The content of macro news may make firm-

level news incrementally more informative about firm value, resulting in stronger price reactions

to earnings announcements.

    We test this information transmission explanation by examining financial analyst forecasts of

                                                 19
earnings. If there is important information from macro news for interpreting firm-level news,

analysts should learn from it and revise their forecasts accordingly. We test two implications of

this information transmission explanation for analyst forecast revisions.

      The first implication is that analysts revise their forecasts more frequently for earnings

announcements that occur on macro-news days. We count the number of analyst revisions 1 to 10

days before earnings announcements. Table 6 Column (1) presents the result. The coefficient on

 is positive, suggesting that analysts revise their forecasts more frequently for earnings

announcements released on macro-news days. This is consistent with the information transmission

channel.

      The second implication is that analysts issue more accurate forecasts for earnings

announcements released on macro-news days since they are able to learn from macro news. We

define the forecast quality as the negative value of forecast errors.9 Our premise is that small

forecast errors are indicative of high forecast quality is. Table 6 Column (2) presents the result.

The coefficient on  is positive, suggesting that analyst forecasts for earnings

announcements released on macro-news days are more accurate than other ones. This result is

consistent with the information transmission channel.


4.3 Strategic timing of earnings announcements

      Estimates of the complementarity or substitutive relationship between macro and earnings

news could potentially be influenced by firms strategically choosing to announce their earnings on

macro-news versus no-macro-news days. In the model of DellaVigna and Pollet (2009), a firm

manager has an incentive to strategically release earnings news on Fridays to maximize short-term



  9
   Following the literature, analyst forecast error is defined as the absolute value of the difference between predicted
earnings by analysts and actual earnings, scaled by stock prices.

                                                          20
value. Similarly, the manager may also strategically release earnings news on macro news days.

This raises the question of whether the complementary relationship is driven by strategic timing

of earnings announcements.

    We identify firms that shift their earnings announcement dates by comparing their current

earnings announcement dates to the previous year's earnings announcement dates. Specifically,

we categorize firms as having advanced or delayed their earnings dates if they differ from their

previous same-quarter date by more than five days based on past studies (e.g., Hartzmark and Shue

2018). We find that roughly 80% of firms do not substantially change their earnings announcement

dates, 15% advance them by more than five days, and 5% delay them by more than five days.

    Previous studies have hypothesized and provided evidence that firms tend to advance good

news and defer bad news (e.g., DeHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock 2015; Johnson and So 2018).

Taking this idea further, firms with positive earnings news may strategically advance their earnings

announcement date to a macro-news day because it is a salient day to investors and the market has

stronger reactions to their announcements. Firms with negative earnings news may strategically

delay their earnings announcement dates while avoiding a macro-news day. If this is the case, the

average of earnings surprises of firms that advance earnings announcement dates to macro-news

days would be more positive than that of firms that shift dates to other days. Similarly, the average

of earnings surprises of firms that delay earnings announcement dates to macro-news days would

be more negative than that of firms that shift dates to other days.

    However, Table 7 Panel A shows that these effects are not present in the data. The difference

in earnings surprises (0.013) for two groups of firms that advance their earnings announcements

to macro-news days and other days is not statistically significant (t = 0.349). Similarly, the

difference in earnings surprise is not significant when firms delay their earnings announcements.



                                                 21
Thus, these results suggest that firms do not strategically time their earnings announcements in

conjunction with macro announcements.

       Also, we examine whether firms are more likely to strategically change their earnings

announcements to a macro-news day when their earning surprise is positive versus negative. If

firms strategically release earnings news on macro news days, firms with positive earnings

surprises are more likely to do so because the market has stronger reactions to their announcements.

Table 7 Panel u presents the results. Firms with positive (negative) earnings surprises are less

(more) likely to change their earnings announcement dates to a macro-news day, which opposes

the strategic timing account.

       To examine whether the complementary relationship is driven by firms strategically changing

their earnings announcement dates, we test whether the complementary relationship is present even

firms that do not strategically change their earnings announcement dates. The results are described

in Table 7 Panel C. Column (1) shows that firms that did not greatly change their announcement

dates have a large positive coefficient of 0.095 on the immediate reaction that is statistically and

economically significant. Firms that changed their earnings announcements forward or backward

have insignificant coefficients for the effects of macro news on reaction to earnings news. Columns

(2) reaches similar conclusion for the drift.10 Overall, these results suggest that strategic timing

does not drive the complementary relationship.


4.4 Trading frictions

       We also examine the possibility that the complementary relationship between macro and micro

news may be driven by a firm's liquidity premium. Even with rational investors, it is possible that



  10
    As a robustness check, we show similar results when analyzing firms that changed their earnings announcements
more than three days in Table IA. 4 of the Internet Appendix.

                                                       22
the effect is driven by shifts in firms' liquidity premia if firms with positive earnings surprises are

more liquid or have lower trading costs on Macrodays. Past literature shows that the earnings

announcement premium is associated with liquidity risk (Sadka 2006; Frazzini and Lamont 2007).

    Table 8 tests for such an explanation. We use two measures of liquidity: bid-ask spread and

turnover. For a firm, greater bid-ask spread means it is less liquid, while higher turnover means it

is more liquid. If the liquidity story holds, we would expect that the coefficient on the interaction

term  ×  is significant and positive. However, Table 8 shows that the coefficients

are not significant. Thus, liquidity is unlikely to account for the complementary relationship.

    Overall, we examine four potential explanations for the complementary relationship between

macro news and earnings announcements. Our results suggest that a combination of attention and

information transmission channels may explain this complementary relationship.



5. Additional results and robustness tests

    We first discuss additional results to provide further insights about the sources of effects. Then,

in Section 5.2, we discuss robustness checks.


5.1 Additional results

    We next provide three additional results. First, we examine situations where earnings

announcements are released a few days before or after macro news. For earnings announcements

released after macro news, the information transmission explanation is potentially consistent with

investors processing subsequent earnings news differently, because they can learn information

from earlier macro news that is relevant for the interpretation of the earnings news. The attention

explanation is potentially consistent with greater investor attention to subsequent earnings


                                                  23
announcements being triggered by preceding macro news. Thus, both explanations are potentially

consistent with stronger reactions to earnings. Table 9 Panel A shows that there is some effect of

macro news on immediate reactions to earnings news when earnings are released one day after

macro news. As discussed above, this is potentially consistent with either the attention channel or

the information transmission channel (or both).

       For earnings announcements released before macro announcements, under the attention

explanation, the prospect of scheduled arrival of macro-news may trigger firm-level attention.

Consistent with this idea, other research shows that investor attention to the stock market (as

measured by news media coverage) rises several days before macro announcements (Fisher,

Martineau, and Sheng 2021). This would increase the sensitivity of the market reaction to earnings

news. The information transmission explanation does not predict that the prospect of macro news

will result in stronger market reaction to preceding earnings news. Table 9 Panel u shows that

there is significant and positive effect of macro news on immediate reactions to earnings news

when earnings are released one or two days before macro news. Again, this result is potentially

consistent with either the attention channel or the information transmission channel (or both).

       In the second test, we examine whether the complementary relationship varies with firms' size

and analyst coverage. When macro-news triggers investor attention to the stock market, they are

more likely to look at large firms such as Apple and Microsoft, since such firms attract greater

attention in general.11 There is evidence from past literature that in general large firms receive

more attention from investors. For example, uhushan (1989) find large firms have higher analyst

following. Also, large firms tend to be more tied to the macro economy rather than having



  11
     Another theoretical possibility is that investors pay attention to large firms almost all the time, and small firms
only part of the time. In this scenario, a triggering event would mainly increase attention among small firms. We regard
this story as much less plausible, most investors do not pay attention to any given firm---even a large one---every day.

                                                          24
idiosyncratic performance. This suggests that macro news will be more valuable to understand

their earnings announcements, which is consistent with information channel.

       To test this idea, we examine the effect of macro news on the sensitivity of prices to firm-level

earnings news separately for small, medium, and large firms. Table 10 Panel A shows that the

effect is more pronounced for large firms. Again the stronger effect can either due to the higher

attention they get from investors or greater information value from macro news for these firms.

Similarly, Table 10 Panel u shows that the effect is concentrated among firms with high analyst

coverage.

       A further plausible implication of the information transmission explanation is that macro news

is more relevant for the processing of earnings news for industries that are more sensitive to macro

news. Likewise, for the attention explanation, macro news may be a stronger trigger for attention

in industries that are more sensitive to macro news.

       To perform this test, we use Fama French 10 industries. To estimate the sensitivity of the

industry to macro news, we regress the value-weighted industry portfolio returns on Macroday.

Industry sensitivity is measured by the coefficient on Macroday. We then compare whether

industries that are more sensitive to macro news have with the largest effect of macro-news on the

sensitivity of returns to earnings news. Table 11 presents the results. Columns (1) and (2) show

that the effect of macro news on the processing of earnings news, is most pronounced in two big

industries: i) Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services; ii) Other (including finance, business services,

etc). Consistent with this result, Column (3) shows that these two industries are also the industries

that are very sensitive to macro news.12



   Given that the analysis is based on a sample of 10 industries, the evidence is suggestive. We also considered an
  12

analysis with a larger number of industries but doing so greater reduces the sample size for estimation. There are fewer
observations within an industry when using a larger number of industries. In the sample of 30 industries, some
industries have less than 1,000 observations, as compared to 158,399 observations in our main analysis.

                                                          25
    Finally, both the attention explanation and the information transmission explanation imply

that the more important the macro news, the larger an effect it has on investors' reactions to

earnings news. This is because more important macro news is likely to be more relevant for the

interpretation of firm-level news, which potentially increases both rational responses to such news

and attention to such news.

    We measure the importance of the macro news by the absolute value of aggregate stock market

return (__) on macro-news days, as both big bad and big good news may contain

more information. To test this idea, we augment the regression Equation (4) by adding a triple

interaction term  ×  × __ and __. Table 12 presents the

result. The coefficient on the triple interaction term is positive and statistically significant for

[0,1], and negative and statistically significant for [2,61]. This result indicates that the

complementary relationship between macro and earnings news is more pronounced when the

macro news is more important.


5.2 Robustness tests

    A possible concern is that the apparent complementary relationship actually reflects

differences between firms that choose to announce on macro-news days and firms that announce

on non-macro-news days. In the extreme, these two sets of firms might not overlap, so that the

complementary relationship between macro news and earnings announcements is just the

difference between this set of firms and other firms.

    To address this concern, we calculate the fraction of firms that always issue their earnings

announcements on macro-news days. Specifically, we create an Abnormal Announcement




                                                26
Preference Ratio (AAPR) for each firm, which is the number of earnings announcements on

macro-news day divided by the total number of its announcements. Among firms that release

earnings news on macro-news days at least once, less than 3% (114) of firms release more than

50% of their earnings news on macro-news days. This accounts for only 13% even if we count

firms that issue more than 33% of their earnings announcements on macro-news days. This

evidence suggests that the complementary relationship between macro news and earnings

announcements is unlikely driven by a set of firms that repeatedly announce earnings on macro-

news days.

    Nevertheless, we test for this possibility by re-estimating Equation (4) with a sample that

excludes these firms. Table 13 Panel A reports the results of this test. It shows that the

complementary relationship between macro news and earnings announcements on reactions to

earnings news remains statistically and economically similar as in Table 2. Thus, our results cannot

be driven by a small set of firms that have strong preference of announcement dates.

    Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) find that investors' immediate reactions to earnings

announcements are much weaker, and drift is much stronger when a large number of earnings are

issued by other firms on the same day. Given that macro-news days have slightly fewer earnings

announcements (Table 1 Panel u), a possible concern is that the complementary relationship

between macro news and earnings announcements is driven by days with a low number of earnings

news. We address this concern by removing days with a low number of earnings news (bottom

quantile) and present the results in Table 13 Panel u. It shows that the complementary relationship

between macro and micro news is the same as in Table 2 at both statistical and economic levels.

Thus, the complementary relationship between macro and micro news is a distinct contributor that

is not explained by the number of earnings news.



                                                27
    Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) find the distraction effect is mainly driven by unrelated

earnings news, which is defined earnings news from other industries. For the same-industry

announcement, there is no distraction effect. This finding is similar in spirit to the finding of this

paper that aggregate/macro announcement can draw attention to a firm rather than serves as a

distraction.

    Gulen and Hwang (2012) show that investors' immediate reactions to corporate events,

including earnings announcements, are much stronger and delayed reactions are much weaker

when earnings are released on days with high market returns and the earnings surprises are positive.

To the extent that both macro-news and market returns are aggregate variables, one may be

concerned about the new implications from macro-news compared to market returns. The fact that

market returns and macro-news are correlated (Savor and Wilson 2013) and that market returns

affect investors' reactions to earnings news does not mean that macro news is not a distinct

phenomenon for studying investor behaviors. Macro-news is different from market returns for at

least two reasons. First, macro-news affects stock market returns, but not the opposite. Also, many

factors move stock market returns. Thus, the impact of market returns on investor behavior can

come from factors other than macro news. Second, macro news is associated with information

release and its impact on reactions to earnings news provides a unique setting to study the

interaction between two types of information. This is crucial in understanding the channels through

which macro-news affects investors' behavior.

      To address the concern that macro-news and market returns are the same driving force for

the changes in investors' reactions to earnings news, we re-estimate Equation (4) by excluding

days with high market returns (top quantile). Table 13 Panel C reports the results of this test. The

complementary relationship between macro and micro news is barely affected by removing these



                                                 28
observations, suggesting that market return swings cannot explain this effect.

    Finally, we test whether the results are robust to alternative measures of investor reactions and

earnings surprise groups. First, instead of using the market model, we use the Fama-French Three-

Factor model when calculating [0,1] and [2,61] and re-estimate Equation (4). Table

13 Panel D presents the results. The coefficient on the interaction term is positive and significant

for [0,1] (Column 1), and negative and significant for [2,61] (Column 2). Thus, the

results are similar to the main findings in Table 2. The economic magnitudes of the coefficients

are also similar. Moreover, we use 10 groups of earnings surprise and re-estimate Equation (4) and

the results remain qualitatively and quantitatively similar (Table 13 Panel E). Overall, the

complementary relationship between macro and micro news is robust to the choice of model in

calculating the reaction measures.



6. Conclusion

    We investigate how the arrival of macro news affects the sensitivity of stock prices to firm-

level earnings news. Models of limited attention in the stock market have predicted since investors

need to allocate cognitive resources between different activities, there will be substitution between

attention to different signals. There is evidence of such distraction triggered by news arrival about

individual stocks. Surprisingly, we find that the effects are opposite to the theoretical prediction:

macro news increases the sensitivity of stock prices to firm-level news. So the relationship between

macro and micro news is complementary.

    A possible explanation for this complementary relationship between macro news and earnings

announcements is the attention channel, wherein investors pay more attention to firm-level news

on macro-news days. An alternative explanation is provided by the information transmission

                                                 29
channel, wherein earnings announcements become more informative when there is also macro-

news. We provide further evidence consistent with both explanations.

    These results suggest that it will be fruitful to broaden the modeling of limited attention in the

stock market to consider an additional margin for attention allocation--the margin between

attending to the stock market at all versus other activities. In particular, our findings suggest that

macro news stimulates overall attention to the stock market, including firm-specific news.

    This evidence also speaks to the dynamics of market efficiency for individual stocks (Savor

and Wilson 2014; Rosch, Subrahmanyam, and van Dijk 2017; Engelberg, McLean, and Pontiff

2018; uirru 2018). The finding of improved price efficiency on macro-news days differs from

these papers in suggesting that shifts in attention allocation may be an important source of such

market efficiency dynamics.

    The idea that swings in investor attention are often in the same direction at macro-news level

and the firm level, instead of being only between them, may operate much more broadly in

financial markets than the application to earnings news that we have focused upon. Several stylized

facts or anecdotal observations are potentially consistent with this idea. Investors trade individual

stocks more heavily when the aggregate market has performed well (US: Statman, Thorley and

Vorkink 2006); 46 countries: Griffin, Nardari and Stulz 2007). During sector or aggregate market

bubble periods, it seems that investors become especially excited about individual stocks, as

exemplified by the rise of day trading, investment clubs, and stock market chat rooms during the

internet boom at the turn of the millennium. So the complementarity between aggregate and firm-

level attention may be a far-reaching phenomenon.




                                                 30
References
uall, Ray, and Philip urown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting numbers, Journal of
    Accounting Research 6, 159­178.
uernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
    response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1­36.
uernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1990, Evidence that stock prices do not fully reflect the
    implications of current earnings for future earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics 13,
    305-340.
uen-Rephael, Azi, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen, 2017, It depends on where you search: A
    comparison of institutional and retail attention, Review of Financial Studies 30, 3009-3047.
uhushan, Ravi, 1989, Firm characteristics and analyst following. Journal of Accounting and
    Economics 11.2-3, 255-274.
uirru, Justin, 2018, Day of the week and the cross-section of returns, Journal of Financial
    Economics130, 182-214.
uoguth, Oliver and Duchin, Ran and Simutin, Mikhail, 2020, Dissecting Conglomerates, Journal
    of Finance, forthcoming.
uoyd, John H., Jian Hu, Ravi Jagannathan, 2005, The stock market's reaction to unemployment
    news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks, Journal of Finance 60, 649-672.
Chan, Wesley S., 2003, Stock price reaction to news and no-news: drift and reversal after headlines,
    Journal of Financial Economics 70, 223-260.
Cieslak, Anna, Adair Morse, and Annette Vissing-Jogensen, 2019, Stock returns over the FOMC
    cycle, Journal of Finance 74, 2201-2248.
Corwin, Shane A., and Jay F. Coughenour, 2008, Limited attention and the allocation of effort in
    securities trading, Journal of Finance 63, 3031-3067.
Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, 2011, In search of attention, Journal of Finance 66,
    1461-1499.
DeHaan, E., Shevlin, T., and Thornock, J., 2015. Market (in) attention and the strategic scheduling
    and timing of earnings announcements. Journal of Accounting and Economics 60, 36-55.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings
    announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709-749.
Drake, Michael S., Darren T. Roulstone, and Jacob R. Thornock, 2012, Investor information

                                                31
    demand: Evidence from Google searches around earnings announcements, Journal of
    Accounting Research 50,1001-1040.
Engelberg, Joseph, R. David McLean, and Jeffrey Pontiff, 2018, Anomalies and news, Journal of
    Finance 73, 1971-2001.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal
    of Finance 25, 383-417.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
    bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fisher, Adlai J., Charles Martineau, and Jinfei Sheng, 2021, Macroeconomic attention and
    announcement risk premia, Working paper, Available at SSRN 2703978.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2007, The earnings announcement premium and trading
    volume, Working paper, Available at SSRN 986940.
Gilbert, Thomas, 2011, Information aggregation around macroeconomic announcements:
    Revisions matter, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 114-131.
Gilbert, Thomas, Chiara Scotti, Georg Strasser, and Clara Vega, 2017, Is the intrinsic value of
    macroeconomic news announcements related to their asset price impact? Journal of Monetary
    Economics 92, 78-95.
Goldstein, Itay, and Liyan Yang, 2015, Information diversity and complementarities in trading and
    information acquisition, Journal of Finance 70, 1723-1765.
Griffin, John M., Federico Nardari, and Rene M. Stulz, 2007, Do investors trade more when stocks
    have performed well? Evidence from 46 countries, Review of Financial Studies 20, 905-951.
Gulen, Huseyin, and uyoung-Hyoun Hwang, 2012, Daily stock market swings and investor
    reaction to firm-specific news, Working paper, Available at SSRN 1934873.
Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Kelly Shue, 2018, A tough act to follow: Contrast effects in financial
    markets, Journal of Finance 73, 1567-1613.
Hillert, Alexander, Heiko Jacobs, and Sebastian Müller, 2014, Media makes momentum. Review
    of Financial Studies 27, 3467-3501.
Hirshleifer, David, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure, and
    financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337-386.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extraneous
    events and underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289-2325.


                                               32
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2011, Limited investor attention and stock
    market misreactions to accounting information, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1, 35-73.
Johnson, Travis L., and Eric C. So, 2018, Time will tell: Information in the timing of scheduled
    earnings news, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 2431-2464.
Kempf, Elisabeth, Alberto Manconi, and Oliver Spalt, 2017, Distracted shareholders and corporate
    actions, Review of Financial Studies 30, 1660­1695.
Liu, Hongqi and Peng, Lin and Tang, Yi, 2019, Retail Attention, Institutional Attention, Working
    paper, uaruch College.
Lucca, David O., and Emanuel Moench, 2015, The PreFOMC announcement drift, Journal of
    Finance 70, 329-371.
Peng, Lin, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning, Journal
    of Financial Economics 80, 563-602.
Rosch, Dominik M., Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Mathijs A. van Dijk, M., 2017, The dynamics
    of market efficiency. Review of Financial Studies 30. 1151­1187.
Sadka, Ronnie, 2006, Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
    liquidity risk, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309-349.
Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2013, How much do investors care about macroeconomic risk?
    Evidence from scheduled economic announcements, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 48, 343-375.
Savor, Pavel and Mungo Wilson, 2014, Asset pricing: A tale of two days, Journal of Financial
    Economics 113, 171-201.
Schmalz, Martin C., and Sergey Zhuk, 2018, Revealing downturns, Review of Financial Studies 32,
    338-373.
Sims, Christopher A., 2003, Implications of rational inattention, Journal of Monetary Economics
    50, 665­690.
Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, and Keith Vorkink, 2006, Investor overconfidence and trading
    volume. Review of Financial Studies 19, 1531-1565.




                                               33
Figure 1. Performance of drift at different horizons

This figure plots the cumulative abnormal returns over different horizons. Cumulative abnormal return for
each stock is based on the market model. For event time, day 0 is the day of earnings announcement. X-
axis is the event time window, and Y-axis is average cumulative abnormal returns (Quantile 11 minus
Quantile 1).




                                                   34
Table 1. Summary statistics

This table reports summary statistics. SUE is earnings surprise. # Earnings news is number of earnings
announcements per day. # Analyst is the number of analysts following the firm. Market cap is the market
capitalization. Share turnover is the turnover of a firm's share. and Market return is the daily value-
weighted market return from CRSP, CAR[0,1] is the cumulative abnormal return based on market model
over days [0,1].CAR[2,61] is the cumulative abnormal return based on market model over days [2,61].
Macro news days (Macroday) include days with announcements of Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption.

 Panel A. Full Sample
                         Count        Mean              SD           P25          P50          P75
 ES %                   158399        -0.01             1.10        -0.05         0.04         0.21
 # Earnings news        158399         118               79           46          107          180
 # Analyst              158399         6.03             5.78           2           4            8
 Market cap($ml)        158399        5187             20513         238          735         2617
 Share turnover %       158399         2.42             4.01         0.48         1.22         2.83
 Market returns %       158399         0.04             1.31        -0.60         0.09         0.67
 CAR[0,1] %             158399         0.10             8.54        -3.77         0.02         3.96
 CAR[2,61] %            158399         1.05            27.16       -12.44        -0.68        11.44

 Panel B. Sample of Macroday vs. sample of other days
                             Count                      Mean                    Mean comparison
                     Macroday Other days       Macroday    Other days          Mean diff   T-stat
 ES %                 18876        139523        -0.004      -0.010             0.006       0.76
 # Earnings news      18876        139523         110         119                 -9      -13.92
 # Analyst            18876        139523         6.12        6.02               0.10       2.16
 Market cap($ml)      18876        139523         4895        5227              -332       -2.09
 Share turnover %     18876        139523         2.63        2.39               0.24       7.78
 Market returns %     18876        139523         0.25        0.01               0.24      23.75
 CAR[0,1] %           18876        139523         0.24        0.08               0.16       2.34
 CAR[2,61] %          18876        139523         0.70        1.09              -0.40      -1.88




                                                  35
Table 2. The complementary relationship between macro and micro news

This table reports the attention trigger effect. The dependent variable is cumulative abnormal return and is
indicated under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise quantile (11 groups). ES Top equals to 1 if
earnings surprise quantile is 11 and 0 if the earnings surprise quantile is 1. Macroday is a dummy variable
equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision,
Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Size is the deciles of market capitalization of a
firm. # Earnings news is the number of earnings announcements on that day. # Analyst is the number of
analysts following the firm. Turnover is the turnover ratio, defined by trading volume divided by shares
outstanding. Market return top is a dummy variable that equals to 1 if the market return of that day belongs
to the top 10% during the sample period. Other control variables include dummy variables for year, month,
and day of week. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings
announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Panel A. Top and bottom groups
 VARIABLES                                      CAR[0,1]                             CAR[2,61]
                                         (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)

 ES Top                               8.352***            8.127***         4.846***           5.190***
                                       (0.175)             (0.179)          (0.527)            (0.535)
 Macroday                              -0.667*              -0.514           1.912               1.468
                                       (0.369)             (0.377)          (1.349)            (1.358)
 (ES Top)×Macroday                    1.277***            1.373***         -3.458**           -3.682**
                                       (0.446)             (0.450)          (1.504)            (1.504)
 Friday                                                     -0.614                               1.452
                                                           (0.385)                             (1.298)
 Size                                                     0.255***                           -0.322***
                                                           (0.036)                             (0.101)
 # Analyst                                               -0.917***                              -0.572
                                                           (0.147)                             (0.426)
 # Earnings news                                           -0.193*                             0.804**
                                                           (0.109)                             (0.316)
 Turnover                                                 0.128***                               0.022
                                                           (0.043)                             (0.059)
 Market return top                                         0.352**                             1.314**
                                                           (0.165)                             (0.533)
 Constant                             -4.491***          -3.299***          -0.385               3.328
                                        (0.137)            (0.633)          (0.446)            (2.275)

 Controls                                 Y                  Y                 Y                    Y
 Observations                          26,460              26,460           26,460               26,460
 Adj. R2                                0.119              0.124             0.004                0.018




                                                    36
Table 2 (continued)
 Panel B. Full sample
 VARIABLES                        CAR[0,1]                      CAR[2,61]
                           (1)                 (2)        (3)               (4)

 ES                     0.848***          0.842***     0.357***          0.388***
                         (0.011)           (0.011)      (0.029)           (0.029)
 Macroday               -0.459**           -0.354*      1.056*              0.776
                         (0.186)           (0.183)      (0.586)           (0.588)
 ES×Macroday            0.089***          0.092***     -0.192**         -0.201***
                         (0.026)           (0.025)      (0.076)           (0.076)
 Friday                                   -0.263**                          0.342
                                           (0.112)                        (0.359)
 Size                                     0.138***                      -0.306***
                                           (0.011)                        (0.030)
 # Analyst                               -0.213***                        0.286**
                                           (0.044)                        (0.112)
 # Earnings news                         -0.184***                         0.155*
                                           (0.032)                        (0.091)
 Turnover                                -0.235***                         -0.003
                                           (0.017)                        (0.021)
 Market return top                        0.183***                       0.967***
                                           (0.051)                        (0.154)
 Constant               -5.737***        -5.019***     -1.513***            0.981
                          (0.079)          (0.226)       (0.212)          (0.728)

 Controls                  Y                    Y         Y                Y
 Observations           158,399              158,399   158,399          158,399
 Adj. R2                 0.086                0.100     0.002            0.008




                                       37
Table 3. Drift over different horizons and longevity of the drift

This table reports the impact of macro news on drift over different horizons. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise
quantile (11 groups). Macroday is a dummy variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption.
Control variables include the number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the
firm, analyst dispersion, market capitalization, share turnover, market return, and dummy variables for year,
month, and day of week. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of
earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. Panel u presents the longevity of the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD). We calculate
the PEAD over different time horizons and report the PEAD as a fraction of 240-day drift. We compare
earnings announcements released on days with important macro announcements (Macroday) and earnings
announcements on other days (Other days).

Panel A. Drift over different horizons
                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
 VARIABLES         CAR[2,30] CAR[2,45]           CAR[2,61]      CAR[2,75]      CAR[2,90]      CAR[2,210]

 ES                  0.250***       0.306***       0.388***      0.372***       0.376***        0.718***
                      (0.018)        (0.023)        (0.029)       (0.035)        (0.038)         (0.071)
 Macroday              0.135         1.262**         0.785         0.572          0.538           0.692
                      (0.397)        (0.571)        (0.589)       (0.660)        (0.685)         (1.254)
 ES×Macroday          -0.100*      -0.213***      -0.201***      -0.186**       -0.206**        -0.354**
                      (0.051)        (0.072)        (0.076)       (0.087)        (0.090)         (0.162)
 Constant              0.506          0.714          1.152        1.541*         2.039**        4.737***
                      (0.462)        (0.553)        (0.727)       (0.819)        (0.850)         (1.350)

 Controls               Y              Y              Y              Y              Y              Y
 Observations        158,399        158,399        158,399        158,399        158,399        158,336
 Adj. R2              0.005          0.005          0.008          0.006          0.005          0.004

Panel B. Longevity of the drift
                                                       PEAD as a fraction of 240-day drift
                                                      (1)                              (2)
 Drift horizons                                     Macroday                       Other days
 [2,61]                                              0.234                           0.209
 [2,120]                                             0.457                           0.383
 [2,180]                                             0.746                           0.653
 [2,210]                                             1.000                           0.888
 [2,240]                                             1.000                           1.000




                                                     38
  Table 4. Trading strategy on drift portfolios

  This table presents the results from a post-earning announcement drift trading strategy. The stock returns
  data is from CRSP and is matched with firms' characteristics from Compustat and I/u/E/S. The trading
  strategy portfolio based on non-macro-day drift is constructed as following. In month , it purchases
  firms that, in month  - 1 made an announcement on a non-macro-day in the top quantile; sells firms
  that made an announcement on a non-macro-day in the bottom quantile. Therefore, the return for the non-
                                         11      1
  macro-day drift portfolio is       =       -      . We construct the macro-day drift portfolio for month t
  following a similar procedure except that we only include firms that made an earnings announcement on a
                                                                          11    1
  macro-day in a previous month. The return for this portfolio is     =      -    . The long-short portfolio
                                                                                                       
  of buying the non-macro-day drift portfolio and selling macro-day portfolio has return, -        =      -
    
   . The Fama-French three-factor returns are from Ken French's website. Standard errors are adjusted for
  heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
  significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                           Value-weighted                             Equally-weighted
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                     Other days     Macroday     Difference     Other days      Macroday      Difference

Constant                       0.970**          0.157        0.891**      1.150***       0.350***       0.804**
                               (0.387)        (0.478)        (0.437)       (0.397)        (0.108)       (0.406)
Market Excess Return            0.078          -0.092         0.170         0.263          -0.027        0.290*
                               (0.200)        (0.148)        (0.234)       (0.166)        (0.065)       (0.164)
Size Factor Return (SMB)        0.180        -0.336**        0.517**        0.015        -0.172**         0.187
                               (0.235)        (0.142)        (0.259)       (0.168)        (0.072)       (0.180)
Value Factor Return (HML)       0.020          -0.211         0.231         0.059          -0.154         0.213
                               (0.227)        (0.215)        (0.276)       (0.206)        (0.122)       (0.220)

Observations                     179            179            179          179             179           179
Adj. R2                         0.011          0.025          0.018        0.002           0.019         0.014




                                                        39
Table 5. Investor attention

This table presents the results of investor attention. Abnormal institutional investor attention (AIA) is the
news-searching and news-reading activity for Russell 3000 firms from uloomberg terminal. AIA is a
dummy variable if AIA index is higher than 2. The regression for AIA test is a probit test and the reported
coefficient is marginal effects (there is no constant term reported and Pseudo R-squared is reported). uoth
measures are at daily frequency. Eday is dummy variable equaling 1 if that has one or more earnings
announcements. Google search volume index (SVI) is the ticker-searching activity for S&P 500 firms.
Control variables include dummy variables for year, month, and day of week. Macroday is a dummy
variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision,
Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Control variables include the number of
earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market
capitalization, share turnover, market return, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week.
Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                         (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
 Attention measure                                AIA                                   SVI

 Macroday                             0.011***            0.012***            0.000              0.001
                                       (0.002)             (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)
 Eday                                 0.522***            0.525***          0.098***           0.106***
                                       (0.008)             (0.008)           (0.035)            (0.035)
 Macroday×Eday                                            0.055***                            -0.025***
                                                           (0.017)                              (0.008)
 Constant                                                                   0.008***           0.008***
                                                                             (0.001)            (0.001)

 Controls                                Y                    Y                 Y                 Y
 Observations                        1,173,450            1,173,450          632,494           632,494
 Adj. R2/Pseudo R2                     0.039                0.039             0.003             0.003




                                                     40
Table 6. Analyst revisions

This table presents the result of the test on whether analyst revisions are different for earnings
announcements released on days with important macro news (Macroday) compared to earnings released on
other days. # of revisions is number of analyst revision 1 to 10 days before earnings announcements.
Forecast quality is the negative value of forecast errors, which is defined as the absolute value of the
difference between predicted earnings by analysts and actual earnings, scaled by stock prices. 
is a dummy variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Size is the deciles of market
capitalization of a firm. # Earnings news is the number of earnings announcements on that day. # Analyst
is the number of analysts following the firm. Turnover is the turnover ratio, defined by trading volume
divided by share outstanding. Market return top is a dummy variable that equals to 1 if the market return of
that day belongs to the top 10% during the sample period. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity
and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                (1)                         (2)
 VARIAuLES                                                # of revisions              Forecast quality

 Macroday                                                   0.092***                      0.014***
                                                             (0.031)                       (0.005)
 Size                                                       0.127***                      0.030***
                                                             (0.008)                       (0.002)
 # Analyst                                                  1.008***                     -0.106***
                                                             (0.055)                       (0.007)
 # Earnings news                                           -0.314***                        0.003
                                                             (0.035)                       (0.005)
 Turnover                                                   0.046***                     -0.009***
                                                             (0.006)                       (0.001)
 Market return top                                           -0.020                      -0.016***
                                                             (0.013)                       (0.003)
 Constant                                                  -0.671***                      -0.073**
                                                             (0.146)                       (0.028)

 Controls                                                      Y                             Y
 Observations                                               158,399                       158,399
 Adj. R2                                                     0.189                         0.024




                                                     41
Table 7. Strategic timing of earning announcements

This table tests whether the complementary relationship is driven by a firm's strategic timing of earning
announcements. date is the difference between the day of the current earnings announcements and the
previous year's same-quarter earnings announcement. Panel A presents results of t-test on the difference
between average earnings surprise (Avg.ES) on macro-news days and Avg. ES on other days. Panel u
examines whether firms are more likely to strategically change their earnings announcements to a macro-
news day when their earning surprise is positive versus negative. Eday Change is a dummy variable
equaling 1 if the absolute value of date is greater than 5. Positive ES is a dummy variable equaling 1 if
the earning surprise is positive. Negative ES and Neutral ES are defined in the same way. Panel C presents
regression results. The dependent variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each
column heading. ES is earnings surprise quantile (11 groups), and Macroday is a dummy variable equaling
1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment
situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Control variables include the number of earnings
announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market capitalization, share
turnover, market volatility, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week. Standard errors are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Panel A. Earnings date change and surprise
                                                           date<-5                     date>5
                                                     Count Mean SD               Count Mean SD
 Avg.ES (%) on macro days                             1137 0.052 1.230            6851 -0.063 1.327
 Avg.ES (%) on other days                             7202 0.039 1.185           53540 -0.067 1.241
 Differences                                               0.013                        0.004
 t-stat                                                    0.349                        0.246

 Panel B. Changes in earnings date and earnings surprises
                                                                               Eday Change
 Positive ES                                                         -0.011*
                                                                     (0.006)
 Negative ES                                                                     0.011*
                                                                                 (0.007)
 Neutral ES                                                                             0.003
                                                                                       (0.011)
 Constant                                                           0.227*** 0.217*** 0.221***
                                                                     (0.005)  (0.004)  (0.003)
 Observations                                                        17,631   17,631   17,631
 Adj. R2                                                              0.000    0.000    0.000

 Panel C: Earning announcement date change and the impact of macro news
                                                                CAR[0,1]                   CAR[2,61]
                                                                     (1)                        (2)
 ES×Macroday if abs( date)<=5                                     0.095***                  -0.263***
                                                                   (0.029)                    (0.090)
 ES×Macroday if abs( date)>5                                        0.077                     -0.010
                                                                   (0.051)                    (0.146)

                                                   42
Table 8. Trading frictions

This table tests whether the complementary relationship is driven by a firm's liquidity. The dependent
variables are bid-ask spread and turnover. ES is earnings surprise decile (11 groups), and Macroday is a
dummy variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Bid-ask is bid-ask spread and
Turnover is the firm's trade volume divided by number of shares outstanding. Control variables include the
number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market
capitalization, market return, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week. Standard errors are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    (1)                    (2)             (3)                  (4)
 VARIABLES                                  Bid-ask                                Turnover

 ES                             -0.182***             -0.201***         0.002***               0.002*
                                  (0.028)               (0.041)          (0.000)               (0.001)
 Macroday                       -0.008***             -0.008***         0.000***              0.000***
                                  (0.001)               (0.002)          (0.000)               (0.000)
 ES×Macroday                                             0.003                                  0.000
                                                        (0.004)                                (0.000)
 Constant                        1.703***              1.706***         0.031***              0.031***
                                  (0.064)               (0.064)          (0.001)               (0.001)

 Controls                          Yes                   Yes              Yes                   Yes
 Observations                    127,045               127,045          158,399               158,399
 Adj. R2                          0.105                 0.105            0.006                 0.006




                                                      43
Table 9. Earnings announcements before or after macro-news days

This table presents the lead and lag effect of macro news and earnings news. The dependent variable is
cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise quantile
(11 groups). "One day before" indicates that the macro news announcement is one day before the earnings
announcement. The same definition applies to other lead and lag windows. For cases where the macro-news
day is one-day before the earnings announcements, -1 equals to 1 if there is macro-news on
day  - 1 for an earnings announcement released on day . Macro announcements include Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Control
variables include the number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst
dispersion, market capitalization, share turnover, market return, and dummy variables for year, month, and
day of week. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings
announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Panel A. Earnings announcements are released after Macro news
                        1 day after (j=1)         2 days after (j=2)              3 days after(j=3)
                     CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61] CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]                      CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]

  × -                    0.045*        -0.064         0.019        -0.102         0.006        -0.039
                         (0.023)       (0.070)       (0.023)       (0.066)       (0.023)       (0.071)


 Panel B. Earnings announcements are released before Macro news
                        1 day before (k=1)       2 days before (k=2)              3 days before(k=3)
                      CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61] CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]                     CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]

  × +                    0.061***       -0.028       0.063***       -0.032         0.023        -0.040
                          (0.021)       (0.061)       (0.022)       (0.063)       (0.022)       (0.068)




                                                    44
Table 10. Heterogeneity

This table reports how the complementary relationship varies with firm size, analyst coverage, and
institutional ownership. The dependent variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each
column heading. ES is earnings surprise decile (11 groups),  is a dummy variable equaling 1 if
day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment
situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Panel A reports the tests on three subsamples partitioned
based on firm size decile. Small, medium, and large firms are in size decile 1 to 3, 4 to 7, and 8 to 10,
respectively. Panel u reports the tests on three subsamples partitioned based on analyst coverage. Low,
medium, and high coverage firms are firms in decile 1 to 3, 4 to 7, and 8 to 10, respectively. Panel C reports
the tests on three subsamples partitioned based on institutional ownership () decile calculated from
Thomson Reuters Institutional (13f) Holdings data. Firms with low, medium, and high institutional
ownership are in  decile 1 to 3, 4 to 7, and 8 to 10, respectively. Control variables include the
number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market
capitalization, share turnover, market return, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week.
Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Panel A. Firm size
                        (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)                (5)          (6)
                          Small firms                  Medium firms                    Large firms
 VARIABLES           CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]         CAR[0,1]   CAR[2,61]           CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]
 ES                   0.765***      0.597***        0.966***       0.255***        0.783***       0.257***
                       (0.018)       (0.050)         (0.020)        (0.052)         (0.016)        (0.044)
 Macroday               0.184       -2.000**         -0.570*          0.503       -0.875***       3.914***
                       (0.296)       (0.921)         (0.343)        (1.007)         (0.308)        (1.136)
 ES×Macroday            0.027         0.007          0.117**         -0.192        0.154***      -0.529***
                       (0.040)       (0.125)         (0.048)        (0.129)         (0.042)        (0.146)
 Controls                Y              Y              Y               Y              Y              Y
 Observations          50,134         50,134         53,952          53,952         54,313        54,313
 Adj. R2               0.096          0.015          0.136            0.008         0.089         0.009


 Panel B. Analyst coverage
                       (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
                     Low analyst coverage          Medium analyst coverage        High analyst coverage
 VARIABLES         CAR[0,1]     CAR[2,61]          CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]         CAR[0,1]     CAR[2,61]
 ES                0.764***      0.611***          0.936***     0.190***         0.852***      0.257***
                    (0.015)       (0.044)           (0.018)      (0.047)          (0.020)       (0.057)
 Macroday            -0.381        0.134            -0.226        -0.285           -0.564       3.272**
                    (0.263)       (0.927)           (0.316)      (0.917)          (0.425)       (1.274)
 ES×Macroday        0.094**       -0.176            0.077*        -0.107          0.114**      -0.423**
                    (0.037)       (0.121)           (0.043)      (0.119)          (0.058)       (0.165)
 Controls               Y            Y                 Y             Y                Y             Y
 Observations       54,792        54,792            53,710        53,710           49,897        49,897
 Adj. R2              0.093        0.012             0.120         0.008            0.090         0.011


                                                     45
Table 10 (continued)

Panel C. Institutional ownership
                      (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)
                         Low Instown            Medium Instown           High Instown
VARIABLES          CAR[0,1]     CAR[2,61]   CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]   CAR[0,1]     CAR[2,61]
ES                 0.706***      0.621***   0.933***     0.244***   1.038***      0.225***
                    (0.013)       (0.044)    (0.013)      (0.037)    (0.017)       (0.044)
Macroday            -0.065        -0.441     -0.078        0.600    -0.740**       1.544*
                    (0.280)       (0.951)    (0.275)      (0.776)    (0.348)       (0.885)
ES×Macroday          0.038        -0.140      0.042       -0.109    0.127***      -0.246**
                    (0.038)       (0.127)    (0.036)      (0.102)    (0.046)       (0.116)
Controls               Y             Y          Y            Y          Y             Y
Observations        40,705        40,705     54,267       54,267     40,677        40,677
Adj. R2              0.079         0.011      0.112        0.008      0.129         0.009




                                             46
Table 11. Different industries

This table presents evidence on the effects of macro news on the processing of earnings in different
industries. We use Fama-French 10 industries. For each industry, we run the regression Equation (4) in the
paper. The coefficients on the interaction term ES ×Macroday are reported for each industry in Columns
(1) and (2). We regress the value-weighted industry portfolio returns on Macroday. Industry sensitivity is
measured by the coefficient on Macroday and reported in Column (3). Standard errors are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                       (1)            (2)                   (3)
 Fama French 10 Industries                         CAR[0,1]      CAR[2,61]        Industry sensitivity
 Consumer Non-durables                                0.097       -0.540**                -0.131
                                                    (0.145)        (0.271)               (0.338)
 Consumer Durables                                   -0.026         -0.478                -0.154
                                                    (0.160)        (0.385)               (0.513)
 Manufacturing                                        0.093         -0.025                 0.436
                                                    (0.059)        (0.179)               (0.282)
 Oil, Gas, and Coal extraction and production         0.063         -0.432                 0.099
                                                    (0.094)        (0.356)               (0.322)
 uusiness Equipment                                  0.121*         -0.170                 0.032
                                                    (0.063)        (0.168)               (0.368)
 Telephone and Television Transmission                0.117          0.090                -0.447
                                                    (0.158)        (0.348)               (0.494)
 Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services               0.206**       -0.514**              -0.624**
                                                    (0.094)        (0.239)               (0.289)
 Healthcare, Medical Equipment, and Drugs           0.133**         -0.416                -0.232
                                                    (0.064)        (0.266)               (0.333)
 Utilities                                            0.063         -0.238                 0.171
                                                    (0.047)        (0.164)               (0.187)
 Other (finance, business service, etc)             0.083**       -0.226**               0.557**
                                                    (0.035)        (0.104)               (0.258)




                                                   47
Table 12. The importance of macro news

This table tests whether the complementary relationship varies with the size of the macro news. The
dependent variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each column heading. ES is
earnings surprise quantile (11 groups). ES Top equals to 1 if earnings surprise quantile is 11 and 0 if the
earnings surprise quantile is 1. Macroday is a dummy variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day
for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal
consumption. Whether a macro news is big or small is measured by the absolute value of the market return
(Market_Ret_Abs) on the day when the macro news is released. Control variables include the number of
earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market
capitalization, share turnover, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week. Standard errors are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                           (1)                           (2)
                                                      CAR[0,1]                      CAR[2,61]
 ES                                                    0.842***                      0.388***
                                                        (0.011)                       (0.029)
 Macroday                                               -0.358*                        0.780
                                                        (0.183)                       (0.587)
 Market_Ret_Abs                                       -0.173***                      0.243***
                                                        (0.032)                       (0.088)
 ES× Macroday                                            0.047*                       -0.147*
                                                        (0.027)                       (0.080)
 ES× Macroday× Market_Ret_Abs                          0.048***                       -0.056*
                                                        (0.011)                       (0.030)
 Constant                                             -4.901***                        0.820
                                                        (0.226)                       (0.730)
 Controls                                                   Y                             Y
 Observations                                           158,399                      158,399
 Adj. R2                                                  0.100                        0.008




                                                    48
Table 13. Robustness

This table reports several robustness tests. The dependent variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated
under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise quantile (11 groups). Macroday is a dummy variable equaling 1
if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM
PMI, or personal consumption. Panel A reports the test excluding firms that have strong preference to issue their
earnings on macro-news days. Abnormal Announcement Preference Ratio (AAPR) for a firm is the number of earnings
announcements on macro-news day divided by the total number of its announcements. Panel u reports the test
excluding days with a low number of earnings announcements (bottom quantile). Panel C reports the test excluding
days with high S&P market returns (top quantile). Panel D reports with a test using an alternative measure of CAR
calculated based on Fama-French Three-Factor model. Panel E reports the test that uses earnings surprise deciles (10
groups). Control variables include the number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm,
analyst dispersion, market capitalization, share turnover, market return, and dummy variables for year, month, and day
of week. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
 Panel A. Exclude firms with strong preference
                                                                (1)        (2)              (3)       (4)
                                                               exclude AAPR>0.5           exclude AAPR>0.33
 VARIAuLES                                                    CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]         CAR[0,1] CAR[2,61]

 ES                                                          0.843***      0.386***       0.844***      0.383***
                                                              (0.011)       (0.029)        (0.011)       (0.029)
 Macroday                                                     -0.350*        0.759       -0.573***        0.686
                                                              (0.185)       (0.592)        (0.199)       (0.616)
 ES×Macroday                                                 0.091***      -0.194**       0.120***      -0.173**
                                                              (0.026)       (0.077)        (0.027)       (0.080)
 Constant                                                   -5.235***       1.531**      -5.352***       1.625**
                                                              (0.234)       (0.764)        (0.236)       (0.763)

 Controls                                            Y                         Y             Y              Y
 Observations                                    157,717                    157,717       152,221        152,221
 Adj. R2                                           0.100                     0.008         0.101          0.008
 Panel B. Exclude days with low number of earnings news
                                                                                   (1)                   (2)
 VARIAuLES                                                                    CAR[0,1]              CAR[2,61]
 ES                                                                            0.830***              0.397***
                                                                                (0.012)               (0.031)
 Macroday                                                                        -0.324                 0.529
                                                                                (0.208)               (0.640)
 ES×Macroday                                                                   0.095***              -0.178**
                                                                                (0.028)               (0.083)
 Constant                                                                     -4.653***                -0.877
                                                                                (0.302)               (0.931)
 Controls                                                                           Y                     Y
 Observations                                                                   125,161               125,161
 Adj. R2                                                                          0.097                 0.009



                                                         49
Table 13 (continued)
Panel C. Exclude days with top S&P returns
                                                             (1)         (2)
VARIAuLES                                                CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]
ES                                                        0.841***    0.366***
                                                           (0.011)     (0.030)
Macroday                                                  -0.438**      1.047
                                                           (0.199)     (0.663)
ES×Macroday                                               0.091***    -0.207**
                                                           (0.028)     (0.084)
Constant                                                 -4.948***      1.217
                                                           (0.233)     (0.775)
Controls                                                      Y           Y
Observations                                               141,639     141,639
Adj. R2                                                     0.103       0.007

Panel D. Alternative measures of stock price reactions
                                                             (1)          (2)
VARIAuLES                                                CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]
ES                                                        0.838***    0.108***
                                                           (0.007)     (0.025)
Macroday                                                 -0.523***     1.086**
                                                           (0.157)     (0.530)
ES×Macroday                                               0.088***    -0.159**
                                                           (0.021)     (0.070)
Constant                                                 -5.195***      -0.608
                                                           (0.228)     (0.769)
Controls                                                      Y            Y
Observations                                               158,399     158,399
Adj. R2                                                     0.101        0.016
Panel E. 10 Earnings Surprise Groups
                                                             (1)         (2)
VARIAuLES                                                CAR[0,1]    CAR[2,61]
ES                                                        0.861***    0.402***
                                                           (0.011)     (0.029)
Macroday                                                 -0.574***      0.663
                                                           (0.158)     (0.483)
ES×Macroday                                               0.111***    -0.175**
                                                           (0.026)     (0.077)
Constant                                                 -4.607***   -1.256***
                                                           (0.064)     (0.170)
Controls                                                      Y           Y
Observations                                               158,399     158,399
Adj. R2                                                     0.084       0.002


                                               50
                                    Internet Appendix for

                 "Macro News, Micro News: Complements or Substitutes?"

A. Details about Macro Announcements
    This section tests the impact of individual macro news on market risk premium. Following
Savor and Wilson (2013), we find important macro announcements for stock markets by running
the following regression over a sample period of January 1997 to December 2014.
                  = 0 + 1  + 2 -1 + 3 (-1 )2 + 
where  is the CRSP value-weighted market return minus the risk-free rate.  is
a dummy variable equaling 1 if day  is an announcement day for a specific type of macro news,
and 0 otherwise. For example, if my focus is on ISM PMI, then  equals 1 if that day
has an ISM announcement, and 0 otherwise. We also include dummy variables for the day of week.
       Due to limited space, we only listed macro announcements that have statistically and
economically significant impact on market risk premium. Table IA.2 presents results for macro
announcements that have statistically and economically significant impact on market risk premium.
Panel A shows the results for FOMC news. Column (1) is parsimonious specification without
including any control variables. The coefficient on  is positive and significant,
suggesting that the market risk premium is higher on FOMC days than other days. We include the
market excess return lagged 1 day and squared market return as control in column (2) and add the
day of week as an additional control in column (3). The  effect remains positive and
highly significant in all specifications. Panels u-D show similar macro-day effects for
announcements of Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI, and Personal Consumption. Panel E shows results
on all of these four macro announcements. The coefficient on  is also positive and
significant. Overall, Table IA.2 shows that these four important macro announcements are market-
moving indicators and therefore investors care about these types of macro news.
       Here is more information about these four macroeconomic announcements.
   1. FOMC: The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is the policy-making arm of the
       Federal Reserve. It determines short-term interest rates in the U.S. when it decides the
       overnight rate that banks pay each other for borrowing reserves when a bank has a shortfall
       in required reserves. The Fed announces its policy decision at the end of each FOMC
       meeting. This is the FOMC announcement, which happens eight times a year. The


                                               51
       announcement also includes brief comments on the FOMC's views on the economy and
       how many FOMC members voted for and how many voted against the policy decision.
   2. Nonfarm payroll: The NFP number is the number of jobs added or lost in the economy over
       the last month. The data is released monthly, usually on the first Friday of the month, by
       uureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Other employment situation
       information released on the same day includes unemployment rate, average workweek, and
       average hourly earnings.
   3. ISM PMI: ISM manufacturing index is a diffusion index calculated from five of the eleven
       sub-components of a monthly survey of purchasing managers at roughly 300
       manufacturing firms nationwide. It is a leading indicator of output.
   4. Personal Consumption: Personal consumption expenditures are the monthly analogues to
       the quarterly consumption expenditures in the GDP report, available in nominal and real
       (inflation-adjusted) dollars.
B. Additional results
    This section provides additional results. We test whether there is a complementary relationship
between macro and earnings news when there is a large number of macro announcements. While
macro announcements that are important are attention-grabbing, a large numbers of macro news
events, even if we do not require each to be individually important, can also draw heavy attention.
Also, there is more information investors can learn from if many macro announcements released
on a day. To test this idea, we examine whether investors' reactions to earnings announcements are
different on days with many macroeconomic announcements. Using a full list of macroeconomic
announcements from uloomberg Econoday, we identify days with a large number of
macroeconomic announcements. The cutoff point for the top 10% of the number of
macroeconomic announcements is 7. Thus, we define a "High Macro News" day as one that has 7
or more macro announcements.
    Table IA.3 presents the results of this test. The coefficients on the interaction terms are positive
and significant for immediate reaction, and negative and significant for the delayed reaction. These
results suggest that investors' immediate reactions to earnings announcements increase and
delayed reactions decrease when a large number of macro announcements are released on the same
day. The economic magnitudes are significant as well. Thus, this confirms that the relationship
between macro news and earnings news is complementary.

                                                  52
Table IA.1 Characteristics of Macroeconomic Announcements
This table presents the four important macroeconomic announcements used in analysis. The release time is
Eastern Time.

   Announcement             Source         Frequency       Unit/Type     Release Time      # of events
Federal Funds Rate          FOMC             8/year         % level          14:00             144
Nonfarm Payrolls             uLS               M           K, change          8:30             216
ISM PMI                      ISM               M             index           10:00             216
Personal consumption         uEA               M           % change           8:30             216




                                                  53
Table IA.2 Macro announcements and market risk premium
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of daily stock market excess return on a macro
announcement day (Macroday) dummy variable and control variables. The dependent variable MKT is the
CRSP value-weighted market return minus the risk-free rate. Macro-day for Panel A-E is a dummy variable
equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for FOMC, Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI, Personal Consumption,
and all these four respectively, and 0 otherwise. Monday-Thursday are dummy variables for the
corresponding days of the week. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

                Panel A: FOMC                  Panel B: Nonfarm Payroll       Panel C: ISM PMI
 Variable         (1)     (2)         (3)        (1)      (2)     (3)            (1)      (2)    (3)
 Macroday       0.25** 0.23**       0.23**      0.14*    0.14*  0.18**        0.27*** 0.26*** 0.27***
                (2.561) (2.418)     (2.358)    (1.817) (1.897) (2.170)        (3.669) (3.519) (3.593)
 MKTt-1                    0.01      0.01                 0.01      0.01                 0.01      0.01
                          (0.522)   (0.521)              (0.556)   (0.550)              (0.580)   (0.585)
 (MKTt-1)2                 40.19      39.00               38.80      38.60               48.00      46.57
                          (0.461)    (0.447)             (0.445)    (0.443)             (0.551)    (0.534)
 Monday                               -0.01                           0.03                          -0.02
                                    (-0.131)                        (0.614)                       (-0.463)
 Tuesday                              -0.02                           0.04                          -0.01
                                    (-0.393)                        (0.676)                       (-0.128)
 Wednesday                             0.02                           0.08                           0.04
                                     (0.451)                        (1.448)                        (0.759)
 Thursday                             -0.00                           0.04                          -0.00
                                    (-0.048)                        (0.700)                       (-0.018)
 Constant         0.03      0.02       0.02      0.03      0.02      -0.01      0.02      0.02       0.01
                (1.580)   (1.270)    (0.679)   (1.590)   (1.258)   (-0.363)   (1.184)   (0.890)    (0.401)
 Observations    4,357     4,289      4,289     4,357     4,289      4,289     4,357     4,289      4,289
 Adj. R2         0.10%     0.10%      0.15%     0.20%     0.60%      0.90%     0.30%     0.52%      1.60%




                                                    54
Table IA.2 (continued)
                         Panel D: Personal Consumption       Panel E: All Top 4 News
 Variable                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (1)          (2)       (3)
 Macro-day                0.21**       0.21**     0.21**      0.25***      0.25***   0.26***
                          (2.286)     (2.287)     (2.303)     (5.629)      (5.485)   (5.627)
 MKTt-1                                0.01        0.01                   0.01        0.01
                                      (0.665)     (0.669)                (0.556)     (0.549)
 (MKTt-1)2                             18.78        18.17                 39.46        40.28
                                      (0.220)      (0.213)               (0.454)     (0.463)
 Monday                                              0.00                               0.04
                                                   (0.069)                           (0.790)
 Tuesday                                             0.00                               0.04
                                                   (0.090)                           (0.748)
 Wednesday                                           0.03                               0.08
                                                   (0.600)                           (1.616)
 Thursday                                           -0.01                               0.05
                                                  (-0.134)                           (0.898)
 Constant                   0.03        0.02         0.02       -0.00      -0.01       -0.05
                          (1.594)     (1.256)      (0.462)    (-0.235)   (-0.264)    (-1.235)
 Observations              4,357       4,289        4,289       4,357      4,289       4,289
 Adj. R2                   0.10%       0.21%       1.10%       0.70%      0.96%       2.60%




                                                55
Table IA.3 Many macroeconomic announcements
This table presents results with many macroeconomic announcements on earnings days. The dependent
variable is cumulative abnormal return and is indicated under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise
quantile (11 groups). High Macro News equals to 1 if that day has 7 or more macroeconomic announcements.
Macroday is a dummy variable equaling 1 if that day is an announcement day for Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Macroday High
is a dummy variable equaling 1 if that day has the listed announcement and has more than 7 macro
announcements at the same time. Control variables include the number of earnings announcements, the
number of analysts following the firm, analyst dispersion, market capitalization, share turnover, market
return, and dummy variables for year, month, and day of week. Standard errors are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                    (3)                   (4)
 VARIABLES                                                        CAR[0,1]              CAR[2,61]

 High Macro News                                                 -0.581***               1.188**
                                                                   (0.172)               (0.583)
 ES                                                               0.841***              0.385***
                                                                   (0.011)               (0.029)
 ES×(High Macro News)                                             0.101***              -0.179**
                                                                   (0.024)               (0.075)
 Constant                                                        -5.175***                1.340*
                                                                   (0.232)               (0.761)
 Controls                                                             Y                      Y
 Observations                                                      158,399               158,399
 Adj. R2                                                            0.100                  0.008




                                                   56
Table IA4. Strategic timing of earning announcements-robustness

This table tests whether the complementary relationship is driven by a firm's strategic timing of earning
announcements. date is the difference between the day of the current earnings announcements and the
previous year's same-quarter earnings announcement. The dependent variable is cumulative abnormal
return and is indicated under each column heading. ES is earnings surprise quantile (11 groups), and
Macroday is a dummy variable equaling 1 if day t is an announcement day for Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) decision, Employment situation, ISM PMI, or personal consumption. Control
variables include the number of earnings announcements, the number of analysts following the firm, analyst
dispersion, market capitalization, share turnover, market volatility, and dummy variables for year, month,
and day of week. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and clustered by the day of earnings
announcement. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                          CAR[0,1]        CAR[2,61]
                                                                               (1)              (2)
 ES×Macroday if abs( date)<=3                                             0.097***        -0.263***
                                                                          (0.029)         (0.093)
 ES×Macroday if abs( date)>3                                              0.072           -0.044
                                                                          (0.048)         (0.135)




                                                    57
