                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TEMPTATION AND INCENTIVES TO WEALTH ACCUMULATION

                                      Orazio Attanasio
                                       Agnes Kovacs
                                       Patrick Moran

                                     Working Paper 28938
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28938


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We are grateful to Taha Choukhmane, Andreas Fagereng, Andrea Ferrero, Greg Kaplan, Mike
Keane, Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, Ben Moll, Peter Neary, Cormac O'Dea, Carlo Pizinelli,
Akos Valentinyi, Gianluca Violante, and seminar participants at Oxford, Yale, Manchester,
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Statistics Norway, Bank of England, and Institute for Fiscal
Studies for helpful comments. We would like to acknowledge the use of the University of Oxford
Advanced Research Computing (ARC) facility in carrying out this work (http://
dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Orazio Attanasio, Agnes Kovacs, and Patrick Moran. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Temptation and Incentives to Wealth Accumulation
Orazio Attanasio, Agnes Kovacs, and Patrick Moran
NBER Working Paper No. 28938
June 2021
JEL No. D11,D14,D91,E21,R21

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a rich model of household behavior to study the effect of two important policies:
mortgage interest tax deduction and mandatory mortgage amortization. These policies have
attracted some controversy, first because they are conceived to increase overall saving, an
objective that the literature does not agree they can achieve, and second because they incentivize
illiquid savings and may thus increase the share of `wealthy hand-to-mouth' households. We
build a life-cycle model where housing may act as a commitment device to counteract present
biases arising from temptation. We show that the model matches several empirical facts,
including the large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households. We evaluate the effect of the two
policies and find that they increase wealth accumulation by 7 and 10% respectively. Our results
demonstrate that these policies not only induce portfolio re-balancing, as emphasized by the
previous literature, but also increase savings by making commitment more accessible.

Orazio Attanasio                                Patrick Moran
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Yale University                                 University of Copenhagen
37 Hillhouse Avenue                             Oster Farimagsgade 5
New Haven, CT 06511                             Building 26
and Institute for Fiscal Studies,               Copenhagen, Denmark 1353
FAIR, BREAD and CEPR                            patrick.moran@econ.ku.dk
and also NBER
orazio.attanasio@yale.edu

Agnes Kovacs
The University of Manchester
Department of Economics
Oxford Road
Manchester M139PL
United Kingdom
agnes.kovacs@manchester.ac.uk
1   Introduction

Many governments, policy makers, and even academics have worried about the level of
savings of households in the U.S. and other countries. Numerous commentators have
judged the level of savings to be `too low'. Such low levels of wealth accumulation
could jeopardize the sustainability of living standards after retirement, as well as the
ability of households to smooth over temporary fluctuations to income. Moreover, even
when households accumulate wealth, they often concentrate their wealth in illiquid form.
Indeed, a large share of households have almost zero liquid assets, despite holding a sizable
amount of illiquid wealth, primarily in housing but also in retirement accounts. The fact
that wealthy consumers and in particular homeowners do not have liquid savings implies
that they have a limited ability to absorb adverse income shocks. These consumers,
who have been labeled as `wealthy hand-to-mouth' (WH2M) households, have featured
prominently in a large number of recent macroeconomic models and policy discussions.
    Numerous countries have implemented policies intended to stimulate household sav-
ings, in part as answer to the worries mentioned above. However, most of these policies
are designed to incentivize saving in illiquid form. For instance, the U.S. and other coun-
tries have introduced large tax subsidies to housing and retirement saving. Further, many
countries have implemented policies that compel homeowners to accumulate wealth in
housing via mandatory mortgage payments. These policies appear puzzling from the per-
spective of traditional public finance and macroeconomic models. In these models, such
policies may simply induce a reshuffling from liquid to illiquid assets, without increas-
ing aggregate savings. Further, such policies may generate more wealthy hand-to-mouth
households, thus increasing consumption sensitivity.
    The main goal of this paper is to evaluate policies designed to incentivize illiquid
wealth accumulation through the lens of a model of individual preferences that generates
a demand for commitment. We make three sets of contributions. First, we develop a two-
asset model of household behavior that generates present biases, demand for commitment,
and in turn wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior. Second, we take this model to the data and
find that it is consistent with several important empirical facts, including recent evidence
on consumption and saving behavior. Third, we use this model to evaluate the impact of
very visible and controversial policies that incentivize illiquid wealth accumulation, such
as tax subsidies to housing and mandatory mortgage amortization.

Modeling demand for commitment. We develop a two-asset life-cycle model with
self-control problems that make it difficult for households to save. In particular, we
introduce a temptation element into preferences, using the approach proposed by Gul
and Pesendorfer (2001, 2004). Temptation represents the idea that households may find
it difficult to save in liquid assets, due to the possibility of instantaneous gratification

                                             2
that is hard to resist. Temptation generates a demand for saving commitment devices
that may allow households to mitigate self-control problems.
     In our model, households are allowed to save in two instruments: liquid assets and
illiquid housing. We focus on housing because it constitutes the vast majority of illiquid
wealth for most households.1 We assume that housing provides direct utility, gives re-
alistic tax advantages, and serves as collateral for fixed-rate fully-amortizing mortgages.
As a result of temptation, housing may act as a savings commitment device for two dif-
ferent reasons. First, housing is illiquid and allows households to lock away their wealth.
Second, housing is purchased with amortizing mortgages that force households to make
regular mortgage payments and gradually accumulate wealth in the form of home equity.
   Temptation preferences are not the only ones that give rise to self control problems,
present biases, and possibly a demand for commitment. Another strand of the literature
that focuses on self-control problems makes use of hyperbolic discounting, as developed by
Strotz (1956), Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1997), Harris and Laibson (2001) and
Angeletos et al. (2001). Temptation preferences, however, are dynamically consistent,
which allows for a simple recursive formulation and makes this approach very convenient
compared to hyperbolic discounting. As a result of dynamic consistentency, temptation
preferences even allow for straightforward welfare analysis, something that has been prob-
lematic under hyperbolic discounting. Finally, temptation preferences are derived from
fundamental axioms that generalize standard preferences, making an analysis of policies
and policy recommendations based on such preferences well grounded in theory.
   The behaviour implied by temptation is consistent with both experimental evidence
and observed consumption behavior. Toussaert (2018) finds evidence of temptation in a
lab experiment where individuals voluntarily choose to restrict their choice set to avoid
costly temptation. Further, Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020) exploit consumption data to
empirically test for the presence of a temptation motive in a life-cycle model. Using data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, they reject the hypothesis that the parameter
that captures temptation is zero. This result justifies our use of temptation preferences.

Taking the model to the data. We calibrate the model to fit U.S. data on con-
sumption and wealth accumulation. We first set the strength of temptation based on the
results from Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020), who use two different estimation strategies
to recover the degree of temptation and find broadly similar results. We then calibrate
the remaining preference parameters by targeting the life-cycle profiles of consumption,
wealth accumulation, and the share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households.
       We find that the model obtains a good fit of the data, including the large share of

   1
    In the Survey of Consumer Finances, the median (mean) U.S. household has $31,000 ($72,500) in
net housing wealth, but less than $1,000 ($34,500) in retirement accounts (Kaplan and Violante, 2014).

                                                  3
wealthy hand-to-mouth households. This is true regardless of whether we set the liquid
asset returns to be high or low, reflecting either equities or bonds. This is an impor-
tant benefit of modeling a demand for illiquidity based on commitment: the presence of
WH2M consumers does not depend on large excess returns to housing, but rather on the
presence of sizable transaction costs, which generates commitment. In contrast, tradi-
tional macroeconomic models of WH2M behavior require the strong assumption that all
liquid assets, including equities, deliver lower risk-adjusted returns than housing.2
    Further, the view of illiquidity that we highlight is consistent with a growing experi-
mental literature which finds that (i) households often save in low-return illiquid accounts
despite the availability of liquid accounts with higher or equal returns and (ii) the abil-
ity to save in illiquid accounts helps households achieve a higher saving rate (Thaler
and Benartzi, 2004; Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin, 2006; Beshears et al., 2020). Again, this
type of behavior is difficult to rationalize within traditional models, but has important
implications for our understanding of WH2M behavior and saving subsidies.
    Finally, we find that our model is consistent with empirical evidence on the Marginal
Propensity to Consume (MPC), including recent findings that have been tough to explain.
For instance, recent evidence shows that the MPC declines only slowly with shock size
(Kueng, 2018; Fuster, Kaplan, and Zafar, 2018; Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik, 2021). This
evidence is difficult to rationalize in traditional two-asset models, where the consumption
response to large income shocks is negligible, but is well explained by our framework.
The slow decline of MPCs by shock size may affect the optimal design of targeted fiscal
stimulus policies, which we discuss briefly.

Implications for policy. Having established the consistency of the model with a va-
riety of facts, as well as its ability to explain the puzzling evidence mentioned above, we
use it to analyse the impact of two important and widely debated policies: the tax de-
ductability of mortgage interest payments, which effectively constitutes a sizeable subsidy
to home ownership, and mandatory mortgage amortization, which forces homeowners to
gradually pay down their mortgage and accumulate wealth in the form of home equity.
     Temptation preferences and the demand for commitment (and illiquidity) have im-
portant implications for saving behavior and wealth accumulation and therefore provide
a new lens to assess the above policies. The opportunity to purchase a savings commit-
ment device (in our case, housing) enables households to accumulate more wealth over the
life-cycle. As a result, a subsidy to the commitment device may increase overall wealth
   2
     This is a somewhat controversial assumption. For instance, Robert Shiller remarks, "It would perhaps
be smarter, if wealth accumulation is your goal, to rent and put money in the stock market, which
has historically shown much higher returns than the housing market." Similarly, a large number of
studies document that housing delivers a lower risk-adjusted return than equities, even when accounting
for imputed rent and other benefits to homeownership (Flavin and Yamashita, 2002; Goetzmann and
Spiegel, 2002; Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel, 2007).

                                                   4
accumulation by enabling more households to access commitment. Further, mandatory
amortization policies may boost household savings by helping homeowners commit to
save in the future via regular mortgage payments.
   There is a large debate about the effect of the mortgage interest tax deduction on
household saving behavior.3 The arguments in this debate share many similarities with
the debate surrounding the provision of tax incentives to save in illiquid retirement ac-
counts. There are two main opposing views: some studies claim that subsidies to retire-
ment accounts increase the average return on household savings and thus increase overall
wealth accumulation (e.g. Venti and Wise, 1986, 1987), while others argue that such in-
centives simply result in portfolio re-allocation from liquid to illiquid assets and do not
substantially increase overall savings (e.g. Gale and Scholz, 1994; Attanasio and DeLeire,
2002). Yet none of these papers consider the effect of making commitment more afford-
able, which could stimulate savings in the spirit of Laibson (1997). Using our calibrated
model, we assess the relative importance of these different effects. We find evidence of
some substitution from liquid to illiquid assets as a result of housing subsidies: every
additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly 33 cents. However,
the increase in housing wealth is not perfectly offset by a reduction in liquid assets, thus
overall wealth accumulation increases by around 7% by the time of retirement.
     There is a similar debate about the effect of mandatory amortization policies. While
mandatory amortization requirements have recently been introduced by Sweden and the
Netherlands, there is concern that these policies may simply result in a re-balancing
of household portfolios away from liquid assets and into illiquid housing. However, if
mortgage payments serve as a commitment device, mandatory amortization may result
not only in simple portfolio re-balancing, but also additional wealth accumulation. Based
on our counterfactual simulations, we find some portfolio re-balancing from liquid to
illiquid assets, but it is far from one-to-one. Overall, mandatory amortization policies
increase wealth accumulation by around 10% by the time of retirement. Every additional
dollar of housing wealth only reduces liquid assets by roughly 60 cents. This finding is
consistent with recent empirical evidence showing that mandatory amortization results
in increased wealth accumulation, as households accumulate more housing wealth, but
do not reduce their non-housing assets (Bernstein and Koudijs, 2020).
    Finally, there is concern that the above policies may increase households' responsive-
ness to income shocks, which would have detrimental effects for macroeconomic stability
(Svensson, 2019, 2020). This may be the case if such policies encourage illiquid wealth
accumulation at the expense of liquid wealth accumulation. We use our calibrated model
to evaluate this concern. Overall, our model predicts that housing subsidies and manda-

   3
    See for instance Rosen (1985), Poterba (1992), Gervais (2002), Chambers, Garriga, and Schlagenhauf
(2009), Floetotto, Kirker, and Stroebel (2016), Sommer and Sullivan (2018), and Nakajima (2020).

                                                  5
tory amortization have very little effect (less than 0.02 percentage point) on the average
MPC. The economic intuition for this result is that these policies have little effect on
the share of WH2M households. This is because households' desire for illiquidity does
not come simply from a desire to exploit higher returns, but also from a desire to obtain
commitment. This model prediction comes in sharp contrast with traditional macroeco-
nomic models, such as Kaplan and Violante (2014), where policies that incentivize illiquid
wealth accumulation would have a large effect on the share of WH2M households.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. First we develop a two-asset model of
hand-to-mouth behaviour driven by temptation preferences (Section 2). We demonstrate
that temptation generates a desire for illiquidity and a demand for commitment devices
(Section 3). We calibrate the model using U.S. data (Section 4) and establish its consis-
tency with both targeted (Section 5) and untargeted moments (Section 6). Finally, we
use our calibrated model to study the effect of policies designed to incentivize illiquid
wealth accumulation (Section 7).



2   A Model with Temptation Preferences

We develop a life-cycle model of consumption and housing with temptation preferences.
In this model, households face uninsurable income risk and save for two reasons: to
maintain consumption following adverse income shocks (the precautionary motive) and
following retirement (the life-cycle motive). Households can save in either liquid assets
or illiquid housing. Housing gives flow utility, serves as collateral, and may provide tax
advantages, therefore generating a third incentive to accumulate wealth, the housing
motive. Housing transactions incur significant costs, thus making housing illiquid.
    Households live for T years and work during the initial W years. Households maximize
their present discounted lifetime utility, which depends on both nondurable consumption
and housing services. Households have access to two investment assets: liquid assets
and illiquid housing. While all households are born as renters, they have the possibility
to purchase housing which comes in discrete sizes, offers a utility benefit, and serves as
collateral for mortgages.
Temptation Preferences. Households with standard preferences have no demand for
commitment, as more choice and more flexibility are always weakly beneficial. To allow for
the possibility that households desire commitment, we incorporate temptation preferences
by Gul and Pesendorfer (2001, 2004). According to these preferences, it may be difficult
to save due to the temptation to spend for short term gratification. This generates a
desire for commitment, as households would like to reduce temptation by locking away
their wealth in illiquid form. More specifically, households want to maximize the sum of

                                            6
their expected discounted lifetime utility, subject to a budget constraint we define later:

                                               T
                                   max Et            t U (ct , ht , c    ~ t)
                                                                    ~t , h                (1)
                                              t=0


where ct and ht are the chosen level of nondurable consumption and housing, while c      ~t
     ~
and ht are the most tempting consumption and housing alternatives each period. The
key feature of temptation preferences is that utility U () depends not only on actual
consumption and housing decisions, but also the most tempting consumption and housing
alternatives available in the choice set each period. We define the utility function as:

                    U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) = u(ct , ht ) -  u(~
                                 ~t , h                             ~ t ) - u(ct , ht )
                                                               ct , h                     (2)

where the felicity function u() is concave and increasing in both ct and ht . We define the
most tempting feasible alternative as that which maximizes current period felicity:

                                   c    ~ t = arg max u(ct , ht ),
                                   ~t , h                                                 (3)
                                                      ct ,ht At



where At represents the current period choice set, which will be defined later. The term
in square brackets in equation (2) represents the utility cost of temptation. The cost
of temptation is proportional to the felicity you could enjoy if you only cared about
the present u(~    ~ t ) minus the felicity you actually enjoy given your current consumption
              ct , h
and housing decisions u(ct , ht ). The parameter  captures the degree of temptation. This
model nests standard preferences, as temptation disappears when  = 0.
    Temptation is not the only way to generate present-bias behavior and possibly gen-
erate demand for commitment. The main alternative is to use dynamically inconsistent
preferences as formally introduced by Phelps and Pollak (1968) based on ideas proposed
in (Strotz, 1956) and later studied by (Laibson, 1997; Harris and Laibson, 2001). These
preferences relax the standard assumption on time discounting and introduce "hyperbolic
discounting." Under hyperbolic discounting, the discount rate from today's perspective
between today and tomorrow is larger than the discount rate between two consecutive
dates in the future. In contrast, preference proposed by Gul and Pesendorfer (2001) gen-
erate present-bias behavior by relaxing the standard assumption on instantaneous utility
­ more specifically, by allowing utility to depend not only on actual choices but also the
most tempting alternative available in the choice set.
    There are three main advantages of temptation preferences over hyperbolic-discounting.
First, modeling hyperbolic discounting poses a number of conceptual problems, as one
needs to specify how individuals perceive their future selves. In the literature, different
selves are modeled as playing games the outcomes of which inform dynamic life-cycle

                                                      7
choices. In contrast, temptation allows for a simple recursive formulation, as seen in the
Bellman equations at the end of the model description.
    Second, as temptation preferences are dynamically consistent, they make welfare anal-
ysis straightforward.4 In contrast, it is impossible to perform internally consistent welfare
analysis under hyperbolic discounting, as the present self and the future self disagree with
each other (see for instance Fang and Silverman, 2009, who describe the difficulty of wel-
fare analysis under hyperbolic discounting).
   Third, temptation preferences are consistent with experimental evidence showing a
demand for commitment even when individuals expect to be able to resist temptation
(Toussaert, 2018). In contrast, individuals with hyperbolic discounting only desire com-
mitment if they expect to succumb to the tempting alternative.
Assets. Households who wish to save can invest in two types of assets: liquid financial
assets, at , or partially illiquid housing, ht . The financial asset, at , yields a certain return
r in each period. We abstract away from the idea of return risk in our model, therefore
we calibrate our model using risk-adjusted returns.
    Households can adjust housing in any period. We assume that housing exists on a
discrete grid with k different sizes: hk  {h1 , h2 , ..., hk }. The price of each house pt (hk )
depends on its size and is determined relative to the index price p    ¯t :

                                          pt (hk ) = hk p
                                                        ¯t

where for simplicity we assume a linear mapping between house sizes and prices.5 House
prices grow at a constant rate, 1 + rH , over time, representing a fixed gross return on
housing, therefore the initial index price determines all other house prices for each period:

                             ¯t = (1 + rH )¯
                             p             pt-1 .       t given p
                                                                ¯1                               (4)

Buying or selling a home incurs a fixed cost, which is a fraction F of the price of the
home:
                                       F pt (hk ).

   We assume that housing markets are segmented, therefore renters are only permitted
to live in the smallest available house (h1 ).6 We assume that the cost of renting is



   4
     Examples of welfare analysis under temptation include Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith (2010), Naka-
jima (2012), Schlafmann (2020), and Kovacs and Moran (2020).
   5
     We previously experimented with different mappings from house sizes to prices, but found that it
had little effect on our results, therefore we chose a linear mapping for simplicity.
   6
     For evidence of segmentation in housing markets, see Greenwald and Guren (2019).

                                                    8
proportional to the price of this unit:

                                          rentt = pt (h1 ).

where  represents rental scale.
    For simplicity, we assume that house prices are determined exogenously and do not
adjust in response to policy. While this assumption seems reasonable for regions of the
U.S. where land is abundant and housing supply is highly elastic, such as Texas, we
should note that this assumption is unlikely to hold in places where land is more scarce,
such as New York City. That said, it would be straightforward to extend our model to
include equilibrium house prices and partially inelastic housing supply.7
   In addition, note that we abstract from the option to save in retirement accounts, as
we want to focus our attention on the choice between liquid assets and housing. This
seems like a reasonable simplification, as most households hold very little in retirement
assets. As Kaplan and Violante (2014) note, the median household keeps only $950 in
their retirement account, according to the Survey of Consumer Finances. In Section
A.6.2, we consider sensitivity to this assumption.
Mortgages. The most widely used mortgage contract in the U.S. is the fully-amortizing
fixed-rate mortgage.8 We assume that mortgages are of this kind, with regular required
mortgage payments that force households to gradually build up wealth in the form of
home equity. As a result, housing may act as a commitment device not only because
of its relative illiquidity, but also because of mandatory mortgage payments mpt every
period. The mortgage balance for households who buy a house at time t is

                                     mt+1  pt (ht )(1 + rM )                                        (5)

where  is the maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio. Conditional on not moving homes,




   7
      If we were to incorporate equilibrium house prices in our model, we would expect that this would
alter the quantitative but not qualitative results in Section 7. Of course, the quantitative magnitude
of this effect would vary depending on the local housing supply elasticity. Interestingly, the direction
of this effect may differ for housing subsidies and mandatory amortization: the former would increase
house prices while the latter may slightly reduce house prices.
    8
      These mortgages accounted for approximately two-thirds of mortgage origination in the U.S. during
the 2000's (Amromin et al., 2018). The prevalence of these mortgage features began with the passage
of the National Housing Act in 1934 which created the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). By
offering to insure mortgages, the FHA was able to insist on fixed-rate mortgages with constant-level
fully-amortizing payment plans (Wiedemer and Baker, 2012). The Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 reaffirmed
these standards with the "qualified mortgage" regulation, which introduced strong incentives for banks
to offer mortgages that are fully-amortizing. For more discussion of the Dodd-Frank Act, see DeFusco,
Johnson, and Mondragon (2020).

                                                   9
mortgage balances evolve according to the following law of motion:

                                   mt+1 = (mt - mpt )(1 + rM )                                      (6)

where mpt represents the required mortgage payment at time t. We assume that mort-
gages require constant-level payment plans, as is the case for the vast majority of mort-
gages in the United States, therefore households must make equal mortgage payments
mpt every year that they own the house until they pay off the mortgage. We assume that
all mortgage debt must be paid off by age W when households retire. Thus households
make fixed repayments each year based on the following formula:

                                                (1 + rM )s
                                     mpt =      s          M j
                                                               mt                                   (7)
                                                j =1 (1 + r )


where the required payment depends on s = W - t + 1 which is the number of periods
until retirement. If there exists a positive mortgage balance mt > 0 at the time a house
is sold, the value of the house is used to repay the mortgage and the remaining home
equity goes to the household. As households are required to pay off their mortgages by
the time of retirement, the terminal condition, mW +1 = 0, is satisfied.
   While the model features a realistic amortization schedule, we assume for simplicity
that home equity withdrawal is not permitted. As a result of this assumption, households
can only liquidate their housing wealth by moving homes, conditional on paying the
housing transaction cost.9 The fact that housing is partially illiquid means that it does
not provide perfect commitment, although it still serves as a savings commitment device.
   If households receive large negative income shocks such that they cannot make their
mortgage payment, they are forced to default on their mortgage. In this situation, house-
holds are forced to sell their home and repay their remaining mortgage debt.10
Income. Each household i receives idiosyncratic labor income, yi,t , in every period before
retirement, t  W , which is assumed to evolve according to the following:


                                           ln yi,t = gt + zi,t                                      (8)

where gt is a deterministic age profile approximated by a third-order age-polynomial,

   9
     This simplifying assumption allows us to keep track of mortgage balances using a discrete state
variable which represents the time since home purchase. That said, it may be interesting to relax this
assumption and explicitly allow for home equity withdrawal. We expect that doing so would alter the
quantitative but not qualitative results, as housing would still be partially illiquid and would require
regular amortization payments, thus providing partial commitment.
  10
     In the case where mortgage debt is larger than the house value plus transaction costs, then the
remaining debt is written off and the government provides a minimum consumption floor. This modeling
choice ensures that households never experience infinite negative utility.

                                                  10
while zi,t is an idiosyncratic shock to log income that is described by an AR(1) Markov
process:

                                     zi,t = zi,t-1 + i,t                                 (9)
                                                2
                                     i,t  N (0,   )
                                               2
                                    i,0  N (0, 0 ).

Note that we let the initial variance of the income innovations, i,0 , to be different from
the subsequent periods' in order to account for initial heterogeneity in income at age 22
in the data.
Taxes and Pensions. We incorporate a number of realistic features into our model,
which are important if the model is going to have a chance to fit observed life-cycle pro-
files of consumption and wealth accumulation. More specifically, we include progressive
income taxation, large and realistic tax benefits to homeownership, and social-security
based retirement. We build progressive income taxation into the model following Keane
and Wasi (2016), who assume a nonlinear tax function:

                              (yi,t , ai,t ) = e1 +2 log(yi,t +rai,t -d )               (10)


where the parameters 1 and 2 determine the progressivity of the aggregate tax sched-
ule. These parameters are estimated based on income and tax data from the Current
Population Survey, therefore  (yi,t , ai,t ) represents the sum of federal, state, and munic-
ipal taxes, plus mandatory social security contributions. Taxes are levied on both labor
income yi,t and capital gains rai,t , although it is important to note that capital gains
to owner-occupied housing are not taxed in our model, thus providing a tax benefit to
homeownership.
    In addition, d represents the deduction which is subtracted from income before the
                                                                               standard
tax is applied. We define d to be the greater of either the standard deduction d        or
mortgage interest payments. This allows our tax schedule to incorporate the mortgage
interest tax deduction, a second large subsidy to homeownership in the United States.
This results in an after-tax income for households given by the following equation:

                                    yi,t = yi,t -  (yi,t , ai,t )


    Following retirement at age W , households get a progressive social security-style pen-
sion determined by the following rule:

                    yi,t = max SS Income Floor, Annual PIA(yW )                         (11)


                                                 11
where Annual PIA(yW ) is the annual social security benefit (the primary insurance
amount) received upon retirement, based on average indexed monthly earnings (AIME),
which we approximate based on the last working period income, yW .11 We calibrate the
social security income floor and primary insurance amount based on U.S. legislation from
2015.12
Functional Form. Turning to the choice of functional form for the felicity function,
u, we follow Attanasio et al. (2012) and let home ownership affect the felicity function
flexibly. This is important as we do not have a strong prior on whether housing utility is
additive or multiplicative, therefore we want a very flexible functional form that includes
both options.

                                ct 1-
                                nt
             u(ct , ht ) = nt           exp (ht , nt ) + µ(ht , nt ) - Iht =ht-1                  (12)
                                1-

where nt is the exogenously given equivalence scale capturing the evolution of household
composition over the life-cycle,  is the risk aversion parameter,  and µ are housing
preference parameters, and (ht , kt ) represents the benefit of owning house ht with family
size nt . Housing affects immediate utility both directly and via the marginal utility of
consumption. The direct effect represented by µ(ht , nt ) makes the utility function non-
homothetic in consumption and housing. We will later calibrate the importance of µ and
 in explaining observed demand for housing.
    The utility benefit of housing depends on the size of the house, h, which exists on a
discrete grid with k values: hk  {h1 , h2 , ..., hk }. We assume a segmented housing market
by only allowing the smallest house, h1 , to be rented, which also provides lower utility
than owning the same unit. In addition, the utility benefit of housing (ht , kt ) increases
with the size of the house ht and decreases with the size of the family.

                                                          ht
                                        (ht , kt ) = ln                                           (13)
                                                          nt

Whenever a household adjusts housing (i.e. when Iht =ht-1 equals one in equation (12)),
it suffers a utility cost, .13 The utility cost, besides the financial transaction cost, plays
an important role in our model, as it increases the illiquidity of housing, thus making

  11
     In reality, to calculate AIME, the worker's wage during the years of employment is first expressed
in today's dollars, then the wages of the highest 35 years are summed up. This sum is then divided by
420 (12*35) in order to get the real average monthly earnings.
  12
     The PIA is a piecewise linear function with two break points. Currently, the PIA is computed as
90% of AIME up to breakpoint 1, 32% of AIME up to breakpoint 2, and 15% of AIME up to the social
security wage base.
  13
     Here we think of the non-monetary cost of changing homes, like finding new schools, setting up new
utility providers, facing stress etc.

                                                  12
housing more useful as a commitment device.
Budget Set. We define the budget set, At , as follows:

                 
                 
                  xt  R+ : xt  at + yt - Iownt  mpt - (1 - Iown
                                                            t   )rentt
                 
                     if no housing adjustment
                 
             At = xt  R+ : xt  at + yt - (1 + F )pt (ht ) - mt+1                                  (14)
                                                              (1 + rM )
                 
                                + (1 - F )pt (ht-1 ) - mt
                        if housing adjustment

This determines the choice set for households each period, which in turn pins down the
most tempting alternative each period. Households will always be tempted to spend all
of their available resources on either consumption or housing.
Recursive Formulation. We define the recursive formulation as follows:

                               Vt (t ) = max Vt0 (t ), Vt1 (t )                                   (15)

where Vt0 (t ), and Vt1 (t ) are the value functions conditional on not adjusting and ad-
justing housing. We define the vector of state variables t = {at , zt , mt , ht-1 }. Those
who choose not to adjust in period t solve the following dynamic problem:

                    Vt0 (t ) = max U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) +  Et Vt+1 (t+1 ),
                                                ~t , h                                            (16)
                                  {ct ,at+1 }


                                  subject to:

                at+1 = (1 + r) at + yt - ct - Iown
                                                 t mpt - (1 - Iown
                                                               t   )rentt
                       
                       exp(gt + zt ),       if t  W
                  yt =                                                                            (17)
                       SS Benefit(y ), if t > W
                                     W

                  zt = zt-1 + t           and          ct > 0

Those who choose to adjust housing in period t solve the following dynamic problem:

                Vt1 (t ) =          max              U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) +  Et Vt+1 (t+1 ),
                                                                  ~t , h                          (18)
                             {ct ,ht ,mt+1 ,at+1 }




                                                        13
                                 subject to:
                                                         mt+1
    at+1 = (1 + r) at + yt - ct - (1 + F )pt (ht ) +             + (1 - F )pt (ht-1 ) - mt
                                                       (1 + rM )
    mt+1  pt (ht )(1 + rM )
           
           exp(gt + zt ),   if t  W                                                           (19)
      yt =
           SS Benefit(y ), if t > W
                        W

      zt = zt-1 + t     and     ct > 0


3     Key Model Insights

In this section, we demonstrate two implications of our model that differ from those of
the standard model. First, our model generates a demand for illiquidity that is absent
in a standard model. Second, the availability of housing helps households save for retire-
ment. To better highlight the implications of temptation and commitment, we focus on
a simplified version of our model in this section.
   More specifically, we simplify our model by assuming that there is only one size of
housing to rent and buy; that housing does not enter the utility function; that labor
income is deterministic; and that the returns on liquid assets and housing are the same.
Table 1 presents the parameter restrictions imposed in the simplified model.

                        Table 1: Parameters in the Simplified Model

           Parameter                                                         Value

           k              Housing options                                       1
                          Housing preference (MU of consumption)                0
           µ              Housing preference (non-homotheticity)                0
           z              Idiosyncratic shock to log income                     0
           r              Net return on liquid asset                            0.021
           rH             Net return on housing                                 0.021

Note: This table presents the parameter assumptions that we use to simplify our model in Section 3,
relative to the full model that we calibrate in Section 4.



3.1    Demand for Illiquidity

In this simplified model, households with standard preferences ( = 0) have no demand for
housing. Homeownership comes with sizeable transaction costs, yet delivers no benefits

                                                14
in terms of either utility or returns. This is demonstrated in Figure 1, which presents the
life-cycle profiles of assets and consumption in the model without temptation. The left
panel presents asset accumulation, which reaches a peak at age 65 when the household
retires. The household saves only in liquid assets and never purchases a home. The right
panel presents income and consumption over the life-cycle. We see that income rises in
a hump shape, before dropping drastically at the time of retirement. Despite this hump-
shaped income process, the household is able to perfectly smooth consumption between
the early 30s and the end of life.

            Figure 1: Life-Cycle Asset and Consumption Profiles without Temptation

                       Asset Accumulation                          Income and Consumption
                                                       4
             Net Wealth                                      Income
       20    Liquid Wealth                                   Consumption
                                                      3.5
             Housing (0 or 1)
                                                       3
       15
                                                      2.5


                                                       2
       10
                                                      1.5


                                                       1
        5

                                                      0.5


        0                                              0
             30       40        50    60    70   80     20    30     40      50     60      70   80
                                Age                                         Age


Note: This figure shows the life-cycle profiles of assets, income, and consumption in a model without
temptation, where housing delivers equal return to liquid assets and provides no direct utility benefit.


     In contrast, households with temptation demand housing, despite the fact that housing
delivers no direct financial or utility benefits. In the left panel of Figure 2, we see that
households with temptation preferences begin to accumulate liquid assets relatively late in
life. This is because liquid wealth accumulation is difficult in the presence of temptation,
owing to the disutility cost of deviating from your most tempting consumption alternative
each period. As a result, households purchase housing despite the presence of sizeable
transaction costs. This is driven by the fact that housing provides commitment, which
helps households accumulating wealth for two reasons. First, households are able to
reduce temptation by locking their wealth in illiquid housing; second, households are able
to bind themselves to save in the future by committing to regular mortgage payments
that build up wealth in the form of home equity.14
    Households are able to decrease the utility cost of temptation by locking away their
wealth in housing. In other words, temptation and commitment generate a preference
for illiquidity. As a result, households spend a significant fraction of their lives holding
  14
    This has been highlighted by Shiller (2014), who says, "One nice thing about investing in a house is
that you're committed to a mortgage payment. So if you don't take out a home equity line of credit or
do something like that, you will accumulate wealth."

                                                      15
no liquid wealth despite owning housing.

             Figure 2: Life-Cycle Asset and Consumption Profiles with Temptation

                      Asset Accumulation                          Income and Consumption
                                                      4
       14
            Net Wealth                                      Income
            Liquid Wealth                            3.5    Consumption
       12   Housing (0 or 1)
                                                      3
       10
                                                     2.5
        8
                                                      2

        6
                                                     1.5

        4
                                                      1

        2                                            0.5


        0                                             0
             30      40        50    60    70   80     20    30     40      50     60      70   80
                               Age                                         Age


Note: This figure shows the life-cycle profiles of assets, income, and consumption in a model with
temptation, where housing delivers equal return to liquid assets and provides no direct utility benefit.


    The right panel of Figure 2 shows the implications of household portfolio decisions
for consumption. Since tempted households do not accumulate liquid wealth early in life,
consumption closely tracks income until shortly before home purchase.15 After buying a
house, consumption continues to follow income closely: the difference between the two is
equal to the mandatory mortgage repayment each period. After age 55, when households
start accumulating liquid wealth, consumption drops steadily. This is the consequence
of temptation: households do not accumulate much wealth for retirement early in life,
therefore consumption declines when nearing retirement.
    The demand for illiquidity that we highlight is consistent with experimental evidence
showing that individuals often choose to save in illiquid accounts even when there is
a liquid asset that gives equivalent returns. For instance, Thaler and Benartzi (2004)
find that many individuals are willing to commit in advance to allocate future income
increases to an illiquid retirement account. Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006) conduct a
field experiment in the Philippines and find that many individuals choose to save in
an illiquid savings account that restricts access to their funds but provides no further
benefits. Further, Beshears et al. (2020) conduct a lab experiment in the US and find
that (i) many individuals choose to allocate their funds to an illiquid saving account that
offers equivalent returns to a liquid savings account and (ii) demand for the illiquid saving
account actually increases as the degree of illiquidity is increased.

  15
    Temptation causes households to accumulate their downpayment quickly prior to home purchase.
Consistent with this finding, Haurin, Hendershott, and Wachter (1997) find that households save the
majority of their downpayment in the year prior to homeownership. Similarly, Charles and Hurst (2002)
find that the vast majority of mortgage applicants have liquid wealth less than 10% of their predicted
house value at the time of mortgage application.

                                                     16
3.2   Access to Commitment Increases Wealth Accumulation

In this section, we study how the availability of housing impacts the wealth accumulation
of households. We demonstrate that in a standard model, the presence of housing has
no impact on wealth accumulation, as housing delivers identical returns to liquid assets
in our simplified model. In contrast, in a temptation model, the presence of housing
enables households to accumulate greater wealth for retirement, as illiquid housing enables
households to "lock away" their wealth and therefore mitigate the effects of temptation.
    To see this, we look at patterns of wealth accumulation, imposing different assump-
tions on the availability of housing and household preferences. We therefore simulate
households under four scenarios: with and without housing and with and without temp-
tation. This allows us to observe the difference in wealth accumulation when housing is
not available (i.e. when a savings commitment device is not available).

                                           Figure 3: The Change in Wealth when Housing is Available
                                      3
                                               Standard Model
                                               Temptation Model
                                     2.5
             Net Wealth Difference




                                      2


                                     1.5


                                      1


                                     0.5


                                      0

                                                  5               10            15            20   25   30
                                                                       Duration of Homeownership

Note: This figure shows the difference in net wealth when housing is available versus when housing is
unavailable. The red line shows the difference for a tempted household, while the blue line with round
markers shows the difference for a standard household. The duration of homeownership is measured for
a household that owns housing and all other simulations are compared based on age.



    Figure 3 presents our results from these simulations using our simplified model. The
solid red line shows the difference in net wealth for a tempted household that has access
to housing, relative to an identical household that does not have access to housing. The
line is increasing over the duration of home ownership, indicating that the presence of
housing changes the savings behavior of the tempted households. After buying a home,
households are required to repay the mortgage in each period, which acts as a self-imposed
commitment device that forces them to accumulate home equity. When housing is not
available, households have no way to mitigate their temptation, therefore they accumulate

                                                                                17
less wealth by the time of retirement.
    It is interesting to note that the red line begins to decline towards the end of the 30
year window that we consider, as households near retirement. This is because tempted
households without access to housing decide to accumulate liquid assets rapidly imme-
diately prior to retirement. When the tempted household does not have access to a
commitment device, they suffer a temptation cost for every period that they hold liquid
assets, therefore they try to accumulate wealth for retirement as late and as quickly as
possible. They catch up with the tempted household with housing, although this effect
is only partial.
    In contrast, the blue line with round markers in Figure 3 shows the difference in wealth
accumulation for a standard household that has access to housing, relative to an identical
household that does not have access to housing. The line is horizontal, indicating that
the presence of housing does not change the savings behavior of the standard household.
In this model, the type of asset choice does not impact the amount of asset accumulation.

    Again, experimental evidence shows that access to commitment allows individuals to
achieve higher wealth accumulation. Thaler and Benartzi (2004) find that access to a
commitment device results in a large increase in saving rates, with the average saving
rate going from 3.5 percent to 13.6 percent over 40 months among compliers. Ashraf,
Karlan, and Yin (2006) find that the availability of an illiquid saving account results in
an 81% increase in average bank account balances one year later for individuals who are
offered the illiquid account compared to those who are not offered it.
   In addition, these results extend to the context of mortgage amortization payments,
which in our framework also serves as a commitment device. Bernstein and Koudijs
(2020) study the introduction of a mandatory amortization policy in the Netherlands
and find that amortization payments result in a near one-for-one increase in net wealth
accumulation, as households increase their housing wealth but do not reduce their liquid
assets. In addition, B¨ackman and Khorunzhina (2020) study the elimination of manda-
tory amortization in Denmark (the opposite of the policy in the Netherlands) and find
that the elimination of mandatory amortization results in a large increase in consumption,
which implies lower saving rates.



4   Calibration

We divide our model parameters into two sets. The first set (P) contains parameters that
we assign based on external evidence. The second set () contains parameters that we
internally calibrate using the Method of Simulated Moments (MSM), which minimizes
the distance between key moments in the model and the data.

                                            18
4.1    Externally Set Parameters

In this section we discuss the parameters that are assigned based on external evidence.
The complete list of parameter values can be found in Table A.1
    Temptation Parameter. We set  = 0.28 following the parameter estimate ob-
tained by Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020). These authors develop two complementary
strategies to estimate the strength of temptation: first, a semi-structural Euler equation
approach using observed consumption data, and second, a simulation based approach
targeting the life-cycle profiles of consumption and wealth accumulation. The authors
apply these two estimation strategies to the U.S. using data from the Consumer Expen-
diture Survey (CEX) and find similar estimates of  in both cases. We opt to use the
point estimate from the Euler equation method, as this semi-structural approach requires
fewer assumptions about the economic environment faced by households.16
     By assuming that households suffer from temptation, our model implies a desire for
illiquidity which is consistent with a growing experimental literature, as discussed in the
previous section.
    Asset Returns. Traditional macroeconomic models generate wealthy hand-to-mouth
households by assuming that illiquid assets deliver large excess returns relative to all
available liquid assets. However, this is a somewhat controversial assumption, especially
when looking at specific assets such as housing and equities. There is a wide body of
empirical research showing that housing delivers lower risk-adjusted returns than equities,
even when accounting for imputed rents and other benefits of homeownership. This poses
a challenge for traditional models of hand-to-mouth behavior. If a high-return liquid asset
such as equities were added to the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014), the wealthy
hand-to-mouth would disappear.
    We set ourselves the challenge of rationalizing the large share of WH2M households
despite the presence of a high-return liquid asset (i.e. equities). We thus assume that
r is given by the real risk-adjusted return on equities. This assumption is not crucial
to our main results, but it does highlight an important benefit of modeling a demand
for illiquidity based on commitment: the presence of WH2M does not require r > rH .
However, our main results do not depend on this assumption, as we demonstrate in
Section A.6.1 where we ignore the presence of high return liquid assets.
    We compute real risk-adjusted returns to housing and equities in Appendix A.2. We
explicitly account for imputed rents in housing using the balance sheet approach, following
Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) and Kaplan and Violante (2014). We find a real
risk-adjusted return of 2.1% for housing and 5.4% for equities, therefore we set the returns
  16
    For instance, the Euler equation approach is invariant to alternative assumptions about the asset
structure of the economy, as explained by Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020).

                                                 19
in our model to be rH = 0.021 and r = 0.054 respectively. This calibration is consistent
with a wide body of research including Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann and
Spiegel (2002), and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) who show that housing delivers
lower risk-adjusted returns than equities, even when accounting for imputed rents and
other benefits to homeownership.
    Housing Transaction Costs. Following Attanasio et al. (2012), we assume that
moving homes requires households to pay a transaction cost F equal to 5% of the value
of the house. F represents the cost of real estate agents, lawyers, surveyors, and moving
companies, and is consistent with empirical evidence showing that transaction costs for
housing are usually at least 5% of the asset value (OECD, 2011). The presence of large
transaction costs is in contrast to Kaplan and Violante (2014), who assume a much smaller
transaction cost of $1,000. The low transaction cost in Kaplan and Violante (2014) helps
their model generate a large share of WH2M households. However, this low transaction
cost would be unreasonable for a model that explicitly focuses on housing.17
    House Sizes and House Prices. Determining the set of available house sizes in
the data is difficult because we only observe house prices for those that have chosen to
purchase a house. Nonetheless, we calculate the distribution of house prices for households
between age 20 and 30. We use this distribution of house prices to define the different
house sizes, and these sizes are then kept constant over time. However, the price of each
house will evolve over time following equation (4). In our model, we set the maximum
house price (size) at 8 times average income at age 22, corresponding to the 90th percentile
of observed house prices for the age group 20-30 in the data, and we set the minimum
price to be equal to average income. We allocate the remaining points on the house size
grid to a logarithmic scale, following Nakajima and Telyukova (2020). We assume that
there are k = 7 different house sizes available. We impose the same house size structure
on the models with and without temptation.
   Mortgages. We calculate the average mortgage rate over the period between 1950
and 2016 based on the 30-year fixed rate mortgage. The average mortgage rate is 4.1%,
therefore we calibrate the net mortgage rate, rM = 0.041, which is two percentage points
higher than the risk-adjusted return on housing. We assume that each household can
borrow up to 90% of the value of its home, hence we set the maximum loan-to-value
(LTV) ratio  = 0.9.18
       Income and Taxes. We calibrate income over the life-cycle in two steps. First, we

  17
     As we later demonstrate, the two-asset model without temptation has difficultly generating a large
share of WH2M households when there is a large transaction cost, even when allowing for potentially
very large utility benefits to housing. This holds in both the baseline calibration where r > rH and an
alternative calibration where r = rH (see Appendix A.6.1).
  18
     We do not study optimal LTV requirements, however, a nice paper by Schlafmann (2020) evaluates
the welfare effect of alternative LTV requirements when households value commitment.

                                                  20
use the estimated parameters for the stochastic component of income from Choukhmane
(2019). We then estimate a third-order age polynomial on income in order to approximate
the deterministic part of labor income. For the parameters of the non-linear tax function
we use the estimation results by Keane and Wasi (2016) and convert them to 2015 units.
Following the U.S. tax code in 2015, we assume that mortgage interest payments are
fully deductible from taxable income and that capital gains to owner-occupied housing
are not taxed. We parametrize the progressive social security-style pension based on U.S.
legislation from 2015. All income parameters are listed in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
    Demographics. In the model, we account for changes in household composition over
the life-cycle by assuming an exogenous and deterministic life-cycle profile for household
composition. This is performed using the equivalence scale nt which enters into the utility
function. To calculate the equivalence scale nt , we follow the OECD methodology using
PSID data. This methodology assigns weight 1 to the first adult in the household, weight
0.7 to the second adult and each subsequent person aged 14 and over, and weight 0.5 to
each child aged under 14. We then average by age in order to construct nt .
   Initial wealth. We assume zero initial housing wealth. We set the initial liquid
wealth distribution to match the distribution for 22-25-year-old households in the PSID.
   Prices. All variables in the model are expressed in 2015 prices. Where necessary,
exogenous parameters from the existing literature are adjusted to represent 2015 prices.

4.2     Internally Calibrated Parameters

The remaining parameters in the model,  = {, , µ,  }, the the impatience parameter,
the risk aversion parameter, the housing preference (taste) parameters respectively, and
the utility cost of changing home, are internally calibrated by the Method of Simulated
Moments such that the model matches aggregate statistics of consumption and wealth
accumulation. This second stage takes the first stage calibrated parameters fixed, P  ^,
while choosing  to minimizes some measure of the distance, f , between the empirical
moments, me , and the simulated moments, ms (P   ^ , ).

                                    ^ , )  [ms (P
                                 f (P           ^ , ) - me ]                          (20)

We choose to target the mean life-cycle profiles of four variables: consumption, liquid
assets, net housing wealth, and the share of homeowners with zero liquid assets. To
focus on the working life, we target the mean of each variable between ages 25 and 65,
giving 164 moment conditions. We also target the average homeownership rate and the
average share of homeowners who move in a given year, giving two additional moments.
Altogether we target Nm = 166 moment conditions to calibrate the five parameters in .
      In order to capture the fact that these targeted moments vary substantially in both

                                             21
scale and volatility, we use a weighting matrix, W, to create our scalar-valued final dis-
tance function, f W , equal to the weighted sum of squared deviations of simulated moments
from their corresponding empirical counterparts:


                                   ^ , )  f (P
                              f W (P         ^ , ) · W -1 · f (P
                                                               ^ , )                           (21)

where W is a diagonal Nm x Nm matrix that includes the variance of the targeted moments
along the main diagonal. In effect, this means that our MSM approach places more weight
on moments that are more precisely estimated in the data.19
    Pinning down the structural parameters requires that each structural parameter in 
has an independent effect on at least one targeted moment in ms (P   ^ , ). More formally,
our model is identified if the mapping from structural parameters  to targeted moments
    ^ , ) is full rank near the true . In Section 5 we discuss the way in which structural
ms (P
parameters impact targeted moments.
    Our MSM results are based on simulations for 1,000 households for two scenarios each.
In the first scenario, we set  to be 0.28 following Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020) and
we call this the model with temptation. In the second scenario, we set parameter  to
be zero and we call this the model without temptation. As a result, we can compare the
ability of these two models to match the empirical patterns of household consumption
and portfolio allocation together with their calibrated parameters.
   Data comes from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) waves 1999 to 2015.
Detailed information on the sample is contained in Appendix A.3. In this section, we
describe each targeted moment in turn.
    Consumption. We compute real nondurable consumption following the classification
in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). With this classification our consump-
tion measure covers approximately 70 percent of consumption expenditure on nondurable
goods and services.
    Liquid assets. We compute liquid assets as the sum of bank account deposits and
publicly traded stock. We believe that publicly traded stock are essentially liquid because
there are very low transaction costs on these assets, thus it would be easy for households
to sell their stock position for consumption smoothing purposes.
   Net housing wealth. We measure net housing wealth as the reported value of the
household's main residence minus all mortgage debt on this home. We exclude net wealth
from other real estate.

  19
   We choose to use the diagonal weighting matrix rather than the full variance-covariance matrix as
many authors have found that the full variance-covariance matrix leads to biased estimates in small
samples. See Altonji and Segal (1996) for example.

                                                22
    Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth. We target the share of homeowners with liquid assets
less than two weeks of income, which we refer to as the wealthy hand-to-mouth. This is an
appealing description: these households are wealthy as they own a house, yet live hand-
to-mouth with essentially zero liquid wealth that can be used for consumption smoothing
(Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner, 2014).
       Homeownership. We target the average homeownership rate between ages 25 - 65.
   Movers. We target the average share of homeowners that move for non-work reasons
each year. We exclude moves for work since that is outside the scope of our model.

4.2.1      Calibrated Parameter Values

Table 2 presents the results for the calibrated preference parameters: time preference
( ), risk aversion ( ), taste for housing (µ, ), and the disutility of moving (). The first
column shows the calibrated parameters for the temptation model. The second column
shows the calibrated parameters for the model without temptation, where we turn off
temptation.
    The model with temptation yields an annual discount factor ( ) of 0.96 and a risk
aversion parameter ( ) of 2.41, consistent with most of the macroeconomic literature.
The additive utility benefit of housing (µ) is roughly 0.3, while the non-separable utility
benefit of housing () is 0.16. It is worth noting that the calibrated positive value of 
implies that consumption and housing are complements. This is in line with the results
from Attanasio et al. (2012) who calibrate a similar utility function for housing, albeit
with two types of homes, and find that consumption and housing are complements.20 We
find that the utility cost of moving () is 0.43 in the temptation model. For an easier
interpretation, we calculate the consumption equivalence of parameter, , by expressing
it as the amount of additional consumption that households require to be indifferent
between moving and not moving homes. An average homeowner aged 25, for example,
has to face a utility cost that is equivalent to an additional $6, 000 of consumption if it
decides to buy a bigger house.21
    The model without temptation yields both a lower impatience parameter of ( = 0.91)
and a lower risk aversion parameter ( = 1.88). Moreover, without temptation the model

  20
    Since µ is positive, an increase in housing has a direct positive effect on utility. In addition, it is
worth noting that a positive  implies Edgeworth complementarity of consumption and home ownership,
as the cross derivative of utility with respect to consumption and housing is positive

                           u(ct , ht )/ct
                                          =  (ht , nt )c- 
                                                        t exp((ht , nt )) > 0
                               ht
Thus in the model with temptation, housing and consumption are complements, whereas in the model
without temptation housing and consumption are (weak) complements.
  21
     Naturally, the consumption equivalence is different depending on the age of households, their current
housing status, and their next period housing status.

                                                    23
                        Table 2: Internally calibrated parameters

                                                        Temptation    No Temptation
     PARAMETER                                            Model           Model

     Time preference                                       0.959           0.914
                                                          (0.000)         (0.000)

     Risk aversion                                         2.415           1.884
                                                          (0.052)         (0.019)

     Housing utility (separable)                  µ        0.291           0.591
                                                          (0.000)         (0.004)

     Housing utility (non-separable)                       0.160           0.282
                                                          (0.007)         (0.003)

     Utility cost of housing adjustment                    0.437           0.887
                                                          (0.037)         (0.039)


     Goodness of Fit                            ^ , )
                                           f W (P   ^      5.667           10.059

    Note: In the temptation model we set  = 0.28. In the model without temptation we set
     = 0. Goodness of fit is defined by equation (21).



features significantly higher housing taste parameters (µ = 0.59 and  = 0.28). This
is because the model without temptation requires strong discounting of future utility
and greater tolerance to risk to try to explain the large share of the wealthy hand-to-
mouth, while matching the substantial housing wealth accumulation over the life-cycle.
Compared to the model with temptation, the model without temptation delivers a higher
value of utility cost of moving ( = 0.88).

5   Model Fit

We find that the baseline model with temptation generates a good match of the life-cycle
profiles that we target, including the striking illiquidity of household portfolios and the
large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households. In contrast, we show that a restricted
version of the model without temptation is unable to match key features of the data.

Baseline Model with Temptation. We first analyze the performance of their cal-
ibrated model with temptation. Figure 4 shows the simulated life-cycle moments from
the temptation model (the solid blue line) and the targeted moments from the PSID (the
black dotted line). In general, the temptation model obtains a good fit of the life-cycle

                                             24
profile of consumption and liquid asset accumulation. The model obtains a good fit of
net housing wealth up until age 50, although after this point, net housing wealth starts
diverging a bit as households approach retirement. The divergence of net housing wealth
arises from the simplifying assumption in our model that all mortgages must be paid off
by age 65, when households are forced to retire. In reality, some households continue to
work and/or maintain positive mortgage balances after age 65, which helps explain this
difference. Notice that, apart from very young ages, household's wealth is concentrated in
illiquid housing: by the age of 40, housing wealth accounts for about 70% of the average
U.S. household's wealth. This overwhelming dominance of housing wealth only starts
declining later in life, close to retirement, reaching roughly 60% by age 65.

                            Figure 4: Fit of Baseline Model with Temptation

                Nondurable Consumption                                            Liquid Assets
  40k                                                         150k
                                                                                                             PSID
                                                                                                             Model
  30k
                                                              100k

  20k

                                                              50k
  10k


   0k                                                          0k
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50           60

                  Net Housing Wealth                                        Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
  50k
                                                              10%

   0k                                                          0%
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50           60
                             Age                                                         Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from the temptation model (solid blue line) and the PSID (black dotted
line). The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations around the mean. Table A.4 in the
Appendix shows the fit of the other moments that we target: the average homeownership rate and the average share of
homeowners moving each period.



   Most importantly, the temptation model obtains a good fit of the wealthy hand-to-
mouth. In the temptation model, wealthy hand-to-mouth behaviour is mainly driven by
the fact that households are willing to withstand fluctuations in consumption in order to
obtain the commitment benefit of illiquid assets. The age profile for the wealthy hand-
to-mouth is hump-shaped with a peak around age 45, when roughly 25% of households
own a home but hold essentially zero liquid wealth. These findings are very similar to
what Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014) document using the U.S. Survey of Consumer
Finances: they find a hump-shaped life-cycle profile of the wealthy hand-to-mouth with
a peak of around 22% at age 40.

                                                         25
    As noted by Parker (2017), hand-to-mouth status may be either situational (i.e. a
result of poor income shocks or temporary illiquidity, as in Kaplan and Violante (2014))
or reflective of persistent household traits (i.e. preferences or behavioral characteristics).
Our model of temptation and commitment implies a relatively high persistence of hand-
to-mouth status. In our calibrated model, there is a roughly 60% probability that a
household who is wealthy hand-to-mouth in one year remains wealthy hand-to-mouth
two years later. This is consistent with empirical evidence from the PSID showing that
hand-to-mouth status is highly persistent in the data (Aguiar, Bils, and Boar, 2020).

Restricted Model without Temptation. We next analyze the performance of the
model where we turn off temptation ( = 0) and re-calibrate the remaining preference
parameters. We document that our two-asset model without temptation cannot fit the
large share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth when housing does not deliver higher risk-
adjusted returns than liquid assets.
    Figure 5 shows the simulated life-cycle moments from the model without temptation
(the solid blue line) and the targeted moments from the PSID (the black dotted line). We
observe that the restricted model without temptation obtains a relatively good match of
the life-cycle profile of consumption, liquid assets, and net housing wealth. However, the
restricted model fails to match the large share of hand-to-mouth homeowners, obtaining
roughly half of the hand-to-mouth homeowners observed in the data. This is despite
the fact that the model is relatively flexible and allows for impatience, different types
of housing taste, and varying degrees of risk aversion. This tells us that there is no
combination of impatience, housing taste, and risk aversion that is able to match the
large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households without failing to match some other
targeted moments.
   High impatience is unable to explain the large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth house-
holds without compromising model fit elsewhere. For instance, if  were lowered below
our calibrated value in the model without temptation (     ^ = 0.91), we would obtain a
better fit of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, but a worse fit of the life-cycle profile of wealth
accumulation.
   Greater tolerance towards risk (i.e. lower  ) reduces the degree to which households
are worried about consumption fluctuations. However, it also reduces the degree to
which households accumulate wealth for a down-payment in order to purchase housing,
thus reducing the homeownership rate. As a result, a lower value of  slightly decreases
the share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, while simultaneously increasing the share of
poor hand-to-mouth households.
   Higher housing taste (µ or ) is unable to explain the large share of the wealthy hand-
to-mouth. This is because higher housing taste makes homeowners more averse to losing

                                             26
                     Figure 5: Fit of the Restricted Model without Temptation

                 Nondurable Consumption                                           Liquid Assets
    40k                                                       150k
                                                                                                             PSID
                                                                                                             Model
    30k
                                                              100k

    20k

                                                              50k
    10k


    0k                                                         0k
            30         40           50           60                    30          40           50          60

                   Net Housing Wealth                                       Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
    50k
                                                              10%

    0k                                                         0%
            30         40           50           60                    30          40           50          60
                             Age                                                         Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from our no temptation model (solid blue line) and the PSID (black
dotted line), where we impose  = 0. The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations
around the mean.



their homes, thus generating a stronger precautionary savings motive for homeowners.
This "housing smoothing" motive results in a smaller share of homeowners holding zero
liquid assets.


6         Consistency with Empirical Evidence on Consumption

We next evaluate our model's ability to match untargeted empirical evidence on the
Marginal Propensity to Consume (MPC). We believe that this is important given that
the view of illiquidity that we highlight differs from the returns-based explanation offered
by the traditional macroeconomic literature.
   We find that our model is consistent with existing empirical evidence on the average
MPC and heterogeneity in the MPC based on liquid asset holdings. This result is similar
to Kaplan and Violante (2014) and therefore we do not dwell on it.
    More importantly, however, our model also generates realistic MPC heterogeneity
based on shock size. In particular, we find that the average MPC predicted by our model
declines relatively slowly with shock size. Large income shocks still induce a sizeable
increase in consumption. This finding is consistent with a growing empirical literature,
which we review below, but inconsistent with traditional models of wealthy hand-to-
mouth behavior such as Kaplan and Violante (2014).

                                                         27
6.1     MPC Heterogeneity

We use our baseline model to study the consumption response to unanticipated and
transitory income shocks. The details of this procedure can be found in Appendix A.5.1.
We find that the model generates an average annual MPC of 0.43 in response to a $1,000
income shock. This lies well within the standard range of annual MPCs estimated by
both the empirical and theoretical literature. For instance, Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka,
and White (2017) give a comprehensive summary of the empirical literature and report
that average annual MPC estimates for the U.S. range between 0.2 and 0.6. Similarly,
Kaplan and Violante (2014) report an average annual MPC of 0.36 in response to a $1,000
income shock, only slightly lower than our baseline result.22
   In addition, when evaluating heterogeneity across households, we find that the average
MPC in our model declines slowly with total wealth, but quickly with liquid wealth.
This is consistent with a large body of empirical research, such as Jappelli and Pistaferri
(2014) and Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021), as well as the model of hand-to-mouth
households by Kaplan and Violante (2014). The results are contained in Appendix A.5.2.

6.1.1      Heterogeneity by Shock Size

To study the effect of shock size on consumption behavior, we experiment with changing
the magnitude of the income shock. The results are contained in Table 3. We observe that
the average MPC declines only slowly with the size of the income shock. For instance,
changing the shock size from $1,000 to $10,000 only causes the average MPC to decline
from 0.43 to 0.29.

                            Table 3: MPC Heterogeneity by Shock Size

                                                              SHOCK SIZE
                                                    $1, 000       $5, 000      $10, 000

               MPC                                     0.43        0.37          0.29
                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.001)


              Note: Each coefficient represents the average annual MPC in our calibrated
              model. The procedure used to compute MPCs is described in Appendix A.5.1.


    This result is consistent with a growing empirical literature that finds that the aver-
age MPC remains large in response to large income shocks. Most similar to our analysis,
Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021) study the consumption response to large and unan-
ticipated lottery winnings using administrative tax data from Norway. They find that
the average MPC only gradually declines as the size of the shock increases: households
 22
      The authors report a quarterly MPC of 0.16 in their model, which leads to an annual MPC of 0.36.

                                                  28
that receive large payments still consume most of their payment shortly after receipt.
    In addition, Kueng (2018) studies the consumption response to large and anticipated
payments of the Alaska Permanent Fund and also finds a large MPC. In response to
an average payment of $4,600, Kueng (2018) finds a quarterly MPC of just under 0.3.23
Finally, Aladangady et al. (2018) study the consumption response to the Earned Income
Tax Credit and also find a large MPC in response to this large and anticipated income
shock. This quasi-experimental evidence has been corroborated by survey evidence that
finds similar results. For instance, Bunn et al. (2018) and Fuster, Kaplan, and Zafar
(2018) both find a large MPC in response to large income shocks.
    Large MPCs in response to large income shocks cannot be explained by traditional
two-asset models. For instance, while the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) obtains a
good fit of the average MPC out of small income shocks, it predates these recent empirical
findings and cannot rationalize large MPCs in response to large income shocks.24 Section
A.5.3 explores the reasons for these differences.

6.2    Interpretation and Implications

In our model, households exhibit high MPCs for two reasons. First, there is the effect of
illiquidity: households keep the vast majority of their wealth in illiquid form, thus restrict-
ing their ability to smooth consumption over transitory income shocks. Second, there is
the mechanical effect of temptation: households experience increased temptation (~       c) in
response to a positive income shock, therefore they consume more today. In Appendix
A.5.3, we decompose the relative importance of these two mechanisms. We find that both
mechanisms are important in generating large MPCs. The effect of illiquidity explains
roughly 55-60% of the overall consumption response to an unanticipated and transitory
income shock, while the mechanical effect of temptation explains the remainder.
    Our findings on MPC heterogeneity have important implications for the design of
targeted fiscal stimulus policies. As noted previously, households with low cash-on-hand
have the largest MPC in response to transitory income shocks. Further, the average MPC
declines relatively slowly with shock size. Taken together, these two facts suggest that
large and targeted fiscal stimulus payments could be very effective in boosting aggregate
  23
      While the early empirical literature suggested that MPCs were small for large shocks (Hsieh, 2003),
new empirical evidence has overturned this finding. More specifically, Kueng (2018) replicates the analysis
in Hsieh (2003) and shows that (i) the small and insignificant consumption response was a result of
nonclassical measurement error in income data attenuating the estimates, and (ii) the estimates in Hsieh
(2003) are of consumption elasticities rather than MPCs.
   24
      Note that historically it has been difficult to measure consumption response for large shocks, as
most governmental stimulus payments are small. As a result, most of the empirical work on MPCs
focuses on the consumption response to small income shocks. See for instance Shapiro and Slemrod
(2003), Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006), Shapiro and Slemrod (2009), Parker et al. (2013) or Misra
and Surico (2014) all analyze the consumption response of households to the 2001 and the 2008 fiscal
stimulus, with average payments of $600 and $1,200.

                                                    29
consumption. We study the design of targeted fiscal stimulus policies in Appendix A.5.4
and find that fiscal stimulus can produce a much larger consumption response when it
is heavily targeted towards households in the bottom of the income distribution. In
contrast, most governments have historically relied upon small fiscal stimulus payments
given to a large proportion of the population.

7        How Does Policy Affect Wealth Accumulation?

The view of illiquidity that we highlight has important implications for saving behavior
and wealth accumulation. As we demonstrated in Section 3, the ability to purchase a
savings commitment device (in our case, housing) allows households to accumulate more
wealth over the life-cycle. This occurs for two reasons: first, households are able to reduce
temptation by locking their wealth in illiquid form; second, households are able to bind
their future self to save by committing to regular mortgage payments that build up wealth
in the form of home equity.
   In this section, we study two important policies that alter households' incentives to
accumulate wealth in housing, and which thus may affect their ability to obtain commit-
ment. First, we evaluate the effect of housing subsidies, such as the mortgage interest tax
deduction and capital gains exemption. Second, we study the impact of mandatory mort-
gage amortization policies, which force households to gradually pay off their mortgage
and accumulate wealth in the form of home equity. In both cases, there is substantial
controversy surrounding (a) whether these policies may even increase household saving
and (b) whether these policies may generate more wealthy hand-to-mouth households.25

7.1      Housing Subsidies

There is a long-standing debate about the effect of tax benefits that incentivize wealth
accumulation in illiquid assets such as housing or individual retirement accounts. In
the United States and many other countries, a large number of tax advantages have
been given to housing and retirement accounts. Some studies have argued that such
tax incentives may result in an increase in overall savings (Venti and Wise, 1986, 1987),
while others have argued that such incentives may only result in portfolio re-allocation
from liquid to illiquid assets (Gale and Scholz, 1994; Attanasio and DeLeire, 2002). In
addition, a growing literature argues that tax benefits to housing may distort household
portfolio allocations, resulting in increased accumulation of housing wealth at the expense
of reduced accumulation of non-housing assets.26 Yet none of these papers consider the
    25
     For this reason, we focus our current analysis on the positive effects of these policies. That said, it
would be easy to extend our analysis to the normative effects of these policies, given that temptation
preferences allow for straightforward welfare analysis due to time consistency.
  26
     See for instance Rosen (1985), Poterba (1992), Gervais (2002), Chambers, Garriga, and Schlagenhauf
(2009), Floetotto, Kirker, and Stroebel (2016), and Nakajima (2020).

                                                    30
effect of making commitment more affordable, which could be an important channel
through which governments may stimulate household saving.
    Using our calibrated model, we evaluate the effect of housing subsidies on both port-
folio allocation and overall wealth accumulation. We focus on two large subsides to
homeownership that are relevant in the U.S. context: the mortgage interest tax deduc-
tion and the tax exemption of capital gains on owner-occupied housing. We compare our
baseline model, where both tax benefits exist, to a counterfactual model, where both tax
benefits are eliminated.
   Figure 6 shows the life-cycle profiles of wealth accumulation in the baseline model
with housing subsidies (the solid blue line) relative to the counterfactual model without
housing subsidies (the dashed pink line). We find evidence of some portfolio re-balancing
from liquid to illiquid assets, however, this is not a one-to-one effect. As a result, overall
wealth accumulation is increased due to the presence of housing subsidies.

                                         Figure 6: Effect of Housing Subsidies

                           Housing Wealth                                                       Liquid Wealth
                 Baseline: Subsidy                                                   Baseline
          150k   Counterfactual: No Subsidy                                   150k   Counterfactual
 Wealth




                                                           Wealth




          100k                                                                100k


           50k                                                                50k


           0k                                                                  0k
                   30             40          50     60                                30             40         50   60


                 Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners                                                     Change in Wealth
           0.5
                 Baseline                                                            Housing Wealth
                                                                              50k
                 Counterfactual                                                      Liquid Wealth
                                                           Change in Wealth




           0.4
                                                                                     Net Wealth
                                                                              25k
           0.3
   Share




                                                                               0k
           0.2


           0.1                                                                -25k


           0.0                                                                -50k
                   30             40          50     60                                30             40         50   60
                                       Age                                                                 Age



    The first two panels of Figure 6 show the life-cycle profiles of net housing wealth and
liquid wealth in the models with and without housing subsidies. We find that housing
subsidies increase housing wealth accumulation at the cost of reduced liquid wealth ac-
cumulation. Every additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly
33 cents by the time of retirement.
   The third panel of Figure 6 shows the share of hand-to-mouth homeowners in the
two different models. We see that the share of hand-to-mouth homeowners is reduced
only slightly by eliminating the tax benefits to housing. This is an important finding

                                                          31
which differs substantially from a traditional model. In a model where wealthy hand-
to-mouth households are generated by the assumption that illiquid assets deliver excess
returns relative liquid assets, such as Kaplan and Violante (2014), we would expect that
a reduction in tax benefits to illiquid assets would have a large effect on the share of
hand-to-mouth households, since it reduces the gap in returns between illiquid and liquid
assets. In contrast, in our model, hand-to-mouth homeowners exist not due to excess
returns on housing, but rather due to a desire to lock away wealth in illiquid form.
    Finally, the fourth panel of Figure 6 shows the difference in wealth accumulation
in the model with housing subsidies relative to the model without housing subsidies.
We find that overall wealth accumulation is increased by roughly 7% by the time of
retirement when there are tax-benefits to housing. This demonstrates that although tax-
benefits to housing do result in distortion, as households accumulate more housing and
less liquid assets, these subsidies also increase overall wealth accumulation by making the
commitment device more affordable.27

7.2    Mandatory Amortization

There is a growing debate about the effect of mandatory amortization policies on house-
hold spending and wealth accumulation. While mandatory amortization requirements
have recently been introduced by Sweden and the Netherlands, there exists concern that
these policies may simply result in a re-balancing of household portfolios away from liq-
uid assets and into illiquid hosuing, potentially resulting in reduced resilience to income
shocks (Svensson, 2019, 2020).28 But if mortgage payments serve as a commitment de-
vice, then amortization might not result in simple portfolio re-balancing, but may also
help households accumulate wealth.
    We use our calibrated model to study the effect of mandatory amortization policies
on household wealth accumulation and to quantify the role of commitment. To do so, we
consider two different policy regimes. In the baseline, we assume that all mortgages are
fully-amortizing, thus mortgagors are required to gradually pay back their mortgage using
a periodic debt repayment plan that ends at the time of retirement. In the counterfactual,
we assume that all mortgages are interest-only (IO), with a balloon payment covering the
mortgage principal at the time of retirement. The latter option implies that homeowners

  27
      In future work, it may be interesting to evaluate other ways that governments can make commitment
devices more accessible to households. For instance, first-time homebuyer tax credits targeted towards
low-income households may be an attractive way to help households onto the housing ladder (giving the
benefit of commitment) without the regressive tax implications of the mortgage interest tax deduction.
It would be straightforward to extend our model to study such a policy.
   28
      While some countries have explicit mandatory amortization policies, others have introduced similar
but less explicit policies. For instance, the United States has created strong incentives against interest-
only mortgages via the "qualified mortgage" provision in the Dodd-Frank Act. As a result, the vast
majority of mortgages in the U.S. require regular amortization payments.

                                                    32
will only be required to make small interest payments on their mortgage during the course
of their working-life.29 This may potentially increase wealth accumulation, as it allows
households to invest in the high-return liquid asset using the money that they otherwise
would have been required to accumulate in the form of home equity. However, interest-
only mortgages may instead decrease wealth accumulation if amortization payments serve
as a savings commitment device.
    Figure 7 shows the life-cycle profiles of wealth accumulation in the baseline model
with mandatory amortization (the solid blue line) relative to the counterfactual model
with interest-only mortgages (the dashed pink line). Overall, we find evidence of portfolio
re-balancing from liquid to illiquid assets, but this is not a one-to-one effect, therefore
overall wealth accumulation is increased.

                                       Figure 7: Effect of Mandatory Amortization

                           Housing Wealth                                                       Liquid Wealth
                 Baseline: Mandatory Amortization                                    Baseline
          150k   Counterfactual: Interest Only                                150k   Counterfactual
 Wealth




                                                           Wealth




          100k                                                                100k


           50k                                                                50k


           0k                                                                  0k
                   30             40           50     60                               30             40         50   60


                 Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners                                                     Change in Wealth
           0.5
                 Baseline                                                            Housing Wealth
                                                                              50k
                 Counterfactual                                                      Liquid Wealth
                                                           Change in Wealth




           0.4
                                                                                     Net Wealth
                                                                              25k
           0.3
   Share




                                                                               0k
           0.2


           0.1                                                                -25k


           0.0                                                                -50k
                   30             40           50     60                               30             40         50   60
                                       Age                                                                 Age



    The first two panels of Figure 7 show the life-cycle profiles of net housing wealth
and liquid wealth in the two different models. Mandatory amortization increases housing
wealth accumulation at the cost of slightly reduced liquid wealth accumulation. Overall,
we find that every additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly
60 cents by the time of retirement. The third panel of Figure 7 shows the share of the
wealthy hand-to-mouth in the two different models. We see that the share of the wealthy
hand-to-mouth is very similar across the two different models, and in fact is very slightly
higher in the model with interest-only mortgages. This suggests that mandatory amorti-
zation policies are not an important determinant of hand-to-mouth behavior. Finally, the
  29
    More specifically, the mortgage payment given by equation (7) is modified to be mpt = mt rM during
the working life and mpt = mt at the time of retirement.

                                                           33
fourth panel shows the difference in wealth accumulation in the model with mandatory
amortization relative to the model with interest-only mortgages. We find that mandatory
amortization increases net wealth by around 10% by the time of retirement, relative to
the model with interest-only mortgages.
    The reason that wealth accumulation is increased is because mortgage amortization
serves as a form of commitment. By purchasing a home using an amortizing mortgage,
households not only lock-away their current wealth, but they also commit to accumulate
wealth in the future in the form of home equity. This finding is consistent with recent
empirical evidence from the Netherlands, showing that mandatory amortization results
in increased wealth accumulation, as households accumulate more home equity due to
this policy, but do not reduce their non-housing assets (Bernstein and Koudijs, 2020).
    More specifically, Bernstein and Koudijs (2020) study the effect of mortgage amor-
tization on wealth accumulation by exploiting a macroprudential policy change in the
Netherlands that restricted the availability of interest-only mortgages for first-time home
buyers starting in January 2013. These authors find that mandatory amortization results
in a near 1-for-1 rise in net worth, with no observable change in non-housing savings, at
least in the four years for which data is available. Our results are consistent with their
findings. Moreover, our calibrated model allows us to evaluate the potential long-term
effects of such a policy on household wealth accumulation. We find that the effect on
wealth accumulation builds over time, with the largest increase in wealth occurring at
age 65, when households in our model finish paying off their mortgage.30

7.3    Housing Subsidies, Mandatory Amortization, and MPCs

Finally, we analyze the effect of these two policies on households' responsiveness to income
shocks. This is an important consideration, as there is concern that these policies may
reduce households' resilience to income shocks by encouraging substitution from liquid
to illiquid forms of wealth accumulation. For instance, the previously mentioned work by
Svensson (2019, 2020) argues that this concern may substantially undermine the macro-
prudential motives for which mandatory amortization policies have been implemented.
   To evaluate the effect of housing subsidies and mandatory amortization on household
sensitivity to income shocks, we compute the average MPC in response to a transitory
income shock under three different policy regimes. Table 4 presents our results. The first
row presents the average annual MPC in the baseline model. The second row presents the
average MPC in the counterfactual model without housing subsidies. We find an average

  30
    In this paper, we do not explore the welfare implications of mandatory amortization. That said, the
presence of temptation generates an interesting trade-off between flexibility and commitment, which is
absent in a traditional model. Kovacs and Moran (2020) study the implications of this trade-off as it
relates to financial liberalization which has given households greater access to home equity withdrawal.

                                                  34
MPC of 0.42 in response to a $1,000 income shock, only 1 percentage point lower than
in the baseline model with large and realistic housing subsides as in the United States.
The difference is even smaller in response to larger income shocks. These results are in
line with the previous finding that housing subsidies are not an important determinant of
wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior and therefore do not have an economically meaningful
effect on the average MPC.

                 Table 4: Average MPC under Different Policy Regimes

                                                                 SHOCK SIZE
                                                       $1, 000      $5, 000    $10, 000

     MPC in Baseline Model                               0.43        0.37        0.29
     MPC in Model without Housing Subsidies              0.42        0.37        0.29
     MPC in Model without Mandatory Amortization         0.41        0.36        0.27

    Note: Each coefficient represents the average annual MPC in our calibrated model. The
    procedure used to compute MPCs is described in Appendix A.5.1.


    The final row of Table 4 presents the average MPC in the counterfactual model with-
out mandatory amortization. We find that the average MPC is slightly lower without
mandatory amortization, however, the difference is small and therefore unlikely to be
economically meaningful. For instance, in response to a $1,000 income shock, the MPC
is 0.43 in the baseline model versus 0.41 in the counterfactual model without mandatory
amortization.
     Why do housing subsidies and mandatory amortization have such a small effect on
the average MPC? The economic intuition for this result is that households' desire for
illiquidity does not come simply from a desire to exploit better interest rates on different
types of assets, but rather from a fundamental difficulty to accumulate wealth in liquid
form, which thus generates a desire for illiquidity. For policy makers looking to reduce
households' responsiveness to income shocks, the answer is not the elimination of housing
subsidies and mandatory amortization. Instead, policy makers should focus on policies
that provide temporary liquidity relief to households who have experienced income loss,
such as the mortgage forbearance policy studied by Boar, Gorea, and Midrigan (2020).

8   Conclusion

A growing body of experimental evidence shows that households suffer from present bias
that makes it difficult to save. At the same time, policy makers around the world have
implemented a large number of incentives intended to encourage wealth accumulation
in illiquid assets. And yet, the decision to incentivize illiquid rather than liquid wealth
accumulation has remained controversial, due to concerns that these policies may sim-

                                             35
ply encourage portfolio reallocation, without actually generating an increase in overall
saving. Further, some economists have suggested that these policies may be actively
detrimental if they increase the share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households. This raises
the question: can the government actually help households save by incentivizing illiquid
wealth accumulation? And do such policies harm macroeconomic stability by increasing
the sensitivity of consumption to income shocks?
    In this paper, we answer these questions using a rich model of individual preferences
with liquid and illiquid assets. Our contribution is related to two important studies:
Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith (2010) show that saving subsidies may be beneficial due
to temptation in a one-asset framework, while Kaplan and Violante (2014) show the
importance of illiquid assets in explaining household consumption and saving behavior.
We bring together these two different strands of literature by incorporating temptation
into a two-asset model of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior, which we then bring to the
data. This allows us to carefully evaluate the effect of housing subsidies and mandatory
amortization on household portfolio allocation and wealth accumulation.
    There are a number of potential extensions to our analysis that may be interesting
and that would be straightforward to implement within our framework. For instance,
we could evaluate the effect of downpayment assistance policies, such as the $15,000
first-time homebuyer tax credit recently proposed by President Biden. We expect that
downpayment assistance may be more effective than the mortgage interest tax deduction,
as it is targeted directly towards the extensive margin of adjustment and may thus help
more households obtain access to commitment. In addition, while we have focused on
the positive effects of policies intended to encourage illiquid wealth accumulation (given
the substantial controversy in the literature about the effect of these policies on house-
hold portfolio decisions), it would be straightforward to use our framework to assess the
normative effects of these policies. As we find that these policies increase savings without
significantly distorting households' ability to smooth consumption, we expect that the
welfare effect of these policies would be positive and substantial.




                                            36
A        Appendix

A.1       Model Parameters


                                    Table A.1: External Parameter Values

    Parameter      Definition                                                                    Value

                   Timing
         T         number of years as adult                                                         59
         W         number of years as worker                                                        44

                   Utility Parameters
                   temptation parameter                                                           0.28

                   Asset Returns, Prices
          r        stock return                                                                  0.054
         rH        housing return                                                                0.021
         rM        mortgage interest rate                                                        0.040
                   rental scale                                                                   0.03
         F         fixed cost of moving                                                           0.05
                   loan-to-value constraint                                                       0.90
        pmax
         1         initial house price                                                        $250,000

                   Income Process
                   stochastic process: income persistence                                         0.90
         2
                   stochastic process: std. dev. income shock                                     0.05
         2
         0         stochastic process: std. dev. initial income                                 0.184
          g0       deterministic process: constant                                               6.391
          g1       deterministic process: age                                                   0.256
          g2       deterministic process: age2                                                  -0.045
          g3       deterministic process: age3                                                   0.002

                   Taxes and Social Security
          1        income tax function: constant                                                -4.034
          2        income tax function: progressivity                                           1.226
          d        income tax function: deduction                                              $6,116
                   social security: income floor                                               $10,9981
                   social security: PIA bend points                                      [$816, $4,917]
                   social security: wage base                                                $118,500

    1
        Supplemental Security Income is $8,796 for individuals and $13,200 for couples. From the 2015
        Bureau of Labor Statistics Report we know that about half of the population is married (50.2%)
        and the other half is single, therefore average households get $10,998 as SS income.


A.2       Asset Returns

In this section, we calculate the real risk-adjusted returns of housing and publicly traded
equitites. We start with the consumption-based pricing equation, which expresses asset
returns in terms of prices and dividends:

                                                            37
                                                pt+1 + dt+1 - pt
                                       rt+1 =                                                 (A.1)
                                                       pt

    where rt+1 is the net return on the asset between periods t and t + 1, pt is the price
of the asset in period t, while dt+1 is the dividend in period t + 1. We use this pricing
formula to calculate the return on housing. Households who invest in housing in period
t enjoy housing service flows between periods t and t + 1, but also pay the costs related
to home ownership over the same period. More explicitly, we can write the return on
housing similarly to equation (A.1) as


                              h        pt+1 + st+1 - cm      i
                                                      t+1 - ct+1 - pt
                             rt +1   =                                                        (A.2)
                                                     pt

    with pt is the price of the house in period t, while st+1 and and ct+1 are the housing
service flow and the costs that arise between periods t and t + 1. Maintenance cost is
denoted by cm , and the cost of home insurance by ci . Note that we implicitly assume
that depreciation is roughly equal to the maintenance cost.
    In what follows we measure aggregate house prices by the Case-Shiller house price
index,31 while we use data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to calculate the
average housing service flow. We follow the approach of Kaplan and Violante (2014) to
calibrate the size of different ownership-related costs. Housing service flow and related
costs are all proportional to the value of the house. Given that these costs are relatively
constant over time in terms of the value of the house, in the rest of the paper we use
constant fractions of changing house value in order to calculate these variables. Under
these conditions equation (A.2) can be rewritten as

                                h        ph           m   i     h
                                          t+1 + (s - c - c - 1)pt
                               rt +1 =                                                        (A.3)
                                                     ph
                                                      t


where s, cm and ci are the housing service flows and different costs relative to the value
of the house.
    We compute imputed rents using the balance sheet approach, following Piazzesi,
Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) and Kaplan and Violante (2014), among others. We use
housing gross value added at current dollars from the BEA to approximate the housing
service flow and use residential fixed assets at current dollars to approximate the housing
stock.32 The average of gross housing value added over residential fixed assets between

  31
    The Case-Shiller house price index is available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.
  32
    Gross value added can be found in Table 7.4.5, "Housing Sector Output, Gross Value Added and Net
Value Added" in National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) of the BEA. Residential fixed assets
can be found in Table 1.1, "Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods" of
the Fixed Asset Tables of the BEA.

                                                   38
                20
                15
                10
                5
                0
                -5




                     1940                  1960                   1980         2000       2020

                                                  Stock Return           Housing Return

                     10-year Moving Average, two sided. Annual Data



                                             Figure A.1: Real Returns


1950 and 2016 is around 8%.
    Following Kaplan and Violante (2014), we set the maintenance cost at 1% and the
insurance cost at 0.35% of the value of housing. In Figure A.1 we plot the calculated real
return on housing together with the returns on the S&P 500 between 1950 and 2016. The
most important thing to notice is that stock returns are in general much higher than the
return on housing. There was only a short period of time in the seventies and a couple
of years in the early twenties when stocks underperformed housing.
    A part of these return differences can obviously be interpreted as reflecting differences
in the riskiness of these assets. To allow for this, we calculate the risk-adjusted returns.
Following Kaplan and Violante (2014) in order to calculate the risk-adjusted returns on
the three assets, we subtract the variance of the return from the expected return of the
asset.
                                    i
                                   radj = E (ri ) - var(ri )                            (A.4)

where superscript i refers to the type of the asset, i.e. 3 Months T-Bill33 , S&P500 and
housing. Since we are using the variance as a measure of riskiness, we cannot generate
a similar graph of risk-adjusted returns as in Figure A.1. Instead, we have the average,
risk-adjusted real returns over the period between 1950 and 2016, which is 0.69% for the
T-bill, 5.40% for the stocks, while 2.10% for the housing asset as seen in Table A.2.
   Table A.2 presents our results. We find that stock deliver substantially higher returns
than housing, even when accounting for imputed rents and differential volatility in re-

  33
    The 3 Month T-Bill times series is downloaded from the database of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis (Fred).

                                                                 39
                                 Table A.2: Real Asset Returns

                                                             Mean    St.Dev.    Risk-adj. Mean

 Treasury Bill                                                0.74     2.12           0.69
 Stock                                                        8.24     16.82          5.40
 Housing (Capital Gains)                                      0.70     5.06           0.01
 Housing (Capital Gains + Imputed Rents)                      2.34     5.06           2.10

Note: This table shows our baseline return calculations. Stock returns include both
capital gains and dividend income from the S&P. Housing capital gains come from the
Case-Shiller index. Imputed rents include the imputed rental income net of
maintenance costs and home insurance, as described in Equation A.3.


turns. In our baseline results, we find that stock have delivered a risk-adjusted real return
of 5.40% per year, while housing has delivered a risk-adjusted real return of 2.10%. It is
important to note that most of the real return in housing comes from imputed rents. This
is consistent with Shiller (2015), who notes that there has been essentially no real growth
in house prices during the 20th century. That said, even when accounting for imputed
rents, we find that housing has delivered substantially lower returns than equities.

A.2.1      Sensitivity to Imputed Rents

We compute imputed rents using the balance sheet approach described above, following
Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) among others. Our results are consistent with a
wide body of empirical literature including Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann and
Spiegel (2002), and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) who show that housing delivers
worse risk-adjusted returns than stock, even when accounting for imputed rents and
other benefits to homeownership. That said, Jord`   a et al. (2019) develop an alternative
method to compute imputed rents. In this subsection, we explore sensitivity to alternative
imputed rent calculations.
   Using the data provided by Jord` a et al. (2019), we calculated average risk-adjusted re-
turns to housing and equities in the United States.34 For comparability with our previous
return calculations, we focus on the sample period between 1950 and 2016.
    Table A.3 presents our results using data from Jord`
                                                       a et al. (2019). We find that stock
deliver risk-adjusted returns that are very similar to housing. The risk-adjusted return
to stock is 5.98% whereas the risk-adjusted return to housing (including both capital
gains and imputed rents) 5.80%. This result is driven by the measure of imputed rents

 34
      We thank the authors for providing their data at http://www.macrohistory.net/data/.

                                                40
constructed by Jord`a et al. (2019). When we look at just the capital gains to housing,
we find a risk-adjusted real return of 0.65%, only slightly larger than our results when
using the Case-Shiller index.

             Table A.3: Real Asset Returns ­ Sensitivity to Alternative Data

                                                       Mean    St.Dev.   Risk-adj. Mean

 Stock                                                  9.03     17.47         5.98
 Housing (Capital Gains)                                0.78     3.52          0.65
 Housing (Capital Gains + Imputed Rents)                5.93     3.60          5.80

Note: This table shows alternative return calculations for the United States between
1950 and 2016. Data on stock, housing, and imputed rents come from Jord`  a et al.
(2019).


    Based on our reading of the literature, where the vast majority of studies find that
stock deliver higher risk-adjusted returns than housing, we decide to adopt that result in
our baseline calibration. That said, even if stock and housing delivered roughly similar
risk-adjusted returns, this would still pose a challenge for the traditional returns-based
explanation of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior, as put forward by Kaplan and Violante
(2014). If liquid and illiquid assets delivered equivalent risk-adjusted returns in their
model, then the wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear. For this reason, in Appendix
A.6.1 we evaluate the sensitivity of our model calibration to the assumption that r = rH
and find that it has little effect on our core results.

A.3   Data: Sample and Definitions

We calibrate our model using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics waves 1999 to 2015.
While the PSID has collected information on income and demographics since 1968, the
survey received a large overhaul in 1999 with the addition of detailed questions on house-
hold expenditure. We therefore use the modern PSID, which to the best of our knowledge
is the only large scale U.S. panel to contain information on income, consumption, and
wealth accumulation.
   Sample Selection. We focus on households with a head between 25 and 65 years old
with non-missing information on age, education, and state. We do not select our sample
based on the working status of the household head or spouse. We include households from
both the core sample of the PSID as well as households from the Survey of Economic
Opportunity. To reduce the influence of measurement error, we drop observations with
extremely high assets, for instance, observations with a total net worth higher than $20

                                           41
million, following the criteria of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). In
addition, we drop the top 5% of households by income due to evidence that the PSID
performs well at measuring the wealth holdings of the bottom 95%, but not the top 5%
of the distribution (Bosworth, Anders et al., 2008; Pfeffer et al., 2016).35
    Consumption. We compute real nondurable consumption following the classification
in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). Prior to 1999, the PSID collected data
on very few components of consumption, namely food, rent, and child care. The coverage
was greatly increased starting in 1999 to include many other components of nondurable
consumption and services including transportation, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance,
health expenditures, education, and childcare. In total, this allows the PSID to cover
approximately 70 percent of consumption expenditure on nondurable goods and services.
While additional categories such as clothing and entertainment were added to the survey
in 2005, we exclude these categories to keep the consumption series consistent over time.
    Assets. We compute liquid assets as the sum of bank account deposits and directly
held stock. We believe that publicly traded stock are essentially liquid because there
are very low transaction costs on these assets, thus it would be easy for households to
sell their stock position for consumption smoothing purposes. We measure net housing
wealth as the reported value of the household's main residency minus all mortgage debt
on this home. We exclude net wealth from other real estate, net business wealth, and
IRA/annuity wealth, as we want to focus our analysis on owner-occupied housing. We
also exclude credit cards debt from our analysis, as the PSID did not collect information
on this variable for the full period of our sample.
    Movers. We target the average share of homeowners that move for non-work reasons
each year. This is computed using detailed information on the timing and reasons for
moving homes, collected by the PSID. We include all moves due to consumptive reasons
(expansion of housing, contraction of housing, better neighborhood, better school, etc.)
and ambiguous reasons (desire to save money, neighbors moving away, unknown). We
exclude moves for work reasons (to take another job, to get nearer to work) since these
are outside the scope of our model.


A.4    Model Fit

Table A.4 presents the model fit of the average homeownership rate and share of home-
owners moving each year. Both the model with temptation and the model without
temptation obtain a good fit of both targeted moments.

  35
    As a result, the share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth in our sample is slightly higher than in the
Survey of Consumer Finances. In our sample, the share of such households reach a peak of 25% at age
45, whereas in the Survey of Consumer Finances this number is 22% at age 45.

                                                42
                            Table A.4: Additional Targeted Moments

                                                          Temptation            No Temptation
                                          PSID
                                                            Model                   Model

    Homeownership rate                     0.57                 0.50                  0.53
                                          (0.006)
    Share of movers                        0.068                0.070                 0.056
                                          (0.004)

      Note: This table shows fit of the average homeownership rate and share of movers each period.
      The average homeownership rate in our sample is 57%, slightly lower than the homeownership rate
      observed in the SCF. This is driven by two factors. First, our sample includes only working age
      households, who have less homeownership than retirees. Second, the PSID oversamples low income
      households.



A.5     Consistency with Empirical Evidence on Consumption

A.5.1      Calculation of the Marginal Propensity to Consume

To calculate the consumption response to an unanticipated and transitory income shock
of size x, we first generate N households, each with a different series of randomly drawn
income shocks and initial heterogeneity. We simulate the behavior of each household,
producing the state variable i,t and consumption behavior ci,t (shock = 0, i,t ) for each
household and each time period. Next, we simulate counterfactual consumption behavior
in response to an unanticipated and transitory income shock at time t conditional on
state i,t , producing ci,t (shock = x, i,t ) for all households and all time periods. We set
the size of the transitory income shock x to be $1,000 in our baseline simulation, though
we also show results for shock of $5,000 and $10,000 respectively. The annual marginal
propensity to consume is computed as follows:

                                    ci,t (shock = x, i,t ) - ci,t (shock = 0, i,t )
                    MPCi,t (x) =                                                               (A.5)
                                                           x

                                                     N   W
                                        1 1
                               MPC(x) =                        MPCi,t (x)                      (A.6)
                                        NW           i=1 t=1


A.5.2      MPC Heterogeneity: The Importance of Liquidity

To evaluate the relationship between wealth and consumption behavior, we group simu-
lated households into quartiles based on net wealth and cash-on-hand. We then estimate
the average MPC in each of these categories. This is performed in a regression framework,
allowing us to control for age, similar to Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014):

                                                    43
                         4                       4                         65
       MPCi,t = 0 +            j CashQj
                                      i,t   +          j WealthQj
                                                                i,t   +           j Agej
                                                                                       i,t +   i,t   (A.7)
                        j =2                    j =2                      j =23



    If low wealth is important in generating large MPCs, then we would expect to see
a rapid decline of MPCs as we move from the lowest to the highest wealth quartiles.
In contrast, if low cash-on-hand is more important in generating large MPCs, we would
expect to see a rapid decline of MPCs as we move from the lowest to the highest quartile
of cash-on-hand.
    The results are presented in Table A.5. We find that the average MPC declines very
quickly with cash-on-hand. Households in the lowest quartile of cash-on-hand have the
highest average MPC. Households in the second quartile have an average MPC that is
0.18 lower. This is even more pronounced in the third and fourth quartiles. In short, low
liquidity is an important determinant of high MPCs.

                    Table A.5: MPC Heterogeneity by Household Type

                                                                      MPC
                                                        Coefficient         Standard Error


             CASH-ON-HAND
             Quartile
                                        2nd                 -0.181                  (0.006)
                                        3rd                 -0.368                  (0.006)
                                        4th                 -0.595                  (0.007)
             NET WEALTH
             Quartile
                                        2nd                 -0.062                  (0.005)
                                        3rd                 -0.093                  (0.007)
                                        4th                 -0.055                  (0.008)
             Constant                                       0.821                   (0.012)

            Note: MPCs are based on a $1,000 transitory income shock. We control
            for age using Equation A.7.  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1.


     In contrast, once we have controlled for cash-on-hand, net wealth has very little effect
on the average MPC. The average MPC is only 0.06 smaller when moving from the lowest
to second lowest net wealth quartile. Moreover, we see that even the richest households
still have a large average MPC: households in the top wealth quartile have an MPC that
is just as large as households in the bottom quartile, once we control for cash-on-hand.

                                                       44
    These results are consistent with a wide body of empirical evidence that finds that the
average MPC declines only slowly, if at all, with net wealth, while it declines quickly with
cash-on-hand. Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) show that households in the top quintile
of cash-on-hand have an avereage MPC that is 0.44 lower than that of households in
the bottom quintile, affirming the importance of cash-on-hand for MPCs.36 Similarly,
Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021) find that net wealth is unimportant in explaining
MPC heterogeneity, once controlling for liquid wealth.37
    The reason behind these empirical observations is that households might have sub-
stantial wealth, but if it is kept in illiquid form, it cannot be used easily for consumption-
smoothing purposes. As a result, wealth is a less important determinant of MPCs than
cash-on-hand. This reaffirms the importance of modeling household illiquidity (using a
two asset model) in order to study consumption behavior in response to transitory income
shocks. In this regard, our model delivers similar results to Kaplan and Violante (2014)
who also find that liquid wealth is more important than total wealth in explaining MPC
heterogeneity. In contrast, these empirical results are almost impossible to justify using
a traditional heterogeneous agent model with only one asset. For instance, Jappelli and
Pistaferri (2014) study whether an Ayiagari model with heterogeneous households and a
standard calibration is able to replicate the slow decline of MPCs by wealth. They find
that this requires implausibly impatient households:  has to be 0.6 or lower.

A.5.3     MPC Decomposition

As mentioned in Section 6.2, large MPCs may be driven by either illiquidity or the
mechanical effect of temptation. In this subsection, we decompose the relative importance
of these two different channels. To do so, we use the following procedure. For each
household i  [1, 2, ..., N ] and each period of working life t  [1, 2, ...W ], we simulate
two versions of household i starting at time t, where one receives an unanticipated and
transitory income shock of x dollars, while the other does not. This is performed using
our baseline parameter estimates for the temptation model with  = 0, thus turning off
the mechanical effect of temptation. We assume that the state variables at the time of
the shock (i,t ) are identical for the two versions of the same household and are based on
our baseline parameter estimates for the temptation model.38 This allows us to isolate
  36
     Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) use Italian survey data to study the consumption response to un-
expected transitory income shocks. They exploit the survey question from the 2010 Italian Survey of
Household Income and Wealth, which asks households how much of an unexpected transitory income
change they would spend.
  37
     Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021) study the consumption response to winning the lottery in Norway.
This study is unique in the quality of its data: the authors use administrative tax data from Norway,
which contains rich information on household income and asset holdings.
  38
     In other words, we assume that households suffer from temptation prior to the realization of the
unanticipated and transitory income shock. This ensures that turning off temptation does not alter the
distribution of liquid assets, housing, and hand-to-mouth households prior to the shock.

                                                  45
the mechanical effect of temptation.

                                        N    W
                                  1 1              ci,t (shock = x,  = 0, i,t ) - ci,t (shock = 0,  = 0, i,t )
  MPC(x) =                                                                                                     (A.8)
                                  NW    i=1 t=1
                                                                                x


   Figure A.2 presents the results from our model decomposition. The striped black bar
shows the effect of illiquidity on consumption behavior when we turn off temptation, while
the white bar shows the mechanical effect of temptation. We find that both mechanisms
are important in generating large MPCs. The effect of illiquidity explains roughly 55-
60% of the overall consumption response to an unanticipated and transitory income shock,
while the mechanical effect of temptation explains the remainder. Even when households
receive an income shock of $10,000, the effect of illiquidity remains substantial.

                                                    Figure A.2: MPC Decomposition

                            0.5

                                            0.43
                            0.4
                                                                        0.37
       Average Annual MPC




                            0.3                                                                0.29
                                            0.25

                                                                        0.2
                            0.2                                                                0.18


                            0.1


                             0
                                            1,000                    5,000                    10,000
                                                                 Shock Size ($)

                                        Effect of Illiquidity       Mechanical Effect of Temptation

Note: This figure shows the mechanisms driving consumption behavior in response to an unanticipated and transitory
income shock. The striped black bar shows the effect of illiquidity, e.g. the MPC absent temptation (MPC(x)). The
white bar shows the mechanical effect of temptation (MPC(x) - MPC(x)).



    Why does illiquidity have a large effect even when households receive an income shock
of $10,000? This is because a shock of $10,000 is insufficient to induce many households to
pay the housing transaction cost and adjust their housing stock. In our model, there are
substantial adjustment costs to housing, both financial and nonfinancial. As a result of

                                                                   46
these adjustment costs, many households are liquidity constrained in the short-term, even
if they have significant housing wealth, therefore they respond strongly to unexpected and
transitory income shocks.
    In contrast, Kaplan and Violante (2014) find a very small MPC (almost zero) in
response to large income shocks. This is because their model has a small, additive ad-
justment cost of $1,000. Moreover, if they were to include a larger adjustment cost, the
wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear. An important benefit of temptation is that it is
able to accommodate a large and realistic adjustment cost,39 yet still explain the presence
of wealthy hand-to-mouth households. In a model with temptation, larger adjustment
costs may actually increase demand for housing, whereas in a traditional model, larger
adjustment costs always reduce demand for housing.

A.5.4     Targeted Fiscal Stimulus

We use our estimated model to study the design of targeted fiscal stimulus policies. In
particular, we evaluate the consumption response to alternative stimulus policies that
give one time unanticipated stimulus payments to varying fractions of the population.
We focus on budget equivalent policies where the government uses income based targeting
to stimulate aggregate consumption.40 For instance, the government may give $500 to
all households or $1,000 to the bottom half of the income distribution. We simulate N
households using our model and then compare their baseline consumption to a counter-
factual simulation where the same households (with the same income shocks) are given
a one time unanticipated stimulus payment at age t. We assume that all households
between the ages of 22 and 65 are eligible for stimulus payments, therefore we repeat this
exercise for all t within this age range and then aggregate our results.41 We then report
the fraction of aggregate stimulus that is consumed within one year after disbursal.
    Figure A.3 shows the aggregate one year consumption response to budget equivalent
fiscal stimulus policies that target different fractions of the income distribution. At one
extreme, all households are given a stimulus payment of $500, while at the other extreme
the bottom 2% of households in the income distribution are given a stimulus payment of
$25,000. At either extreme, just under 40% of stimulus payments are consumed within
the year of disbursal. We observe that the consumption response gradually rises as the
government moves from a policy that distributes stimulus to all households to a policy
that targets the bottom 20% of the income distribution. At the optimum, when $2,500
is given to each household in the bottom 20% of the distribution, we observe that 68%

  39
     In our case, 5% of the value of the home (OECD, 2011), as well as the utility cost of moving.
  40
     We study the response to income targeting as most governments have comprehensive information on
residents' income, but not liquid assets. Of course, Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021) might be able to
help Norway perform targeted stimulus based on liquid assets, which may be even more effective.
  41
     We choose N = 1, 000 for each time period, therefore there are 44,000 households in our simulation.

                                                  47
of aggregate stimulus is consumed within one year.
                                              Figure A.3: Income Targeted Stimulus Payments
                                       80%
       Fraction Spent after One Year




                                       60%




                                       40%




                                       20%




                                         0%      20%            40%            60%             80%   100%
                                                 Bottom Percentage of Income Distribution Targeted


    These results imply that fiscal stimulus can produce a much larger consumption re-
sponse when it is heavily targeted towards households in the lowest quintile of the income
distribution. In contrast, during the Great Recession, most governments that provided
stimulus payments decided to give payments to a large fraction of the population, with
very little targeting. For instance, under the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, the U.S.
government gave tax rebates to approximately 80-85% of households, with an average
stimulus payment of $600-$1,200.
    Targeted fiscal stimulus allows the government to reach households with higher MPCs,
but there exists a trade-off, as larger stimulus payments induce households to save a larger
fraction of their income in either housing or liquid assets. As a result, the consumption
response observed in Figure 4 declines when the government targets households in the
very bottom of the income distribution. For instance, in response to a stimulus pay-
ment of $25,000, approximately 29% is saved in housing wealth. Nevertheless, a very
large stimulus payment is needed to convince households to increase their investment in
housing, due to the presence of sizable housing transaction costs.
    We find a more important role for stimulus targeting than the existing theoretical
literature. For instance, while the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) implies a similar
consumption response when stimulus payments are given to the entire population, they
find smaller gains to targeted stimulus payments, and their optimal policy is to target the
bottom half of the income distribution.42 This difference is driven by the above trade-off
 42
      In their model, stimulus payments given to the entire population would imply that roughly 40% is

                                                                      48
between targeting households with high MPCs and giving larger payments. Their model
requires very small transaction costs ($1,000 in their preferred calibration) in order to
explain the presence of wealthy hand-to-mouth households, therefore there is a rapid
decline in the MPC based on size of stimulus payment, as larger stimulus payments
induce more households to pay this cost and put their wealth in the illiquid asset. In
contrast, in our model we have a realistic housing transaction cost of 5% of the value
of the home, as well as a utility cost  that we estimate, therefore fewer households are
willing to adjust housing due to a stimulus payment, unless that payment is very large.
As a result, our model is consistent with the recent empirical evidence showing a gradual
decline in MPCs based on shock size, thus suggesting a more important role for targeted
fiscal stimulus.

A.6     Sensitivity

In this section we evaluate the sensitivity of our results presented in Sections 4 and 6. We
consider two modification to our baseline model. First, we change the return structure in
the model by assuming that housing and equities provide equivalent risk-adjusted returns
(r = rH ). Second, we modify the asset structure of households by assuming that they
receive annuitized disbursements from individual retirement accounts after retirement.
Our core findings are robust to these modifications: both the calibrated parameters of
the model and the MPC results are similar to our baseline results.

A.6.1    Asset Returns

We consider a model where the two assets give equivalent risk-adjusted returns (r = rH ).
It is important to note that this return structure would pose a challenge for the traditional
returns-based explanation of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior. If liquid and illiquid assets
delivered equivalent returns in a model of the type proposed by Kaplan and Violante
(2014), then the wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear.
    In contrast, we find that the model with temptation and commitment doesn't require
excess return on housing to explain the existence of wealthy hand-to-mouth households.
Figure A.4 shows the model fit when we re-calibrate the preference parameters of the
model. We find that the model with equal returns obtains a good fit of the large share of
wealthy hand-to-mouth households, as well as the other targeted moments, despite the
fact that housing and liquid assets deliver equivalent returns.
    The calibrated parameter results are reported in Table A.6. When the asset returns
are equal (column 2), we find that that households are more patient and more risk averse

consumed within one year, while stimulus payments given to the bottom half would imply that 55%
is consumed within one year. In contrast, we find that 70% is consumed within one year if stimulus
payments are targeted towards the bottom 20% of the income distribution.

                                               49
                               Figure A.4: Model Fit with Equal Returns

                Nondurable Consumption                                             Liquid Assets
  40k                                                         150k
                                                                                                              PSID
                                                                                                              Model
  30k
                                                              100k

  20k

                                                               50k
  10k


   0k                                                           0k
           30           40           50          60                     30          40           50           60

                  Net Housing Wealth                                         Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
  50k
                                                              10%

   0k                                                          0%
           30           40           50          60                     30          40           50           60
                             Age                                                          Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from our model with equal returns (solid blue line) and the PSID (black
dotted line). The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations around the mean.


relative to the baseline calibration (column 1). More specifically,  and  are slightly
higher than in our baseline calibration.
    In addition, the alternative return structure has little impact on the main MPC results.
Table A.7 shows the MPC by shock size. The average MPC in response to a $1,000 shock
is 0.40 in the model with equal returns (the second row), which is only slightly lower
than in our baseline model (the first row). In addition, we find that the average MPC
declines only gradually with respect to shock size. The average consumption response to
a $10,000 shock is 0.27, only slightly lower than our baseline result of 0.29.

A.6.2      Individual Retirement Accounts

In order to evaluate sensitivity to alternative modeling assumptions about the resources
that are available to save for retirement, we extend our model by assuming that households
have an individual retirement accounts (IRAs) from which they then receive annuitized
disbursements after retirement. We make the simplifying assumption that households
have no choice over the size of their retirement account or the timing at which they
withdraw from their retirement account, i.e. retirement contributions are mandatory and
must be converted to an annuity at the age of retirement (W ). This assumption implies
that households suffer zero temptation to consume their retirement account.
   We require all households to purchase an annuity in the first year of retirement using
the entirety of their retirement account. This ensures equal payments throughout the

                                                         50
          Table A.6: Model Parameters ­ Alternative Modeling Assumptions

      PARAMETER          Baseline    Equal Returns (r = rH )        Retirement Accounts

                          0.959                 0.970                       0.955
                          2.415                 2.795                       2.596
      µ                   0.291                 0.317                       0.455
                          0.160                 0.267                       0.295
                          0.437                 0.552                       0.869

     Note: This table shows our calibrated model parameters under alternative modeling as-
     sumptions. In the model with equal returns, we set r = rH = 0.021. In the model with
     retirement accounts, we add retirement accounts as defined in Section A.6.2. The tempta-
     tion parameter is set at  = 0.28 following Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020).


            Table A.7: MPC Heterogeneity ­ Alternative Modeling Assumptions

                                                                   SHOCK SIZE
       MPC                                               $1, 000      $5, 000       $10, 000

       MPC in Baseline Model                               0.43         0.37          0.29
       MPC in Model with Equal Returns                     0.40         0.33          0.27
       MPC in Model with Retirement Accounts               0.43         0.38          0.28

      Note: This table shows the average MPC in the temptation model. In the model with
      equal returns, we set r = rH = 0.021. In the model with retirement accounts, we add
      retirement accounts as detailed in Section A.6.2.


remainder of their life. During each year of retirement, households receive annuitized
disbursements that depend on the replacement rate 1 and the size of their IRA at
retirement:


                                     IRA
                                    yi,t = 1  IRA(yi,W )                                        (A.9)

We assume that the size of the retirement account is a linear function of last working
period income. This simplifying assumption allows us to include retirement accounts
without the introduction of an additional state variable. The size of the retirement
account is given by the following formula:


                               log[IRA(yi,W )] = 2  log(yi,W )                                 (A.10)

The relationship between last period income and the size of the retirement account (2 )
is estimated using the PSID. Estimation is performed on a sample of households where

                                               51
the head is age 60 to 65 and currently employed. We find a value of ^2 = 0.99.

   Finally, the annuity is priced equal to its discounted value, giving the following re-
placement rate during retirement:

                                        T                 -1
                                                 st
                                1 =                                                 (A.11)
                                       t=W
                                             (1 + r)t-W

    We then re-calibrate the preference parameters of the model, under the assumption
that households have individual retirement accounts as just described. The third column
of Table A.6 shows the parameter results. We find that the impatience parameter ( ) and
the risk aversion ( ) hardly change, compared to the baseline model. On the other hand,
modifying the asset structure of households increases the housing preference parameters
significantly (µ, , ).
   The third row of Table A.7 shows the MPC by shock size for our alternative model
with IRAs. We find that the average MPCs are almost identical in this alternative model,
and there still exists a sizable consumption response to large income shocks. For instance,
we find an MPC of 0.28 in response to a $10,000 shock, only slightly smaller than the
MPC of 0.29 in our baseline model.




                                             52
References

Aguiar, Mark A., Mark Bils, and Corina Boar. 2020. "Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth?"
  NBER Working Paper (26643).

Aladangady, Aditya, Shifrah Aron-Dine, David Cashin, Wendy Dunn, Laura Feiveson,
  Paul Lengermann, Katherine Richard, and Claudia Sahm. 2018. "High-frequency
  Spending Responses to the Earned Income Tax Credit." FEDS Notes. Board of Gov-
  ernors of the Federal Reserve, Washington, DC .

Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. "Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
  Covariance Structures." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3):353­366.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong. 2018. "Complex
 mortgages." Review of Finance 22 (6):1975­2007.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
 Stephen Weinberg. 2001. "The Hyperbolic Buffer Stock Model: Calibration, Simu-
 lation, and Empirical Evaluation." Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3):47­68.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. "Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evi-
  dence from a commitment savings product in the Philippines." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121 (2):635­672.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Renata Bottazzi, Hamish Low, Lars Neisham, and Matt Wakefield.
  2012. "Modeling the Demand for Housing over the Lifecycle." Review of Economic
  Dynamics 15 (1):10­53.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Thomas DeLeire. 2002. "The Effect Of Individual Retire-
  ment Accounts On Household Consumption And National Saving." Economic Journal
  112 (6):504­538.

B¨
 ackman, Claes and Natalia Khorunzhina. 2020. "Interest-only mortgages and consump-
  tion growth: Evidence from a mortgage market reform." Available at SSRN 3533247
  .

Bernstein, Asaf and Peter Koudijs. 2020. "Mortgage Amortization and Wealth Accumu-
  lation." mimeo .

Beshears, John, James J Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian,
  and Jung Sakong. 2020. "Which early withdrawal penalty attracts the most deposits
  to a commitment savings account?" Journal of Public Economics 183:104144.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. "Consumption In-
  equality and Familiy Labor Supply." American Economic Review 106 (2):387­435.

                                         53
Boar, Corina, Denis Gorea, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2020. "Liquidity constraints in the
  US housing market."

Bosworth, Barry, Sarah Anders et al. 2008. "Saving and Wealth Accumulation in the
  PSID, 1984-2005." .

Bunn, Philip, Jeanne Roux, Kate Reinold, and Paolo Surico. 2018. "The Consumption
  Response to Positive and Negative Income Shocks." Journal of Monetary Economics
  96:1­15.

Carroll, Christopher, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White. 2017. "The
  Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume." Forthcoming, Quan-
  titative Economics .

Chambers, Matthew, Carlos Garriga, and Don E Schlagenhauf. 2009. "Housing policy and
 the progressivity of income taxation." Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (8):1116­
 1134.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst. 2002. "The Transition To Home Ownership And
 The Black-White Wealth Gap." The Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2):281­
 297.

Choukhmane, Taha. 2019. "Default Options and Retirement Saving Dynamics." mimeo
 .

DeFusco, Anthony A, Stephanie Johnson, and John Mondragon. 2020. "Regulating house-
  hold leverage." The Review of Economic Studies 87 (2):914­958.

Fagereng, Andreas, MArtin B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik. 2021. "MPC Heterogeneity
  and Household Balance Sheets." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics .

Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman. 2009. "Time-inconsistency and welfare program
  participation: Evidence from the NLSY." International Economic Review 50 (4):1043­
  1077.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita. 2002. "Owner-Occupied Housing and the Com-
  position of the Household Portfolio." American Economic Review 92:345­362.

Floetotto, Max, Michael Kirker, and Johannes Stroebel. 2016. "Government intervention
  in the housing market: Who wins, who loses?" Journal of Monetary Economics
  80:106­123.

Fuster, Andreas, Greg Kaplan, and Basit Zafar. 2018. "What Would You Do with
  $500? Spending Responses to Gains, Losses, News and Loans." NBER Working Paper
  (24386).

                                         54
Gale, William G and John Karl Scholz. 1994. "IRAs and household saving." The Amer-
 ican Economic Review :1233­1260.

Gervais, Martin. 2002. "Housing taxation and capital accumulation." Journal of Mone-
 tary Economics 49 (7):1461­1489.

Goetzmann, William N and Matthew Spiegel. 2002. "Policy implications of portfolio
 choice in underserved mortgage markets." Low-income homeownership: Examining the
 unexamined goal :257­274.

Greenwald, Daniel and Adam Guren. 2019. "Do credit conditions move house prices?" .

Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. "Temptation and Self-Control." Economet-
 rica 69 (6):1403­1435.

------. 2004. "Self Control, Revealed Preference, and Consumption Choice." Review of
  Economic Dynamics 7:243­264.

Harris, Christopher and David Laibson. 2001. "Dynamic Choices of Hyperbolic Con-
  sumers." Econometrica 69:935­957.

Haurin, Donald R, Patric H Hendershott, and Susan M Wachter. 1997. "Borrowing
  Constraints and the Tenure Choice of Young Households." Journal of Housing Research
  8 (2):137.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai. 2003. "Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evi-
  dence from the Alaska Permanent Fun." American Economic Review 93:397­405.

Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri. 2014. "Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (4):107­136.

Johnson, David S., Johnathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. "Household
  Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001." American Economic Review
  96 (5):1589­1610.

Jord`   `
    a, Oscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Tay-
  lor. 2019. "The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870­2015*." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 134 (3):1225­1298. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz012.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response
 to Fiscal Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82 (4):1199­1239.

Kaplan, Greg, Giovanni L. Violante, and Justion Weidner. 2014. "The Wealthy Hand-
 to-Mouth." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

                                         55
Keane, Michael P. and Nada Wasi. 2016. "Labor Supply: The Roles of Human Capital
  and the Extensive Margin." The Economic Journal 126 (592):578­617.

Kovacs, Agnes, Hamish Low, and Patrick Moran. 2020. "Estimating Temptation and
 Commitment Over the Life-Cycle." International Economic Review forthcoming.

Kovacs, Agnes and Patrick Moran. 2018. "Temptation, Commitment, and Hand-to-
 Mouth Consumers." mimeo .

------. 2020. "Breaking the Commitment Device: The Effect of Home Equity With-
  drawal on Consumption, Saving, and Welfare." .

Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony A. Smith. 2010. "Temptation and
  Taxation." Econometrica 78 (6):2063­2084.

Kueng, Lorenz. 2018. "Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 133 (4):1693­1751.

Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics :443­477.

Misra, Kanishka and Paolo Surico. 2014. "Consumption, Income Changes, and Hetero-
 geneity: Evidence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs." American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics 6 (4):84­106.

Nakajima, Makoto. 2012. "Rising Indebtedness and Temptation: A Welfare Analysis."
  Quantitative Economics 3 (2):257­288.

------. 2020. "Capital income taxation with housing." Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 115:103883. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S016518892030052X.

Nakajima, Makoto and Irina A. Telyukova. 2020. "Home Equity in Retirement." Inter-
  national Economic Review 61 (2):573­616.

OECD. 2011. "Housing and the Economy: Policies for Renovation." Economic Policy
 Reforms 2011: Going for Growth .

Parker, Johnathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland.
  2013. "Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008." American
  Economic Review 103 (6).

Parker, Jonathan A. 2017. "Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence
  from a 25M illionExperiment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics9 (4) :
  153 - -83.

                                        56
Pfeffer, Fabian, Robert F. Schoeni, Arthur Kinnickell, and Patricia Anderski. 2016. "Mea-
  suring Wealth and Wealth Inequality." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement
  41 (2):103­120.

Phelps, Edmund and Robert A. Pollak. 1968. "On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
  Equilibrium Growth." The Review of Economic Studies 35:185­199.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. 2007. "Housing, Consumption and
  Asset Pricing." Journal of Financial Economics 83(3):531­569.

Poterba, James M. 1992. "Taxation and housing: Old questions, new answers." Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rosen, Harvey S. 1985. "Housing subsidies: Effects on housing decisions, efficiency, and
  equity." In Handbook of public economics, vol. 1. Elsevier, 375­420.

Schlafmann, Kathrin. 2020. "Housing, Mortgages, and Self-Control." The Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies URL https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa096. Hhaa096.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. 2003. "Consumer REsponse to Tax Rebates."
  American Economic Review 93 (1):381­396.

------. 2009. "Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending?"            American Economic
  Review: Papers and Proceedings 99 (2):374­379.

Shiller, Robert J. 2014. CNN Money .

Shiller, Robert J. 2015. Irrational exuberance: Revised and expanded third edition. Princeton
  university press.

Sommer, Kamila and Paul Sullivan. 2018. "Implications of US Tax Policy for House Prices,
  Rents, and Homeownership." American Economic Review 108 (2):241­74. URL https:
  //www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20141751.

Strotz, Robert H. 1956. "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization."
  The Review of Economic Studies 23:165­180.

Svensson, Lars EO. 2019. "Amortization requirements, distortions, and household resilience:
  Problems of macroprudential policy II." Tech. rep., Working Paper, Stockholm School of
  Economics.

------. 2020. "Macroprudential policy and household debt: What is wrong with Swedish
  macroprudential policy?" .

Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Benartzi. 2004. "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral
 Economics to Increase Employee Saving." Journal of Political Economy 102:S164­S187.

                                              57
Toussaert, S´
            everine. 2018. "Eliciting Temptation and Self-Control Through Menu Choices:
  A Lab Experiment." Econometrica 86 (3):859­889.

Venti, Steven F and David A Wise. 1986. "Tax-deferred accounts, constrained choice and
  estimation of individual saving." The Review of Economic Studies 53 (4):579­601.

------. 1987. "IRAs and saving." In The effects of taxation on capital accumulation.
  University of Chicago Press, 7­52.

Wiedemer, J.P. and J.K. Baker. 2012. Real Estate Finance, 9th ed. Cengage Learning.




                                           58
