                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE IMPACT OF FREE SECONDARY EDUCATION:
                     EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM GHANA

                                        Esther Duflo
                                       Pascaline Dupas
                                       Michael Kremer

                                     Working Paper 28937
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28937


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




This study is registered in The American Economic Association's registry for randomized
controlled trials under RCT ID AEARCTR-0000015. The study protocol was approved by the
IRBs of UCLA, Stanford, MIT and IPA. We thank the Ghana Education Service and IPA Ghana
for their collaboration, and Jonathan Addie for outstanding project management. We are grateful
to Ishita Ahmed, Madeline Duhon, Gabriella Fleischman, Erin Grela, Jinu Koola, Stephanie
Kabukwor Adjovu, Ryan Knight, Victor Pouliquen, Nicolas Studer, Mark Walsh, and Alexandre
Simoes Gomes for outstanding research assistance. The funding for this study was provided by
the NIH (Grant #R01 HD039922), the JPAL Post-Primary Education Initiative, the IGC, 3ie, the
Partnership for Child Development and the Nike Foundation. We thank them, without implicating
them, for making this study possible. Dupas gratefully acknowledges the support of the NSF
(award number 1254167). We also thank Rachel Glennerster for valuable input on the paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Free Secondary Education: Experimental Evidence from Ghana
Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer
NBER Working Paper No. 28937
June 2021
JEL No. H52,I26,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

Following the widespread adoption of free primary education, African policymakers are now
considering making secondary school free, but little is known about the private and social
benefits of free secondary education. We exploit randomized assignment to secondary school
scholarships among 2,064 youths in Ghana, combined with 12 years of data, to establish that
scholarships increase educational attainment, knowledge, skills, and preventative health
behaviors, while reducing female fertility. Eleven years after receipt of the scholarship, only
female winners show private labor market gains, but those come primarily in the form of better
access to jobs with rents (in particular rationed jobs in the public sector). We develop a simple
model to interpret the labor market results and help think through the welfare impact of free
secondary education.

Esther Duflo                                    Michael Kremer
Department of Economics, E52-544                University of Chicago
MIT                                             Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue                         1126 E. 59th St.
Cambridge, MA 02139                             Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu                                  kremermr@uchicago.edu

Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and CEPR
and also NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

Following the widespread adoption of free primary education in low-income countries and the
subsequent surges in primary school enrollment rates, policymakers' attention has shifted to secondary
school. The U.N's new Sustainable Development Goals call for "... free, equitable and quality primary
and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes". In Ghana, the setting
of this study, debates about whether secondary education should be free were central in the last four
presidential elections. Secondary education is expensive and making secondary school free generates
a transfer to households sufficiently well off to send their children to secondary school in any case.
Offsetting these costs are the presumed benefits of secondary education for all those unable to afford
it. Surprisingly, however, rigorous evidence on the private and social welfare effects of free secondary
education remains scarce. We shed light on this debate by providing experimental evidence of the
effects of scholarships for secondary school on a range of outcomes over 12 years.

To do so, this paper answers three questions. First, we assess the extent to which free secondary
education would induce more children to attend secondary school and investigate who are the
marginal children. Second, we provide estimates of the extent to which access to secondary education
increases learning (despite the weak preparation provided by many primary and middle schools and
the often-questioned quality of existing secondary schools), and has positive effects on life outcomes
such as fertility, female empowerment, technology adoption, and civic knowledge and participation. 2
Third, we examine the key question of whether free secondary education would generate either private
or social labor market gains. It is not obvious it would, given that education levels in poor countries
are already high relative to the historical benchmarks for much richer economies (Pritchett, 2018). 3
Moreover, there is rationing of government jobs that command rents (Murphy et al. 1991; North,
1990). This means that any private gain may come at the expense of others, and also that rapidly
expanding education may be problematic if young people see secondary education as promising access
to tertiary education and ultimately a government job, but the number of such jobs is limited. Most
youth may then not get the jobs they hope for after investing time and money in their education, and
some have argued this could lead to a cohort of "over-educated" young people, frustrated in their
aspirations (e.g. Krueger and Maleckova 2003; Heckman, 1991).



2 See UNGEI, 2010 and Warner et al., 2012, for indications of strong correlations.
3 For example, in Ghana average years of education among those 15 years old and above in 2010 was 7.8, equal to the
level in the UK in 1970, even though the GDP per capita in Ghana in 2010 was less than a fifth that of the UK in 1970.

                                                          1
Access to senior high school in Ghana has historically been limited based both on a gateway exam
administered at the end of grade 8, which only roughly 40% of junior high school entrants pass, and
by annual tuition fees, corresponding to about 20% of GDP per capita. 4 In this project, we generated
experimental variation in the cost of secondary school by providing secondary school scholarships to
some randomly selected youth in Ghana, while keeping educational requirements the same.

In 2008, full scholarships were awarded to 682 adolescents, randomly selected among a study sample
of 2,064 rural youth who had gained admission to a public high school but did not immediately enroll
because they were not able to pay the fee. Follow-up data were collected regularly until 2020, when
these youth were on average 29 years old. By 2019, we had a minimal attrition rate (under 6%). Our
last round of data collection took place between June and September 2020, which gives us the
opportunity to shed light on the impact of secondary education on labor market outcomes during the
COVID-19 crisis.

Scholarships increased educational attainment. While 44% of non-winners were eventually able to
obtain a secondary education, winners were 27 percentage points (60%) more likely to do so, and they
received 1.25 more years of secondary education than non-winners on average. Given enrollment rates
absent scholarships, back of the envelope calculations suggest that if free secondary education were
to become universal, for every additional year of education induced by the subsidies, the government
would be paying for seven (i.e., 6 infra-marginal years for each extra year). 5

The increase in education translated into an increase in cognitive skills and knowledge. Five years into
the study, scholarship winners scored on average 0.16 standard deviations higher on a series of
practical math and reading comprehension questions modelled on the PISA. Winners were also more
knowledgeable about national and international politics and more likely to know and use modern
technologies. Winners were also more likely to have ever enrolled in tertiary education by 4.4
percentage points on a base of 15.4 percent in 2019 (+29%). These effects are concentrated among
women, implying that while the marginal boys induced to attend secondary school by the scholarship
were very unlikely to make it to tertiary education, marginal girls induced to attend secondary school
made it to tertiary education at almost the same rate as inframarginal girls who would have attended
secondary school without scholarships.


4 A complete senior high school education, currently three years, would cost about 70% of GDP per capita, when
additional clothing, exam and material fees are included.
5 The ratio becomes more favorable if the prospect of secondary education induces extra years of junior high school and

increases the secondary school entry exam pass rate.

                                                           2
Female winners also reduced their fertility. By age 22 (in 2013), women who had received a scholarship
were 7.0 percentage points less likely to have ever been pregnant ­ a 14.6% drop compared to the rate
in the comparison group (47.9%), an effect that persisted by age 28.

Scholarship winners obtained better jobs, but these private benefits seem to reflect in large part access
to rationed formal sector jobs. The clearest impact we see on the labor market is that the scholarship
increased the odds of females being public-sector employees (often teachers or nurses) by 4.1
percentage points (or 65%) in 2019. Wage premia and other perks for public sector jobs in Ghana are
high, like in many other low- and middle-income countries, particularly for those with tertiary
education, both in our data and in other work (Aryeetey and Baah-Boateng, 2016; Barton et al., 2017).

The earnings data is noisy and censored by the fact that some youths are still enrolled in tertiary as of
2019. Up to 2019, we did not observe any impact on average earnings. However, some marginal jobs
proved to be protective during the 2020 COVID-19 crisis: women in the treatment group earned 59%
more in April 2020 (when Ghana had shut down to avert the first wave) than women in the control
group. Treatment men, however, did not fare better than those in the control group during the
COVID-19 slowdown.

Even allowing for the difficult macroeconomic conditions that Ghana experienced around the time
our study sample graduated, it is clear there is a substantial gap between actual labor market impacts
and the stated expectations of students and their parents. At baseline in 2008, students and parents
correctly understood that the key labor market benefit of secondary education would be to open up
public sector positions that require tertiary education, but they dramatically overestimated the
probability of obtaining public sector positions. At baseline 70% of students thought they would be a
government employee or a teacher (a profession largely dominated by government employees) by the
age of 25 if they completed senior high school (Figure 1, Panel A). In reality, only 6% of those who
completed senior high school held these positions by the age of 26 (Figure 1, Panel B), and 8% by age
28. This misperception could potentially lead to distortions in the amount and type of education
individuals chose to pursue.

We interpret these results using a simple model in which households invest in education taking into
account the effect of education on non-labor market outcomes, labor market effects in the private
sector, and education-based rationing of public sector jobs that carry rents. Households have private
information on their child's ability to benefit from schooling but may have gender-specific preferences
and beliefs regarding their children and may be heterogeneous in the extent of these gender

                                                   3
differences. The model is consistent with our findings that 1.) marginal boys who attend secondary
school due to the scholarship are unlikely to make it to tertiary education or obtain a public sector job;
2.) marginal girls have very similar rates of obtaining tertiary education or obtaining public sector jobs
as inframarginal girls, and 3.) inframarginal girls are less likely to progress to tertiary education or
obtain public sector jobs than inframarginal boys. Despite scholarships lowering the threshold
perception of child ability above which each household invests in both boys' and girls' education,
the pattern of effects can arise through an aggregation effect if almost all household invest in education
of talented boys even without scholarships, but households are heterogeneous in beliefs and
preferences with regard to girls, with some valuing the non-labor market benefits of education for
girls and others only willing to invest in education for girls if they are both very talented and receive a
scholarship.

Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that secondary education affects labor market outcomes
mostly by helping people compete for jobs that yield rents. However, we cannot rule out that
education also generates substantial human capital returns in the private sector. This is because, as the
model highlights, the highest ability workers in the treatment group may sort into tertiary education
and public sector employment, and this selection makes it difficult to assess the treatment effect of
education on private sector wages for any given individual.

Our results contribute to a large literature on the impact of education in low- and middle-income
countries. There are surprisingly few well-identified studies on the impact of secondary education in
this context. We are aware of no randomized controlled trial (RCT) of the impact of post-elementary
education, and of only two studies based on regression discontinuities­-exploiting admission cutoffs
in test scores in Kenya (Ozier, 2018) and scholarship eligibility cutoffs based on a dropout-risk score
in Cambodia (Filmer and Schady, 2014). Our approach can be seen as identifying the impact of
relaxing financial constraints to obtaining education, while the regression discontinuity approach can
be seen as the impact of relaxing academic qualifications for secondary school, and of course the
relevant treatment effects may differ (Lang, 1993; Card, 1999). Our paper also contributes to the
literature on long term follow up of interventions (Gertler et al, 2014, Blattman et al, 2020, Evans and
Ngatia 2020, Banerjee et al., 2020, Hicks et al, 2020). We show that in this setting, allowing for long-
term follow up is essential to get a comprehensive picture of the impact of secondary school. We show
in appendix that a state-of-the-art, machine-learning based method to control for a rich array of
observables would not have recovered the estimates we find in the paper, suggesting that there is no
easy shortcut for the experiment.


                                                    4
2 Context

This section provides background on Ghana's education system and the labor market context
throughout our study period, ending with the COVID-19 crisis.

2.1      Ghana's Education System
Formal education in Ghana begins with two years of kindergarten, six years of primary school, and
three years of junior high school. Primary and junior high school are free and enrollment rates are
close to 95% in primary school and are around 75% in junior high. At the end of junior high school,
students take the Basic Education Certification Examination (BECE) and those with high enough
grades qualify for senior high school (SHS). Passing rates are low. Around 70% of junior high school
entrants go on to take the BECE and 60% of BECE takers pass. Ajayi et al. (2020) find that 30% of
those admitted do not enroll in senior high school the following year. In 2011, government-approved
tuition fees for day (non-boarding) students in senior high school were around 500 Ghana cedis per
year, a very large sum in a country where the per capita GDP that year was 2400 Ghana cedis. 8 As of
2010, girls were 6 percentage points (20%) less likely to ever reach senior high school than boys. Some
of those who do not enroll in senior high school enroll in Technical and Vocational Institutes (TVIs). 9

Students who complete senior high school and do well on the senior high school finishing exam (the
West African Senior School Certificate Examination or WASSCE) may be admitted to tertiary
programs, including degree programs at universities, less prestigious diploma programs, and
government training programs. There is a one-year gap between completion of senior high school and
admission into university or training colleges. Students who do not score well enough on the exam to
secure tertiary admission can retake the senior high school finishing exam any number of times.
Tertiary education is expensive. Two government training program, for nursing and teaching, have
historically been subsidized through government stipends, though this policy was put on hold in 2014­
initially precluding youth in our study sample from benefiting from the stipends. The policy was
reinstated (though with stipends cut in half) in 2017, allowing some of the students in our cohort to
enroll in tertiary education as late as 2017, 2018, 2019 or 2020. 10


8 See http://www.statsghana.gov.gh/docfiles/GDP/EconomicPerformance_2011.pdf
9 TVI students do not have to take any core academic classes and cannot go on to tertiary. TVIs are a relatively minor part
of Ghana's education system, with less than 10% the enrollment of senior high school. In 2008, there were 43,592 full-
time TVI students compared to the 486,085 senior high school students (MoE Ghana, 2008).
10 Between the 1980s and 2013, the government paid allowances large enough to cover all fees to all students enrolled in

nursing and teacher training programs, making them effectively fully subsidized for those admitted, and admissions in the
programs were capped via a quota system. Both the allowances and the quotas were removed in 2014, taking into effect

                                                            5
These two tertiary programs open the door for the most accessible public sector jobs for the
population in our sample. As in many low- and middle-income countries, Ghana has very high premia
for public sector positions, particularly those requiring tertiary education. Finan et al. (2015) find a
wage premium of at least 59% in Ghana, using the 2013 STEP Skills Measurement Survey. Note that
public sector jobs provide substantial benefits beyond higher wages because they provide a great deal
of job security and because they typically carry substantial benefits.

2.2      The Macroeconomic Context
The effects we measure should be interpreted as conditional on the macro-economic context
(Rosenzweig and Udry, 2020). Our study participants began senior high school in the 2008/2009
academic year at the earliest. Most participants who completed senior high school did so and entered
the labor market in July of 2012, and our last follow-up survey was administered in 2020. Ghana had
strong macro-economic performance through the first quarter of 2012, when GDP growth reached
an all-time high of 25.0%, but between 2012 and 2016, GDP growth fell each year, reaching a fifteen-
year low of 3.6% in 2016. It rebounded in Q2 of 2017 and was strong through 2019.

The government changed their secondary and tertiary education policy during our study period.
Starting with the school year 2009/2010, the government shortened the length of senior high school
from 4 years back to 3 years (what it was before 2007). Our study participants were thus the last cohort
(2008/2009) enrolled in the four-year program. As a result, most of our participants graduated in a
double cohort with the students who had enrolled a year later, potentially making it more difficult to
quickly enter tertiary education.

Government policies affecting the labor market for educated youth entering the labor market also
began to shift in 2012. In 2008, the government wage bill was 11.3% of GDP, which was the highest
of the 12 West African countries surveyed by the World Bank. The Ghanaian government enacted a
new salary scale for government employees in 2012, which raised the government wage bill by 38%
in one year (IMF, 2012). In 2015, the ballooning wage bill forced the Ghanaian government to accept
an IMF loan. As a condition of the loan, the government was required to impose a net hiring freeze
on government employment outside health and education departments. The net hiring freeze ran
through most of the period in which we collected data and ended in April 2019.



for the school year starting in September 2014. Our study cohort graduated from SHS in June 2012 and the earliest they
could have applied for tertiary was Fall 2012 for a September 2013 start--but given the quotas, having to wait at least two
years before getting admission was common, thereby the reform directly affected our study cohort. The government that
was elected in December of 2016 brought back the allowances and quota system in August 2017.

                                                            6
2.3      COVID-19 in Ghana
The government of Ghana adopted strict measures in response to COVID-19 on March 15, closing
schools, banning all social gatherings, and closing international borders. A 3-week lockdown restricted
the activities and movements of people in the urban areas of Greater Accra and Kumasi for most of
April 2020. Social distancing and regular disinfection protocols were put in place in markets. By end
of July, Ghana's Trades Union Congress (TUC) estimated that 100,000 jobs had been lost in the formal
sector and 400,000 in the informal sector. 11 Schools did not re-open until January 2021.


3 Data and Sample Characteristics

This section describes our sample, the experimental design and the data collection.

3.1 Sampling Frame

The sample frame was constructed as follows. First, 54 rural districts from five regions were included
in the study. 12 Across these 54 districts, we selected 177 publicly funded senior high schools (SHS)
accepting only day (i.e. non-boarding) students. 13 These represented about 60% of all SHS in the
selected districts as of 2008 (and about 25% of all SHS in the country). They are all co-ed, and typically
have over 1,500 students, with an average pupil-teacher ratio of 22. Within each selected SHS, all
students officially admitted into the senior high school as of October 2008 were considered for
eligibility.

Students needed to satisfy the following eligibility criteria: (1) To have successfully passed the BECE
exam and have been placed into one of the 177 study SHS by the Computerized School Selection and
Placement System (CSSPS) 14; (2) To have attended a junior high school in the same district (referred
to as "in-district students") as the SHS they were admitted to; (3) To have not yet enrolled in any SHS
(verified through school and home visits) by October 2008 (the school year had started in September).




11 https://www.theghanareport.com/covid-19-has-rendered-500000-people-jobless-in-ghana-tuc/.
12 At the time, there were only 10 regions in Ghana. The three Northern regions and the Volta region were not selected
because the Government of Ghana already ran a scholarship program in those regions at the time. Greater Accra was
excluded given our focus on poorer areas. We sampled districts from the remaining five regions.
13 We focused on day students for budget reasons and because as senior high school becomes more common, we expect
more students to be attending day schools.
14 The CSSPS is a centralized, merit-based admission system, which is based on the deferred-acceptance algorithm of Gayle

and Shapley (1962) (Ajayi, 2013).

                                                           7
We surveyed 2,246 students eligible for the study and asked them why they had not enrolled. 95%
cited financial difficulties as the main reason, 2% cited pregnancies and 3% cited a variety of other
reasons such as being injured, having a job or not liking the school they were placed in.

In early January 2009, we called back the 2,246 eligible students to assess whether they had enrolled
or intended to enroll in a senior high school for the second term of the 2008-2009 school year. A total
of 182 students who either had enrolled or intended to enroll in the immediate term were dropped
from the sample prior to randomization. The scholarship program was only announced to students,
headmasters, and surveyors later, so students could not have strategically changed their answer based
on the potential to receive scholarships. The final study sample is thus composed of 2,064 individuals
(1,028 males and 1,036 females). Among females, 746 had taken the junior high school finishing exam
in 2008 and 290 had taken it in 2007. 16

3.2 Scholarship Program
The scholarship program was implemented by Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) in Ghana, in
partnership with Senior High School staff, and the Ghana Education Services, the implementing arm
of Ghana's Ministry of Education.

The scholarship covered full tuition and fees for a day student for four years. It was paid directly to
the school and covered the entire school bill. A typical bill for a day student is comprised of three
items: government approved fees which are applied for all schools, PTA (Parents-Teachers
Association) dues, and other levies and supplies, including exam fees. The latter two costs are school-
specific. In addition to paying school fees, the scholarship also included payment for the secondary
school exit exam (WASSCE). Students who received the scholarship were only responsible for the
cost of school materials, transportation to school, and school meals. The total amount paid by the
scholarship program varied slightly across courses and schools but averaged approximately 1,921
Ghana cedis (in 2016 GHX terms) per student who completed senior high school. This corresponds
to around USD480.

Winners were notified by phone in January 2009 and encouraged to immediately report to their
"placement" SHS (the school where they had been placed into based on their performance on the
junior high school finishing exam). SHS Headmasters were informed of the names of scholarship


16 To ensure we had enough eligible girls in the sample, we had to include girls who had graduated from junior high school
in July 2007 and had gained admission into one of the 177 sampled senior high schools one year prior to the rest of the
sample but had still not enrolled as of October 2008.

                                                            8
winners by phone and received an official letter from the Director-General of the Ghana Education
Service and IPA with details on the scholarship scheme. All schools agreed to participate. Scholarship
students typically accounted for less than 1% of a cohort in the school.

Enrolling by the start of the second term did not make our scholarship winners particularly unusual,
as it is very common for schools to have students enroll late. Ajayi et al. (2020) show that only 44%
of students who eventually enroll do so by week 7 of the academic year. Students on the waitlist are
notified late in Term 1 if those initially admitted have not reported and can be replaced.


3.3     Data
We use three main data sources: a baseline survey, an extensive follow-up survey administered in
person after 5 years, and "callback" surveys (shorter phone surveys) administered almost yearly.


3.3.1 Baseline Survey
In November and December of 2008, prior to selecting the students for the scholarship, a baseline
survey was administered to the youth themselves as well as to one of their guardians, most commonly
the mother. The surveys included questions on perceptions of education, guardian literacy, values and
beliefs, as well as modules on members of the household, household living conditions, and assets.
After the survey, each student received a basic (non-smart) mobile phone with a sim card and assigned
phone number.

3.3.2   Randomization
The final study sample of 2,064 youths was stratified by district, senior high school, junior high school,
gender and BECE year. A third of students within each stratum (682 in total) were assigned to the
"treatment group" (a scholarship) while 1,382 students were assigned to the "comparison group" (no
scholarship).

3.3.3. Sample Maintenance and Attrition
To enable high follow-up rates, mobile phones were distributed at the onset of the study to every
youth, and study participants were sent mobile phone credit worth about USD1 twice a year, as an
incentive for them to keep the phone number we had on file active. Once a year, we attempted to
reach all respondents in order to update their contact information. If they could not be reached over
the phone, we attempted to find them in person by going to their home area. Table A1 presents survey
rates across years. In 2017, 9 years after the start of the study, we were able to reach and interview, in


                                                    9
phone or in person, 95.4% of our study sample in a few months. In 2019, 11 years after the baseline,
the tracking rate was 93.9%. This is remarkably low attrition for a longitudinal study of this kind,
particularly for a young-adult, mobile population. Other successful longitudinal studies in low- and
middle-income countries achieved 81% retention over three years (South Africa; Lam et al., 2011), or
95% (at the household-level) over five years (Indonesian Family Life Survey; Thomas et al., 2002).
Studies that deal with attrition by doing intensive tracking on a random subset of the "hard to find"
subsample and then reweigh have obtained 91% over seven years (Kenya; Duflo et al., 2015), 84%
over ten years (Kenya; Baird et al. 2017), and 84% over twenty years (Kenya, Hicks et al. 2020).

Attrition is not differential by treatment group until 2017. During the 2019 survey round, the refusal
rate increased from 1% to 2.5% in the control group, while it remained unchanged in the treatment
group. This generates a small discrepancy in survey rates across arms, driven by males: male
scholarship winners were 2.5 percentage points more likely to be surveyed than non-winners, on a
base of 93.1%. The non-winners who refuse the survey appear somewhat negatively selected, 17
suggesting that this differential attrition may if anything lead us to underestimate treatment effects for
males when we focus on the 2019 wave. Attrition in 2020 is somewhat larger because we could not
do in-person tracking due to COVID-19. We successfully surveyed 84% of respondents on the phone.
Attrition was 4.9 percentage points smaller in the treatment group than in the control group. Given
this, we focus on 2019 as our "main" results, but we note that the patterns of results are identical in
the 2020 data, with the exception of the earnings data we explicitly discuss.

3.3.4    Detailed In-Person Follow-up Survey (2013)
A detailed in-person follow-up survey was conducted from April to August 2013. For many study
participants, this follow-up survey fell in the gap year between the end of secondary high school in
July 2012 and potential enrollment in tertiary education in September 2013 (see footnote 10). The
survey included modules on schooling, occupation, cognitive skills, labor market expectations, health
and fertility, among other things. Most of these modules were fairly standard and adapted from well-
known surveys such as the Demographic and Health Surveys.

The cognitive skills module included reading comprehension questions, as well as applied math
questions (e.g. profit calculations, reading and interpreting a bar chart, etc.). There were 17 questions,
modeled on the OECD PISA (Program for International Student Assessment) exam, tailored to the


17
   Regressing the 2017 value for "total years of education" on "refused 2019 survey" yields a coefficient of -1.64 (p-
value=0.03). For "total earnings in the past 6 months" the coefficient is -662 GHX (p-value 0.15).

                                                         10
Ghana context by the research team with inputs from the Assessment Services Unit (ASU) of the
Ghana Ministry of Education.

3.3.5   Yearly Callback Surveys
Yearly mini-callbacks were conducted between 2008 and 2014 to update respondents' contact
information and basic outcomes (education status, fertility). Starting in 2015, the callbacks included a
30-minute survey on major life outcomes, specifically: tertiary education, fertility, partners, labor
market activity, as well as year-specific questions (e.g. in the 2017 callback we asked about voting
behavior in the presidential election of December 2016). The last callback was conducted between
June and September 2020. In addition to a (somewhat shortened) regular module on life outcomes,
we also included questions specifically related to COVID-19.

We have data on many outcomes and over multiple years, which raises the issue of multiple inference.
We deal with this by constructing summary indices and by presenting in appendix table A2 the
sharpened q-values controlling for the false discovery rate (the expected proportion of rejections that
are Type I errors) for p-values below the 0.1 threshold (Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli, 2006).

3.4     Characteristics of Study Sample
Table 1 presents key summary statistics on the study sample and baseline balance. Appendix Table A3
presents a few additional characteristics. This data comes from baseline surveys administered to the
respondents and their guardians in Fall 2008. As a test for balance, we show mean differences across
groups for a battery of outcomes. Specifically, we run regressions of the form:

                                  =  +   +                        (1)

where Y is the outcome of interest and T is whether or not the student won a scholarship. Since
randomization was at the individual level, we do not cluster standard errors. For each variable of
interest, we show  , the difference between the treatment and control group, and its standard error.
We also present the mean outcome in the control group. We show the means and estimate the
regressions in the full sample in panel A, and by gender in panels B and C. We show results with
region fixed effects and a control for junior high school finishing exam (BECE) score. The results do
not change when controlling for the stratification variables (district, senior high school of admission,
BECE year) and/or other important baseline characteristics.




                                                  11
Students were on average 17 years old at the onset of the study. Our study participants come from
poor households, which is unsurprising since they are drawn from the financially constrained. Over
40% of the students lived in households with no male head and 48% of household heads have only
primary education or less, compared to 24% and 35%, respectively, in Ghana as a whole. Additionally,
only 17% of household heads have reached at least senior high school, compared to 26% in Ghana as
a whole (figures for Ghana as a whole come from Ghana Statistical Services 2010).

Respondents had extremely optimistic beliefs about the returns to secondary education at baseline:
the average perceived percentage increase in earnings if one completes senior high school compared
to not completing senior high school was 276% in the control group (Table 1, column 7). These high
expected average returns are not driven by outliers: 46% thought the returns would be at least 100%.

Panel A of Figure 1 shows that respondents saw a secondary school degree as the gateway to a
government job. Over 70% thought they would be a government employee or in a profession
dominated by government employees by the age of 25 if they completed senior high school (81% of
females and 65% of males). In particular, respondents often thought they would be a teacher or a
nurse, which may be because rural youth interact more with teachers or nurses than with people in
other professions requiring secondary or tertiary education.



4     Impacts on Educational Attainment

Considerable evidence suggests that participation in primary school is responsive to school fees, but
less is known about how secondary school participation respond to direct costs. 19 This section presents
effects of the scholarship on educational attainment and skills. We also provide a back of the envelope
estimate of the fiscal costs of a free secondary education policy.

4.1       Secondary Education
We estimate the impact of the scholarship on educational attainment using regressions similar to
equation (1). In the specifications reported in the text, we include regional fixed effects, and control


19There is however a large literature on conditional cash transfer, which speaks to how secondary education participation
responds to indirect costs and incentives. Barrera-Osorio et al. (2007) find that fee reductions increased primary enrollment
but find no effect on secondary enrollment. Angrist et al. (2006) find that vouchers for private secondary school increased
completion rates. Barrera-Osorio et al. (2011) find effects of CCTs on secondary enrollment. Khandker et al (2013) find
that a stipend for secondary education increased enrollment among girls but had no effect among boys. Blimpo et al.
(2019) find that secondary school fees elimination increased girls' enrollment by 55%.


                                                            12
for the BECE exam score, though all our results are robust to the inclusion of additional baseline
controls. The main results are presented in Figure 2 and Table 2. Additional education outcomes are
shown in Table A4.

Seventy-five percent of scholarship winners enrolled in senior high school immediately upon learning
about the scholarship, almost four times the enrollment rate in the comparison group (Figure 2). By
2019, 70.8% of the scholarship winners had completed SHS, compared to 43.6% of the non-winners
(Table 2). Thus, while many of those in the control group were eventually able to enroll, scholarships
generated a large gap in educational attainment between winners and non-winners.

While the scholarship increased attendance in SHS, it led to a small reduction in attendance in technical
and vocational institutes (TVI). In the comparison group, 2.9% completed TVI as of the 2019 survey
while in the treatment group, only 0.9% had done so.

The scholarship increased the SHS completion rate (the fraction of the entire group ­ including those
that do not enroll ­ who graduate from SHS) from 38.9% to 64.7% among women (a 66% increase)
and from 48.5% to 76.6% among men (a 58% increase). 20 Figure 3 shows that the effect of
scholarships on SHS completion is large and statistically significant at the 1% level at all quartiles of
the initial test score distribution. The graduation rate (the fraction of those ever enrolled who graduate
from SHS) is extremely high: 98% of scholarship recipients who enroll graduate, compared to 95% of
those in the comparison group, with no meaningful difference by gender. 21

Overall, as of 2019 the scholarship had led to a 1.24 years increase in total years of education on
average (Table 2). Quantitatively, for most of the sample, the change is overwhelmingly due to years
spent in secondary school. In fact, the scholarship led to a 1.25 years increase in years spent in SHS,
which is larger than the increase in total years of education due the substitution away from TVI.

4.2 Tertiary Education

As of 2019, 15.4% of the comparison group had ever enrolled in tertiary education (5.8% at university,
4.0% at teacher training colleges, 2.4% at nursing colleges, and the rest at other professional schools).
The treatment effect of the scholarship was an increase of 4.4 percentage points (29%) (Table 2), seen

20 The lower absolute level of completion rate among women is primarily driven by the fact that about 28% of the women
in the sample had completed junior high school one year prior to the scholarship program (the BECE '07 girls). Among
those, take-up of the scholarship was significantly lower, at 56%, compared to 72% among women who had graduated in
2008 and 79% among men who had graduate in 2008.
21 For this calculation, we use information on whether students had ever enrolled in SHS as of 2019, shown in Table A4.



                                                         13
across all types of tertiary programs. As of 2019, the treatment group was 3.5 percentage points (40%)
more likely to have completed tertiary.

The average tertiary enrollment results conceal important heterogeneity by gender. Treatment effects
on tertiary education are concentrated among women. In 2019, female scholarship winners are 7.7
percentage points more likely to have ever enrolled in a tertiary institution on a base of 12.6%, and
4.0 percentage points more likely to have completed tertiary on a base of 7.8%, while the effects on
males are small and insignificant. The same pattern is present in 2020 (see column 8 of Table 2 and
column 6 of Table A4). The effects could be interpreted as indicating that boys who were likely to be
able to eventually enroll in tertiary school were already likely to attend secondary school without the
scholarship but that many girls who would have made it to tertiary education were only able to attend
secondary school due to the scholarship. Note that the effect on women is large enough that provision
of free secondary education led to equalization of the rates of tertiary attendance by gender within our
full sample.

While we see significant impacts of the secondary school scholarship on tertiary enrollment and effects
are substantial relative to the low base rates, they are small in absolute terms, especially in comparison
to expectations. As of 2017, almost 50% of the control group and 65% of the treatment group were
planning to apply to go to tertiary, many through the "mature applicant" university admission system,
reserved for students above 25 (Table A5). Two years later (2019), only 2% (3.2% in treatment group)
had done so. Plans were still alive and well, however, with 37% of the control group and 52% of the
treatment group still planning to apply to tertiary as of 2019 (Table A5). We see a small increase
between 2019 and 2020 in having ever enrolled in tertiary, suggesting that there will likely be a trickle
of new tertiary enrollees in the sample over a few more years.

The results so far suggest that marginal boys (those induced to complete senior high school by the
scholarship) struggle to move from senior high school completion to tertiary enrollment relative to
infra-marginal boys (those who could finish senior high school without a scholarship). Assuming that
the treatment effect on tertiary enrollment is due to marginal students, only 4% (0.010/0.281) of boys
induced to complete secondary school by the scholarship went on to tertiary education compared to
38% (0.184/0.485) of inframarginal boys. This is not because marginal boys are drawn from a lower
part of the initial score distribution (compliers have similar BECE scores than always takers--see
Appendix B for more details).




                                                   14
Marginal girls, however, are as likely to move on to tertiary as inframarginal girls. Of the girls induced
to complete SHS by the scholarship, 30% (0.077/0.258) went on to tertiary education. For
inframarginal girls, the fraction of SHS graduates who eventually enroll in tertiary is 32%
(0.126/0.389), somewhat lower than for inframarginal boys.

In Section 7, we present a model that is consistent with the findings that inframarginal boys are
somewhat more likely to progress to tertiary than inframarginal girls, that marginal boys are unlikely
to make it to tertiary education, and that marginal girls perform much better than marginal boys and
almost as well as inframarginal girls.

Column 7 of Table 2 shows current enrollment status as of 2019. Remarkably, scholarship winners
were still more likely to be enrolled in formal study ­ this is driven entirely by females, who are 2.9
percentage points more likely to still be studying, on a base of 3.5%, a very large proportional gap.
Even in 2020, scholarship winners were still 1.9 percentage point (43%) more likely to be enrolled in
a tertiary program than the control group (although only marginally significant at the 10% level) and
this time we see similar point estimates for male and women (Table A4 column 5). This has
implications for the estimates of labor market impacts, something we discuss in detail in Section 7.

4.2      Estimating the Fiscal Cost of Free Secondary Education
Using the responsiveness of secondary school participation to school fees we can estimate the fiscal
cost per additional year of enrollment from making secondary education free. Given the findings
above, and the distribution of junior high school exit exam scores, we estimate that in the absence of
incentive effects on primary school students, making secondary education free could require paying
for seven years of secondary school for every additional year of education generated by marginal
students. To see the logic, note that on average, scholarship winners spent 3.08 years in senior high
school, while non-scholarship winners spent 1.83 years in senior high school, a difference of 1.25
years. Therefore, within our sample, the scholarship paid for 3.08 years of education for each 1.25
additional years of education. With a few assumptions, we can estimate the effect of a nation-wide
free senior high school policy using these results. We assume that 60% of qualified students enroll in
senior high school by the beginning of Term 2, 23 and assume that they would graduate under the
policies prevailing at the time of the study, without free secondary education. We assume that the 40%


23Ajayi et al. (2020) find that 44% enroll in the first 6 weeks, and our own sampling data show that 8% (182/2246) of
those who have not enrolled in the first 6 weeks enroll by the beginning of Term 2. This yields 0.44+0.66*0.08=48%
enrollment rate by the beginning of Term 2. Ajayi et al. (2020) find that 70% have enrolled by the end of Term 2. To be
conservative, we use 60%, roughly the midpoint between these two estimates.

                                                          15
of qualified students who do not enroll by the beginning of Term 2 behave like our sample (i.e. they
obtain on average 1.84 years of secondary education without financial help and 3.09 years when it is
free). With these assumptions, universal free SHS education would require paying for 0.6 × 4 years +
0.4 × 3.09 years = 3.6 years/student, using the old standard of 4 years, but this would generate only
0.4 × (3.08 years - 1.83 years) = 0.5 years/student. Therefore, a free senior high school policy
would pay for 3.6 years of education for each additional 0.5 year of schooling attained and the fiscal
cost per additional secondary school graduate would be approximately $3,680. 24

Note, however, that the promise of free secondary school for students who pass the junior high school
finishing exam may also incentivize more financially constrained students to study harder in earlier
stages of education, allowing more of them to pass the exam and qualify for senior high school (for
some evidence of such incentive effects, see Kremer et al. (2009) at the upper primary level in Kenya,
and Lajaaj et al. (2018) at the tertiary level in Colombia.) In Ghana this is likely an important margin,
since as of 2014 only about 40% of those who start junior high school pass the finishing exam. 25

Targeting scholarships to students with characteristics that predict lower senior high school
enrollment conditional on qualifying based on merit (such as students with lower incomes and female
students) could increase the ratio of marginal to infra-marginal expenditure and reduce any regressive
effects of scholarships for senior high school.



5.     Knowledge, Skills, Fertility, Marriage, and Health

Some have expressed concern about whether increases in access to education will lead to increases in
learning, given the quality of schools (Pritchett, 2001). Knowledge and education are correlated in
non-experimental data, but this may reflect the correlation between existing skills and enrollment. In
this section, we document significant improvement in cognitive skills.

5.1 Learning Outcomes




24 Current estimated cost of a 3-year scholarship ($400) divided by expected additional graduates from one scholarship
(which is the estimated treatment effect of a 27.2% increase in graduates multiplied by 40% of qualified students who do
not enroll on their own by the beginning of Term 2).
25 If one assumes that the promise of free secondary education would lead one quarter of students who currently do not

pass the primary school leaving exam to pass, the ratio of years of education paid for to marginal years of education
would fall from 7.2 to 4.9, and the fiscal cost per extra graduate falls to $2,609.

                                                          16
Impacts on cognitive skills and knowledge are presented in Table 3. These results are based on oral
tests administered as part of the 2013 in-person survey. Thus, these tests provide the effect after most
study participants had completed or stopped going to senior high school but before participants had
a chance to enroll in tertiary education.

In the full sample, scholarship winners score 0.157 standard deviations higher (we see gains both in
math and in reading, see Table A6). The point estimates vary little with how selective the school is
and effects are significant at the 5% level for the second and fourth quartiles of the initial test score
distribution (Figure A1). The point estimates are larger for females (0.194) than for males (0.113),
although the difference is not statistically significant. Note that there are very large differences in
scores by gender in the control group, with men (who have 0.5 more year of education on average)
vastly outperforming women. Thus, despite very large gains, female scholarship winners are barely on
par with male non-winners and far behind male winners in learning outcomes. 26

5.2 Connectedness and Technology Adoption

Besides impacts on cognitive skills, in 2013 scholarship winners scored higher on a series of questions
related to current political affairs. They were also more likely to report engaging with the media, and
more likely to know how to use the internet (the second significant only at the 10% level, see Table
3). These gains persisted: in 2016, they scored higher on an ICT/Social media adoption index
(marginally significant at the 10% level, see description of indices in Table 3 notes). Regular internet
usage remains higher for the treatment group in 2019, particularly among women.

Turning to other technologies, we find that the scholarship accelerates adoption of bank accounts
among women ­ here again, helping reduce the gender gap. However, we do not see any significant
effects on adoption on fertilizer use for the small fraction involved in farming.

5.3. Civic Participation
Experimental evidence of the impact of education on civic participation at the micro-level is rare. Our
data collection period spanned two presidential elections (2012 and 2016), and two district assembly
elections, for which our sample was old enough to vote. We present results on voting behavior in


26 We show in appendix some evidence that the test scores gains are not due to students in treatment group working
harder on the tests than those in the control group. We find no difference on IQ, as measured by Raven's matrices and
digit span (which should not depend on education but do depend on concentration and effort) (Table A6). And while the
enumerator rated the winners as 5pp more likely to have exercised full effort (Figure A2), the difference is too small to
account for the whole difference in test scores, given the correlation between effort and test score.

                                                          17
Table 4. We find no effect of the scholarship on voting propensity, whether in presidential elections,
where the turnout is very high overall, or in district assembly elections, where the turnout is much
lower. This is in direct contrast with the findings in Sondheimer and Green (2010), who exploit three
small-scale randomized education programs in the United States to study long-run impacts on voting
behavior and found large positive impacts from education on voting. However, previous studies have
found evidence that such influence of education level on political participation is not as clear in low
income countries, which is consistent with our findings (see Friedman et al., 2016; Blaydes, 2006,
Campante and Chor, 2012).

5.4    Fertility, Partners and Health Behavior

Table 5 presents results on fertility and marriage and show consistent patterns over a wide range of
outcomes, especially for women.

Scholarships greatly reduce pregnancies and unwanted pregnancies for women. By 2013, women in
the scholarship arm were 7.0 percentage points less likely to have ever been pregnant (on a base of
47.9% in the control group). Because the great majority of first pregnancies are reported to be
unwanted, the fertility decline is almost exclusively a decline in unplanned, out-of-wedlock
pregnancies. As shown in Figure 4, the fertility effect is sustained until our most recent survey. These
results are consistent with those of a randomized experiment that reduced the cost of access to upper
primary school in Kenya and found that the onset of childbearing was also delayed, with no-catch up
in the three years following school exit (Duflo et al., 2015). T

The finding that the gap in childbearing between treatment and comparison groups persists once the
majority of scholarship winners are out of school suggests that the mechanism is not an "incarceration
effect", preventing fertility for a few years while in school (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2008). We
have collected data that sheds light on the importance to our respondents of the mechanisms most
discussed in the literature, namely (1) increase in the opportunity cost of bearing and raising children
(Becker, 1991); (2) the ability to make better choices thanks to better decoding of information
(Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1989); (3) changes in desired fertility; and (4) changes in the type or
preferences of the partner.

Consistent with channel (1), we show below that female winners are more likely to have contract
employment than female non-winners, which presumably increases the opportunity cost of a child.
Consistent with channel (2), we find large increases in learning for both men and women (Table 3 and


                                                   18
A6), and an increase in the adoption of preventive health behavior (Table A7, column 2). There is no
evidence for channel (3) in our sample (Table A7, column 1). Finally, we find significant effects on
partners (Table 5). First, fertility changes coincide with changes in co-habiting behavior, starting with
a delay in cohabitation. By 2016 (age 25 on average), treatment women were 12.1 percentage points
(24% of the control mean) less likely to report having ever lived with a partner. As of 2019, they are
6.2 percentage points (p-value 0.067) less likely to be married or cohabiting (compared to a base of
47.5% in the control group).

The effect on the education of partners is somewhat complicated to interpret since there are
differential match rates across treatment and control groups, but it is striking that the effect seems to
be of the opposite sign for females and males (although the effect is only significant at the 10% level
for females). Female scholarship winners are significantly more likely to have partners with tertiary
education (+7.1pp on a basis of 19.5%), while the opposite holds for men: while only 7.2% have a
partner who has tertiary education in the control group, this reduces further by a significant 5.1pp in
the treatment group.

Besides this impact on partner characteristics, we see few changes in fertility and marriage behavior
for men, although it is worth noting that men marry later and that parenthood is likely measured with
much more error for them: since many pregnancies are out of wedlock and not all of them lead to
shotgun marriages, it is possible that male respondents under-report births they may have been
responsible for. One clear impact on male scholarship winners is that they are more likely to still be
living with their parents (+ 7.8 percentage points, or 30% of the control mean, in 2019), which may
be related to their labor supply decisions.

Column 8 of Table 5 shows results on child mortality. We are somewhat under-powered for this
outcome and the effects are not significant, but point estimates suggest a fairly large decrease in child
mortality among female scholarship winners. These results are consistent with the finding, shown in
Table A7, that winning a scholarship leads to reports of safer health choices. In 2013, scholarship
winners reported adopting more preventative health behaviors (0.105 increase on an index covering
three categories: handwashing with soap, anti-malarial bed net use, and mosquito repellent use). They
also report less risky sexual behavior (-0.047 SD on an index of 12 questions).

In the 2020 callback, however, we see no difference between winners and losers in knowledge of
COVID-19 or in the adoption of social distancing practices (columns 5 and 6 of Table A7). This is
possibly because awareness was very high for everyone, given the salience of COVID-19.

                                                   19
6.      Labor Market

This section discusses labor market impacts, focusing on our last two rounds of data (2019 and 2020),
The 2017 results are reported in Table A8. The long-run follow up is critical to capture the effects on
public sector employment, which requires tertiary education and often a waiting period. 29 Indeed,
throughout most of our labor market survey period (2015-2020) there is entry to and exit from tertiary
education (as discussed in section 4). Both are significantly more likely in the treatment group, so
selection into the labor market is differential across arms, and across years within arms. Year 2019 is
our last "normal" year. The year 2020 allows us to shed light on the impact of secondary education
on resilience during the pandemic.

6.1.     2019 results

Impacts on labor outcomes as of 2019 are presented in Table 6. We see no impact on labor force
participation (having worked for pay in the past 6 months), but the type of employment differs
between treatment and control groups. Scholarship winners are 3.9 percentage points more likely to
be a salaried employee with a contract (p-value 0.008), a relatively rare outcome overall (8.4% in the
control group). Relatedly, scholarship winners are 3 percentage points more likely to have jobs with
benefits (p-value 0.052). Self-employment is lower among scholarship winners, but not significantly.

Winning a scholarship substantially increases the chance a woman eventually obtains a public sector
job, but consistent with the tertiary education results, it does not do so for men. Looking at the control
group, 6.3/38.9 or 16 percent of inframarginal women obtain public sector jobs. Female scholarship
winners were 4.1 percentage points more likely to be public sector employees. This implies that 16%
(4.1/25.8) of marginal women ended up getting a public sector job, the same figure as among
inframarginal women. 19% (9.2/48.5) of inframarginal men obtain public sector jobs. There is no
significant effect of the scholarship on men obtaining public sector jobs, which means that we cannot
reject the hypothesis that none of the marginal men obtained a public sector job.

The estimate of the total impact on earnings is 37 shilling (3% of the control group mean), a very
imprecise estimate (95% CI [-10%,+15% of the control group mean], p-value 0.65). We cannot reject
that returns are either zero or high compared to standard estimates of Mincerian returns. For example,


29All graduates of Ghanaian tertiary institutions are required to serve one year in the National Service. In the National
Service, the graduate will work (usually for the government, but occasionally for a private company) for a year and
receive a monthly stipend from the government. See https://nss.gov.gh/nss-faqs

                                                            20
Duflo (2001) reports returns to education ranging from 6.8% to 10.6%. There are several reason for
this imprecision. A quarter of our sample is self-employed and hence their income is subject to
stochastic shocks and seasonal fluctuation. Moreover, self-employment income is particularly subject
to measurement error (de Mel et al., 2009). Finally, income is highly skewed.

In addition, estimated short-run returns may underestimate long-run returns for two reasons. First,
differences in educational enrollment between winners and losers may bias estimates. Section 7 derives
bounds based on our model. Second, if education and experience are complementary (e.g. Yamauchi,
2004), effects on lifetime income will exceed short-run effects. W

Public sector wageworkers in our sample earn 3,335 GHX in 6 months on average, which is above
the 85th percentile of the sample's earnings distribution. However, a quantile regression (not shown)
cannot reject the hypothesis of no effect of the scholarship, even on the 90th percentile of earnings.
This is because the wages of the public sector wageworkers are offset by the control group having
more self-employed in the higher deciles of earnings. This is consistent with the model we outline
below, in which the scholarship increases the chance recipients obtain government jobs which provide
security and allow lower effort but may well offer lower earnings in a particular period than self-
employment.

One factor that may limit the impact of jobs on earnings is that scholarship winners do not appear to
be willing or able to move for jobs: the probability of having migrated and settled to an urban area is
the same among the two groups, and modest, at 12%.

6.2.    2020 results: COVID

Table 7 presents labor market results from the 2020 survey round. We control for the specific time at
which the survey was done for this analysis, since the survey was spread over three months and the
COVID-19 situation was evolving rapidly, with restrictions easing over time. While self-employment
increased by 10 percentage points in the control group between 2019 and 2020, both female and male
scholarship winners saw a smaller increase, and as a result scholarship winners are 6.6 percentage
points (-19%) less likely to be self-employed in 2020 (p-value 0.004). Besides this, the treatment effects
for men and women scholarship winners seem to have taken very different turns during these times.

Among men, we do not see significant differences between scholarship winners and losers in the
probability of having a job with benefits or with a contract, and total earnings in the first half of 2020
are in fact smaller (though not significantly) for scholarship winners.

                                                   21
In contrast, among women, scholarship winners do much better than scholarship losers during the
pandemic. For the first time, we detect large and marginally significant differences in earnings, with
women in the treatment group reporting 26% higher earnings (p-value 0.079) over the past 6 months
(recall that the 2020 survey was done between June and September 2020 so the earnings data cover
approximately the first half of 2020). Looking at data month by month, we see a particularly large gap
in earnings in April, the month most affected by the introduction of severe COVID-19 related
restrictions. 30 Female scholarship winners also benefit from more stable earnings, with a lower
coefficient of variation in monthly earnings (p-value 0.092).

6.3.     Aspirations or Frustration?

While substantial in percentage terms, the increase in tertiary education and in obtaining public sector
jobs was much lower than parents or children anticipated at baseline­in fact, we cannot reject that it
was null for males. Returns to education in this context fall far short of perceived returns to education,
as shown in section 3.4. This suggests that the finding in Jensen (2010) that eighth-grade boys in the
Dominican Republic underestimate the returns to secondary school is not general (see also Kaufmann
2014, Benhassine et al. 2015, and Nguyen 2008).

Given that, the question is whether the program generated disappointment and frustration in the years
that followed secondary school graduation, especially for males. This does not appear to be true on
average, although the evidence does not point towards a large positive effect of education on mental
health and well-being either: a satisfaction index (covering life satisfaction, financial satisfaction and a
comparison of their life to others) shows a small insignificant negative treatment effect, as does a
mental health index (Table A10). A striking result is that, in 2017, among those who have a job,
scholarship winners are much less satisfied with it (a decline of -0.196 on a scale that ranges from 1 to
5, p. value 0.02), but also more confident they can get a better one (an increase of 0.071 on an index
that ranges from 1 to 5, p. value 0.018). By 2019, satisfaction with one's job remains lower in the
treatment group, and scholarship winners are significantly more likely to be actively looking for a job,
whether or not they are currently employed, suggesting that they maintain higher aspirations (Table
A10). Thus, overall, access to free senior high school does not appear to be associated either with deep
frustration or significantly happier lives. Although few graduates have found the jobs that meet their
high expectations for education at baseline, their hopes appear to still be alive.


30 There is a 35% increase in March and a 59% increase in earnings in April (with a p-value of 0.006). By May, the
employment and earnings of the control women have recovered and the treatment effects are smaller.

                                                          22
      7. Model

This section presents a simple model of human capital in a context in which households choose
investment in education taking into account the effects of education on non-labor market outcomes,
the private-labor market, and the chance of obtaining a public sector job commanding rents that is
rationed by education. We use the model to show that heterogeneity among households in gender-
specific preferences and beliefs can help explain why marginal girls induced to attend senior high
school by scholarships perform well relative to both inframarginal girls and marginal boys in advancing
to tertiary education and obtaining public sector jobs while inframarginal boys are more likely to obtain
tertiary education and public sector jobs than inframarginal girls. We also use the model to construct
bounds on the effect of education on earnings and to argue that private utility returns to education
likely exceed gains due to increased average earnings. The model suggests that while much of the
private labor market return to receiving a scholarship may come in the form of increased access to
public sector jobs and thus be at the expense of those who might otherwise have obtained those
positions, we cannot rule out the possibility that the scholarship program had social benefits exceeding
its costs.

Subsection 7.1 lays out assumptions on the human capital production process and the labor market.
Subsection 7.2 characterizes household decisions on educational investment with and without an
education subsidy. Subsection 7.3 investigates the labor market and economic implications of the
subsidy and establishes bounds on the rate of return to senior high school.

7.1      Assumptions
Timing: At t=0, parents choose whether to enroll their offspring in secondary education. At t=1,
offspring are either in secondary education or the labor market. Those who do well enough on their
exams at the end of secondary school go on to tertiary education at t=2, while others enter the labor
market. By t=3, all offspring are in the labor market. Offspring's consumption takes place only when
they join the labor market (at t=2 or t=3). Households cannot save or borrow.

Endowments: At t=0 parents have already worked and have wealth drawn from a distribution (. )
with lower support greater than  (defined below). Offspring have initial ability drawn from a
continuous distribution  (. ) with support [ , ]. (Note that by initial ability we mean anything
correlated with the child-specific impact of education that is at least partially observable by parents ­
we are thinking of something broader than just test scores going in to SHS.) Wealth and initial ability
are assumed to be independent.

                                                   23
Human capital production: Households, indexed by  , each have one child. Offspring's skill
depends on initial ability  , the highest level of education completed  , and a random noise term  :
                         
 = ( ,  ) +  .           
                           ,   > 0 and initial ability and education are complements in the human
                                  2 
capital production function, i.e.  > 0 (see Heckman and Mosso, 2014; Abbott et al., 2019). The

highest level of education can be primary ( = 1), secondary ( = 2) or tertiary ( = 3).
Performance on the admissions test for tertiary education is increasing in initial ability, but subject to
a stochastic element. All offspring who complete secondary education and qualify for tertiary
automatically go on to tertiary education.  , the error term in human capital production is mean zero,
independently and identically drawn from a continuous distribution  (. ) with lower support of  >
                 
   - (1, ) -  . (Notation in this expression is defined below).
                  



Parent perception of offspring ability: Parents do not observe the actual ability of their offspring,
 , they only observe perceived ability,  , which is a continuous and strictly increasing function of
actual ability,  =  ( ) that may vary across households.

Education cost: Denote the cost of secondary education as  . Since the treatment group ( = 1)
receives a scholarship its cost,  , is less than that of the control group ( = 0),  . (We assume that
the subsidy is provided only to a small portion of the cohort so examine only partial equilibrium
effects).

Production function: Once skill is realized, offspring enter a labor market with three different
production technologies: self-employment, working for others in private firms, and the public sector.
For self-employment, the production of a single worker is  =   +  + , where  represents
worker's skill,  effort, and  is an idiosyncratic mean-zero time-varying shock term with lower support
. In the private wage-sector, production is  =   +  ­  +  , where  represents a fixed cost

of working in the private sector and  >  . Finally, in the public sector, production is  =   +

 ­  +  , where  represents a fixed cost of working in the public sector. We assume that
                 
(3, ) +  >            , which ensures that all tertiary graduates are more productive in the competitive
                 - 

private sector than in the self-employment sector.

Labor market institutions: Self-employment and the private sector are perfectly competitive. Self-
employed workers receive their output and bear risk, while firms in the private sector can perfectly

                                                   24
monitor workers, so pay a fixed wage (according to skill level) and insure workers. In the public sector,
jobs pay rents and positions are rationed by tertiary education (this sector could also be thought of
more broadly as a sector that pays a premium over the market wage, where jobs are rationed by
education level). We will treat public sector jobs as allocated by a lottery among all those eligible who
seek to work in this sector. We focus on the problem facing individual households, and since the
scholarship program is small, we will assume that households can treat the probability of obtaining a
public sector job as exogenous given their education and skill level.

Wages in the public sector are institutionally fixed at  =   +  ­  where   1/2. Public
sector workers thus face no effort incentives and bear no risk.

Utility function: Building on Becker et al. (2018) and Ferreira et al. (2009), we assume parents
maximize expected utility:

                                       1   2                                     1
                                     =   +  +   [ ] -                              2 ,
                                                                                 2 


      1                                                       2
where  0 denotes household  's consumption of good 1 at  = 0, 0 denotes the consumption of

good 2,  denotes effort, and  denotes the offspring's welfare after they join the labor market. The
parameter 0    1 represents the household and offspring-gender specific weight parents put on
their offspring's welfare. 31 Gender is indexed by the subscript g, where  =  denotes a female and
 =  denotes a male. Parents do not face a choice of effort, we use  = 0 for simplicity. Moreover,
we assume the price of good 1 and that of good 2 are exogenously given, both being 1. The utility of
the offspring follows a similar quasilinear form:

                                          1   2                     1 2
                                        =   +   -                    
                                                                    2 
                                                                          +   ,

where the last term corresponds to the utility term derived by the offspring from non-labor market
impacts of education.  is the highest level of education completed as defined previously and the
coefficient  is gender-specific and we assume that  >  (this is consistent with our empirical
results that scholarships reduced unwanted pregnancies and led to higher quality partners for women
but had smaller effects for men)



31
  We take the possibility of gender differences in parental preference as exogenous for simplicity, but it could also
endogenously arise from differences in parents' ability to recoup investments in children's education or gender.

                                                            25
7.2      Household choice of effort, sector, and human capital

Given the education choices of all other households, and hence the chance of obtaining a public sector
job conditional on obtaining tertiary education, it is possible to solve the optimization problem of
individual households backwards, first solving for effort choice within each sector, then choice of
sector given skill, and finally parental education choice as a function of wealth, offspring gender,
perceived ability, and scholarship receipt. All proofs are presented in Online Appendix A.

Proposition 1: (i) Public sector workers will choose   = 0 while self-employed workers and workers in the
                                                                                
competitive private sector will choose   = 1. (ii) Workers with skill s>              and no tertiary education will prefer
                                                                                - 

                                                                     
to work in the competitive private sector, while workers with s>           and tertiary education will apply for jobs in the
                                                                    - 

public sector, as illustrated in Figure 5A.

Characterizing education choices:

Define the decision variable  as equal to 1 if offspring are enrolled in secondary and 0 otherwise.
Note that  , parents' perception of the gain in utility to the offspring from enrolling in secondary
education, is increasing in offspring's initial ability. The model implies that households have stronger
reasons to invest in secondary education the higher their estimate of their offspring's ability.

Proposition 2: (i) Given the education choices of other households, for each household, there exists a gender-specific
threshold of offspring's perceived ability,  , above which  = 1 and below which  = 0. (ii)  decreases with the
cost of education, all else equal, and thus subsidies weakly increase the share of offspring obtaining education.

Probabilities of tertiary education and public sector employment among marginal and
inframarginal students, by gender:

While at the individual household level education subsidies induce offspring with lower initial ability
to enroll in secondary school within each gender, heterogeneity across households could lead to
aggregation effects that may make marginal girls, those that only get access to secondary education
because of the scholarship, equal or higher ability than inframarginal girls. To see the intuition, recall
that households may have gender-specific preferences and beliefs regarding education. Suppose that
on one end of the distribution some households value the non-labor market benefits of education for
girls, but that other households are so strongly biased against girls that in the absence of a scholarship
they do not send any girls to SHS and that with a scholarship, they only send girls with very high initial


                                                            26
ability. If this latter group of households is large enough, then average initial ability among girls could
rise in response to the scholarship. At the same time, if enough households have relatively similar
preferences and beliefs across genders and value the non-labor market benefits of education for girls,
inframarginal girls may be less likely to go on to tertiary education or obtain public sector jobs than
inframarginal boys.

Proposition 3: If households are identical in all aspects but offspring's ability, then marginal children getting education
in response to a subsidy will have lower ability than inframarginal ones. However, if there is heterogeneity across
households in (i) income, (ii) altruism levels, or (iii) in the difference between perceived and actual ability, then marginal
children can have higher ability than the inframarginal ones.

Our empirical evidence suggests that a key form of heterogeneity is gender-specific. From a policy
perspective, the results suggest that while the scholarship does not necessarily primarily help high-
ability boys from credit-constrained families access secondary education, it does seem to improve
access for high initial ability girls from families with lower altruism or more negative beliefs about
girls.

7.3      Labor market impacts of the scholarships

Proposition 4: While receiving a scholarship weakly increase the recipient's welfare, households with scholarships may
have greater, lesser, or equal average earnings in the wage-employment sector, as well as in the full population.

Scholarships may create a selection effect that reduces wage earnings in the private sector by causing
low-skill workers to move to wage work from self-employment and high-skill workers to move from
the private sector to the public sector. Movements into the public sector increase individual welfare
but may reduce earnings since moving to the public sector leads individuals to reduce effort. This is
illustrated in Figure 5 Panel B for 0.5 <  < 1. In this case, while expected utility is always greater in
the public sector (as shown in Figure 5 Panel A), wages are always greater in the private sector.

Timing and wage gains versus welfare gains:

Proposition 5. (i) The treatment effect on earnings in t=2 will be less than that in t=3. (ii) The treatment effect on
earnings in t=3 will underestimate the treatment effect on welfare. (iii) Combining (i) and (ii), the treatment effect on
earnings in t=2 will constitute a lower bound for the treatment effect on welfare in t=3.

Although this is not captured by our model, which treats households as risk-neutral over the relevant
range of income levels, workers might also prefer public sector jobs over private sector jobs with

                                                             27
greater mean earnings because public sector jobs offer much more secure income. Recall that females
who won scholarships had higher earnings during the pandemic, largely because more held public
sector jobs. 32

Bounds on rate of return to education:

Students in the treatment group were more likely to still be enrolled in tertiary education in 2019 and
2020 (Table A4). Under the model, we can construct bounds for the impact of senior high school on
earnings in this situation. Table A9 presents our estimates for women. The lower bounds are simply
the estimates of Table 5. The upper bounds assume, as per the model, that the most talented
individuals attend tertiary education. They are therefore computed by removing the highest earners in
the control sample until the fraction removed is equivalent to the difference in proportion still in
tertiary education between the treatment group and the control group. In this analysis, all those in
tertiary school are excluded from the regression.

The 95% confidence interval for the upper bound of the impact on 2019 earnings runs from 5.4% to
47.4%. While this is still far from the return to secondary high school as perceived by parents, it
encompasses ranges found in other studies in developing settings (e.g. Duflo, 2001).

Effect of scholarships on total economic output:

Since earnings, net of education costs, are perfectly linked to production in the self-employment and
private sectors, any switches between these sectors induced by scholarships will necessarily be
followed by an increase in production. However, for switches induced to the public sector, the impact
on economic output is ambiguous.

Proposition 6: Scholarships can potentially either increase or decrease economic output, net of education costs.

It is intuitive that since public sector jobs command rents and are rationed, gains to scholarship
winners from obtaining public sector jobs generate losses for others who no longer obtain those
positions. This may generate socially excessive investment in education, potentially exacerbated by
behavioral biases if households over-estimate the return to education. However other factors can work
in the opposite direction. For example, if    and education subsidies increase average skill
among the set of people applying to public sector jobs, they could increase total output. On the other


32Excluding women in the public sector, we find a very small and insignificant (50 GHX) impact of the treatment on
female earnings in 2020. Thus the women in the public sector seem to account for the bulk, if not all the earnings gain
of treatment women during COVID-19.

                                                           28
hand, if    and the subsidy decreases average skill among public sector applicants by making
lower-skill workers eligible for public sector jobs, economic production could also increase as high-
skill workers who can no longer get public-sector positions switch to the private sector.

One last implication of the model is that Mincer-like regressions that do not control for child ability
will be subject to bias. This highlights the importance of experimental measurements of the returns to
education, as we provide in this paper. In Online Appendix B, we argue that non-educational channels
of scholarship effects are likely to be small, and that while exclusion restrictions are probably not fully
satisfied, instrumental variable estimates of the effect of education based on random assignment of
scholarships are likely to be reasonable approximations of the causal effect of education for the
inframarginal students (the compliers in our experiment). We show large differences between OLS
and IV estimates of impact on cognitive skills. We then apply recent non-experimental machine
learning techniques (Double Machine Learning, or DML) to very flexibly account for a large array of
observable variables collected at baseline (Chernozukhov et al, 2018). This remains true in a weighted
DML regression that produce estimates for individuals observationally similar to the compliers in our
experiment. The fact that the DML estimate stays close to the OLS suggests that observable variables
do not fully capture what parents know.



8.      Conclusion

Using a randomized controlled trial in which a random subset of qualified but financially constrained
students in rural Ghana were awarded secondary school scholarships, and detailed outcomes data was
collected over 12 years, we identify the partial equilibrium impact of free education on those who
obtain education in response to the scholarship. We find that scholarships increase secondary school
completion rates by 27 percentage points. Furthermore, we find that secondary education does impart
significant learning gains, enable healthier behaviors, and delays fertility and marriage. Those gains
tend to be particularly strong for women who are otherwise less likely to access secondary school,
perhaps reflecting unequal treatment by gender within the household in some families.

The scholarship led to an increase in the fraction of youth who ever enrolled in tertiary education by
2019 (after 11 years) from 15% to 20%. Even though female scholarship winners were more likely to
still be enrolled in school at the time of the survey, they were also more likely to be formally employed,
and more likely to have public sector jobs and jobs with benefits. Female scholarship winners' earnings
were less negatively impacted by the COVID-19 lockdowns.

                                                    29
While scholarships increased the probability of tertiary education and obtaining a public sector job for
women, the overall fraction of secondary school graduates attending tertiary education remains fairly
low in this sample. Few of these secondary school graduates will meet their ambition of becoming
teachers or entering other occupations requiring tertiary education and commanding high rents. To
the extent that government jobs are in fixed supply, there will likely be excessive entry into competing
for these jobs since entry creates a negative externality for other applicants. A symptom of this
competition is that, in 2013, 67% of the treatment group (almost all of those who graduated from
secondary school) had plans to attend tertiary, but as of 2020 only a third of them (24%) have been
able to carry those plans out. Those who did enroll often spent several years waiting for a place.

We do not find any evidence that the scholarship for free secondary education led to large
improvements in earnings overall (except during the COVID-19 crisis, among women). These results
may change over time as more of those who have gone to tertiary school graduate and enter the labor
market. Employment rates will likely rise in the entire sample as well. This will both increase all wages
and give us a larger and more representative sample to estimate any productivity impacts of education.
Estimating the long-run returns to free secondary education will require surveying our study sample
again in five or ten years, twenty years after they were first identified. This underscores the importance
of very long-term longitudinal follow up.

Nevertheless, it appears plausible at this stage that any private labor market gains from education are
to a significant extent at the expense of others (if education mainly help graduates get access to a
rationed job). Moreover, the slow entry of secondary school graduates in the labor market may
reflect in part their long wait for the opportunity to get one of these slots (they don't commit to an
alternative occupation as long as they think they still have a chance to get a tertiary slot), which
deprives them of some of the benefits of education and may lead to depreciation of human capital
(Dinerstein et al., 2020). All told these results, and our model, suggest that if free education was
generalized, while we can expect real gains on cognitive skills and health, the impact on overall
welfare is unclear given the labor market in Ghana.

One possible response to the overestimation of the chance of obtaining government jobs would be
a campaign to provide information to families on the chances of obtaining such jobs. This could
also potentially lead families to better plan the types of education investment they make. Of course,
it could also have unintended effects, such as discouraging student effort in school.




                                                   30
A policy of universal free secondary school could be accompanied with a reform of public sector
compensation and hiring policies, in order to reduce the distortions caused by the hope of getting
access to scarce jobs with large rents. Entry in training programs could be restricted to one or two
years after secondary school graduation.

If such a reform is not possible, one potential alternative to universal free education would be more
targeted support which maximizes the human capital gains of secondary education while limiting the
distortions driven by the competition for scarce jobs. For example, scholarships could be offered to
students from disadvantaged background with high scores on the JHS exam. This would make it
more likely that they succeed in secondary school and displace less talented richer children. Most
obviously, scholarships could be given in priority to girls. Both the model and data suggest that
many girls with the potential to succeed will not go to senior high school without scholarships and
that scholarships for girls are likely to be particularly impactful on learning outcomes, tertiary
education, political awareness, health, and fertility.




References
Abbott, Brant, Giovanni Gallipoli, Costas Meghir, and Giovanni L. Violante (2019). "Education
   Policy and Intergenerational Transfers in Equilibrium". Journal of Political Economy, 127:6, 2569-2624
Ajayi, Kehinde F. (2013). "School Choice and Educational Mobility: Lessons from Secondary School
   Applications in Ghana". IED Discussion Paper 259.
Ajayi, Kehinde F., Willa H. Friedman, and Adrienne M. Lucas (2020). "When Information is Not
   Enough: Evidence from a Centralized School Choice System". NBER Working Paper 27887.
Aryeetey, Ernest, and William Baah-Boateng (2016). "Understanding Ghana's growth success story
   and job creation challenge." UNU-WIDER Working paper.
Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. "Long-term educational consequences of
   secondary school vouchers: Evidence from administrative records in Colombia." The American
   Economic Review 96, no. 3 (2006): 847-862.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo and Garima Sharma (2020). "Long-term Effects of the Targeting the
    Ultra Poor Program". MIT Working Paper.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Edward Miguel and Michael Kremer (2017). "Worms at Work:
   Long-run Impacts of Child Health Gains". Quarterly Journal of Economics.



                                                    31
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Leigh L. Linden, and Miguel Urquiola (2007). "The effects of user fee
   reductions on enrollment: Evidence from a quasi-experiment." Columbia University.
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden and Francisco Perez (2011). "Improving the
   Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Education Experiment
   in Colombia." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 3(2): 167-95.
Barton, Nicholas, Tessa Bold and Justin Sandefur. 2017. "Measuring the Rents from Public
   Employment: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Kenya." CGD Working Paper 457.
Becker, Gary S. (1991), "An economic analysis of fertility," Demographic and Economic Change in Developed
   Countries, Gary S. Becker, ed., Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Becker, Gary S., Scott Duke Kominers, Kevin M. Murphy, and Jörg L. Spenkuch (2018). "A Theory
   of Intergenerational Mobility". Journal of Political Economy, 126:S1, S7-S25
Benhassine, Najy, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, and Victor Pouliquen (2015).
   "Turning a Shove into a Nudge? A `Labeled Cash Transfer' for Education." American Economic
   Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (3): 86-125
Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli. 2006. "Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures
   That Control the False Discovery Rate." Biometrika 93(3): 491­507.
Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux and Kjell Silvanes. (2008). "Staying in the classroom and out of the
   maternity ward? The effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage births". Economic Journal 118
   (539): 1025-1054.
Blattman, Christopher, Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez. 2020. "The Long-Term Impacts of
   Grants on Poverty: Nine-Year Evidence from Uganda's Youth Opportunities Program." American
   Economic Review: Insights, 2 (3): 287-304.
Blaydes, Lisa. (2006). "Who Votes in Authoritarian Elections and Why? Determinants of Voter
   Turnout in Contemporary Egypt", unpublished.
Blimpo, Moussa P., Ousman Gajigo, and Todd Pugatch. 2019. "Financial Constraints and Girls'
   Secondary Education: Evidence from School Fee Elimination in The Gambia." The World Bank
   Economic Review, Vol. 33 (1): 185­208.
Campante, Filipe R. and Davin Chor (2012). "Schooling, Political Participation, and the Economy,"
   The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 94(4), pages 841-859, November.
Ministry of Education (MoE) Ghana (2008). "EMIS Basic Educational Data."
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whitney
   Newey, James Robins (2018). "Double/Debiased Machine Learning for Treatment and Structural
   Parameters." The Econometrics Journal 21(1): C1­C68.


                                                   32
de Mel, Suresh, David J. McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2009). "Measuring microenterprise
  profits: Must we ask how the sausage is made?" Journal of Development Economics, 88(1): 19-31.
Dinerstein, Michael, Megalokonomou, Rigissa, and Yannelis (2020). "Constantine, Human Capital
  Depreciation." University of Chicago, BFI Working Paper No. 2020-146.
Duflo, Esther (2001). "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
  Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment." American Economic Review 91(4): 795-813.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas and Michael Kremer (2015). "Education, HIV, and Early Fertility:
  Experimental Evidence from Kenya". American Economic Review, 105(9).
Evans, David; Ngatia, Irene Muthoni. (2020). "School costs, short-run participation, and long-run
  outcomes: evidence from Kenya". The World Bank Economic Review.
Ferreira, Francisco HG, Deon Filmer, and Norbert Schady (2009). "Own and sibling effects of
  conditional cash transfer programs: Theory and evidence from Cambodia." World Bank.
Filmer, Deon, and Norbert Schady (2014): "The Medium-Term Effects of Scholarships in a Low-
  Income Country," Journal of Human Resources, 49(3), pp. 663-694.
Finan, Frederico, Olken and Pande (2015): "The Personnel Economics of the Developing State." In
  The Handbook of Field Experiments, Volume II (pp. 467-514).
Friedman, Willa, Edward Miguel, Michael Kremer and Rebecca Thornton (2016). "Education as
  Liberation?" Economica, 83(329): 1-30.
Gertler, Paul, James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, Arianna Zanolini, Christel Vermeersch, Susan Walker,
  Susan M. Chang, and Sally Grantham-Mcgregor (2014). "Labor market returns to an early
  childhood stimulation intervention in Jamaica". Science: 998-1001.
Ghana Statistical Service (2010). "Population & Housing Census", accessed 01/12/20:
https://statsghana.gov.gh/gssmain/fileUpload/pressrelease/2010_PHC_National_Analytical_Report.pdf.
Heckman, James J. and Stefano Mosso (2014). "The Economics of Human Development and Social
  Mobility". Annual Review of Economics, 6:1, 689-733
Hicks, Joan Hamory, Edward Miguel, Michael W. Walker, Michael R. Kremer, and Sarah Baird (2020).
  "Twenty Year Economic Impacts of Deworming" NBER Working Paper No. w27611.
Jensen, Robert (2010). "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 125, Issue 2, Pages 515­548.
Kaufmann, K.M. (2014), Understanding the income gradient in college attendance in Mexico: The
  role of heterogeneity in expected returns. Quantitative Economics, 5: 583-630.
Khandker, Shahidur, Mark Pitt and Nubuhiko Fuwa (2003). "Subsidy to Promote Girls' Education:
  The Female Stipend Program in Bangladesh." MPRA Paper 23688 (2003).


                                                  33
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel and Rebecca Thornton (2009) "Incentives to Learn". Review of
   Economics and Statistics (91)3: 437-456.
Krueger, Alan, and Jitka Maleckova (2003). "Education, Poverty, Political Violence, and Terrorism: Is
   There a Causal Connection?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17, Fall 2003, no. 4, pp.119-144
Lajaaj, Rachid, Andrew Moya and Fabio Sanchez (2018). "Equality of Opportunity and Human Capital
   Accumulation: Motivational Effect of a Nationwide Scholarship in Colombia". CEDE Doc 26.
Lam, David, Cally Ardington, and Murray Leibbrandt (2011). "Schooling as a lottery: Racial
   differences in school advancement in urban South Africa." Journal of Development Economics, 95(2).
LaLonde, Robert J. (1986). "Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
   Experimental Data". The American Economic Review, 76(4): 604-620.
Lang, Kevin. (1993). "Ability Bias, Discount Rate Bias, and the Return to Education." Manuscript.
   Boston: Boston University, Department of Economics.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1991). "The allocation of talent:
   Implications for growth." The quarterly journal of economics 106.2 503-530.
Nguyen, T. (2008). "Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experimental
   evidence from Madagascar." Unpublished manuscript.
North, Douglass (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge.
Ozier, Owen (2018). "The Impact of Secondary Schooling in Kenya: A Regression Discontinuity
   Analysis," Journal of Human Resources 53 (1): 157-188.
Pritchett, Lant (2001). Where has all the education gone? World Bank Economic Review, 15(3): 367-91.
Pritchett, Lant (2018). The Politics of Learning: Directions for Future Research. RISE working paper.
Rosenzweig, Mark, and T. Paul Schultz (1989). "Schooling, information and nonmarket productivity:
   contraceptive use and its effectiveness." International Economic Review 30:457-477.
Rosenzweig, Mark, and Christopher Udry (2020). "External Validity in a Stochastic World: Evidence
   from Low-Income Countries." The Review of Economic Studies, 87:343­381.
Sondheimer, R. M. and Green, D. P. (2010), Using Experiments to Estimate the Effects of Education
   on Voter Turnout. American Journal of Political Science, 54: 174-189.
United Nations Girls Initiative (2010). "UNGEI at 10: A Journey to Gender Equality in Education."
Warner, A., A. Malhotra, and A. McGonagle (2012). "Girls education empowerment and transitions
   to adulthood: The case for a shared agenda." International Center for Research on Women
Yamauchi, Futoshi (2004). "Are experience and schooling complementary? Evidence from migrants'
   assimilation in the Bangkok labor market", Journal of Development Economics, 74: 489-513




                                                         34
           Figure 1: Type of work, by education level: Baseline Expectations vs. Realizations




Notes: Data from 2008 in-person baseline survey of participants (Panel A) and 2017 phone survey (Panel B). SHS stands
for Senior High School. In Panel A, respondents (aged 17 on average at the time) were asked in 2008: "If you never go to
SHS or continue any other higher education in the future, what types of work do you think you would do when you are 25
years old?" and "Imagine that you complete Senior High School in the future, what types of work do you think you would
do when you are 25 years old?" In Panel B, data from the 2017 phone survey on the realized career outcomes of students
who did and did not complete SHS is shown. We plot answers separately by respondent gender, pooling treatment and
control groups.




                                                          35
                             Figure 2: Impact of Scholarship on SHS Enrollment over time




Notes: Data from yearly phone surveys. The scholarships were awarded at the beginning of Term 2 of the 2008/2009
academic year. We split the sample by gender.




        Figure 3: Impact of Scholarship on Educational attainment, by entrance exam quartile


                                                                                                       .28
                                                                 .56
                                                                                                         .3
                                                               .53
          Top Quartile                                                                                 1.36
                                                           12.04
                                                                                 .11
                              .67

                                                                                                 .23
                                                         .47
                                                                                                  .25
                                                    .44
          3rd Quartile                                                                       1
                                                         11.57
                                                                                .08                                       Ever SHS
                             .41
                                                                                                                          Completed SHS
                                                                                                             .32          Education Years
                                              .39
                                                                                                             .32          Tertiary Years
                                             .38
          2nd Quartile                                                                                             1.81
                                                     10.98
                                                                                       .26
                             .23

                                                                                                  .26
                                                   .43
                                                                                                   .26
                                               .41
       Bottom Quartile                                                                            1.22
                                                     11.12
                                                                                .06
                             .27

                         0                                                  0


Notes: Educational attainment data from 2019 phone survey. Left half of graph shows means in comparison group; right
half shows estimated treatment effects and 95% confidence intervals. See text for details.




                                                                       36
                        Figure 4: Impact of Scholarship on Childbearing Onset, by survey year




Notes: Data from 2013 in-person follow-up and 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019, and 2020 phone surveys. The outcome
shown is "Ever pregnant", by survey year. "Ever pregnant" means respondent or respondent's partner has ever been pregnant at the time
of the survey. Left half of graph shows means in comparison group; right half shows estimated treatment effects and 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                                37
       Figure 5: Model: Expected Utility and Expected Earnings in each Labor Sector


                                     Panel A. Expected Utility

Expected Utility

                        Choice:                      Choice:
                   Self-Employment                 If h=3: Public
                                                   If h<3: Private               Public

                                                                               Private




                                                                      Self-employment




                                         fp
                                       Ap -Ah                                             Skill




                       Panel B. Expected Income, assuming 0.5    1

Expected Income




                                                                     Private

                                                                                 Public



                                                                       Self-employment




                                         fp                                               Skill
                                       Ap -Ah




                                                38
                                   Table 1: Baseline Sample Characteristics and Balance



                             (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                                        Highest           Highest
                                                          No male                     education of      education of       Perceived
                                         BECE               head        Number         HH head:          HH head:           returns
                            Age          exam              in the        of HH          primary             SHS             to SHS
                          in 2008     performance        household      members          or less          or more             (%)
 Panel A: All
 Treatment                 -0.064         0.002            0.009          -0.099          0.011              -0.001          14.639
                          (0.073)        (0.004)          (0.023)        (0.108)         (0.023)            (0.018)         (28.106)
 P-value                   0.376          0.585            0.706          0.361           0.625              0.945           0.603
 Comparison mean          17.369          0.623            0.425          5.659           0.483              0.171          276.102
 N                          2060          1924             2053            2054           2049                2049            1782

 Panel B: Female
 Treatment        -0.050                  -0.001           -0.030         -0.144          0.024              -0.003          33.392
                 (0.100)                 (0.005)          (0.033)        (0.145)         (0.033)            (0.025)         (39.913)
 P-value          0.620                   0.833            0.370          0.323           0.463              0.909            0.403
 Comparison mean 17.314                   0.618            0.455           5.617          0.478              0.172          272.429
 N                 1033                    961              1031           1032           1030                1030             874

 Panel C: Male
 Treatment                 -0.085         0.005            0.047          -0.054          -0.002             0.001           -1.726
                          (0.106)        (0.005)          (0.033)        (0.160)         (0.033)            (0.025)         (39.730)
 P-value                   0.421          0.361            0.150          0.738            0.944             0.971           0.965
 Comparison mean          17.426          0.628            0.395          5.703            0.487             0.170          279.719
 N                          1027           963             1022            1022            1019              1019             908
Notes: Data from baseline survey (2008). We document pre-intervention characteristics for the comparison group ("comparison
mean") and differences between treatment and comparison ("Treatment" coefficient). Panel A shows the full sample, Panel B
of females, Panel C of males. The estimated difference between the comparison and treatment groups are in each panel's first
row; standard errors are in each panel's second row in parentheses; p-values from the test that the respective treatment-comparison
difference is non-zero are reported in the third row; control group means are in each panel's fourth row; sample size for the estimation
is in each panel's fifth row. Controls include region dummies.




                                                                   39
                                                Table 2: Education Outcomes


                           (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
                         Total        Total                                                      Ever        Currently        Ever
                        years of     years of                                                  enrolled       enrolled      enrolled
                       education       SHS       Completed      Completed      Completed      in tertiary    in tertiary   in tertiary
                        to date      to date        SHS            TVI           tertiary      program        program       program
                         (2019)       (2019)       (2019)         (2019)         (2019)         (2019)         (2019)        (2020)
Panel A: All
Treatment                1.241        1.251         0.272         -0.020          0.035          0.044         0.010          0.047
                        (0.104)      (0.079)       (0.022)        (0.006)        (0.015)        (0.018)       (0.011)        (0.020)
P-value                  0.000        0.000         0.000          0.001          0.019          0.016         0.346          0.019
Comparison mean          11.387       1.842         0.436          0.029          0.087          0.154         0.049          0.179
N                         1924         1925         1952           1952           1952           1951           1951          1740


Panel B: Female
Treatment                1.313        1.208         0.258         -0.005          0.040          0.077         0.029          0.088
                        (0.155)      (0.119)       (0.032)        (0.008)        (0.020)        (0.025)       (0.015)        (0.028)
P-value                  0.000        0.000         0.000          0.573          0.048          0.002         0.059          0.002
Comparison mean          11.030       1.627         0.389          0.017          0.078          0.126         0.035          0.146
N                         968          968           986             986           986            986           986            856


Panel C: Male
Treatment                1.141        1.273         0.281         -0.035          0.030          0.010         -0.009         0.007
                        (0.138)      (0.104)       (0.031)        (0.009)        (0.022)        (0.026)       (0.016)        (0.029)
P-value                  0.000        0.000         0.000          0.000          0.162          0.709         0.588          0.804
Comparison mean          11.758       2.065         0.485          0.041          0.096          0.184         0.065          0.210
N                         956          957           966             966           966            965           965            884


P-val male=fem           0.467        0.580         0.529          0.009          0.734          0.069         0.098          0.045
Notes: Year of survey in parentheses. Panel A shows results for the full sample, Panel B for females, Panel C for males. The last row
shows the p-values for tests that the effects are identical between males and females. The estimated treatment effects are in each
panel's first row; standard errors are in each panel's second row in parentheses; p-values from the test that a respective treatment
effect is non-zero are reported in the third row; control group means are in each panel's fourth row; sample size for the estimation
is in each panel's fifth row. Controls include baseline score on Ghana's exam for admission to secondary and vocational schools, an
indicator for whether the student took the exam, and region dummies.




                                                                40
                                           Table 3: Skills and Technology Adoption


                      (1)         (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)            (9)
                                                                Media           Knows               ICT/Social     Uses           Used
                                                                                           Has a
                      Total      Total        Political       engagement         how                  media      fertilizer     internet
                                                                                            bank
                    years of   cognitive     knowledge    (radio, newspaper,    to use               adoption      (if in     in the past
                                                                                          account
                   education     score          score        TV, internet)     internet                index     farming)        month
                                                                                           (2013)
                     (2013)     (2013)         (2013)           (2013)          (2013)                (2016)      (2017)         (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment            1.191       0.157         0.095             0.060          0.086      0.058       0.062      -0.024        0.059
                    (0.077)     (0.046)       (0.046)          (0.025)         (0.047)    (0.023)    (0.037)     (0.037)       (0.024)
P-value              0.000       0.001         0.040             0.018          0.069      0.011       0.095       0.527        0.013
Comparison mean     10.787       -0.000        0.000            -0.020          0.000      0.314      -0.133      0.471         0.493
N                    2064         1983         1981              1981           1983       1984        1995         769         1950

Panel B: Female
Treatment            1.186       0.194         0.075             0.074           0.050     0.098       0.090      0.020         0.076
                    (0.114)     (0.069)       (0.058)          (0.032)         (0.058)    (0.031)    (0.054)     (0.057)       (0.033)
P-value              0.000       0.005          0.192            0.023           0.386     0.001       0.095      0.720         0.023
Comparison mean     10.575       -0.175        -0.381           -0.165          -0.333     0.236      -0.416      0.410         0.402
N                    1036         1002          1001             1001            1001      1002        1007        337           985

Panel C: Male
Treatment            1.183       0.113         0.094            0.035           0.101      0.016      0.016       -0.059        0.033
                    (0.101)     (0.059)       (0.061)          (0.037)         (0.067)    (0.033)    (0.045)     (0.050)       (0.033)
P-value              0.000       0.054         0.126            0.347           0.133      0.630      0.724        0.238        0.310
Comparison mean     11.006       0.183         0.397            0.131           0.346      0.396      0.162       0.522         0.590
N                    1028         981           980              980             982        982        988          432          965

P-val male=fem       0.963       0.371         0.807            0.396           0.577      0.066      0.302       0.290         0.430

 Notes: See Table 2 notes. Total cognitive score refers to standardized score on combined reading and math test, administered
 at the 2013 survey. Political knowledge score is a standardized index of national and international political knowledge scores.
 The national political knowledge score is comprised of the following: could name President of Ghana, Vice President of Ghana,
 knew political party in power before 2012 election in Ghana, could name presidential running mate for the NPP, knew how
 many years someone could be legally elected President in Ghana, knew number of candidates that participated in presidential
 elections, knew number of new constituencies created in 2012 general elections. The international political knowledge index is
 comprised of the following: knows name of current U.S. President, knows name of UN Secretary General, knows countries that
 border Ghana, knows country with largest population in Africa, knows name of Venezuelan President who died in 2013, knows
 which country Muamar Qaddafi led, knows name of leader from Cote D'Ivoire that ICC tried. The media engagement index is
 comprised of: has a preferred newspaper, number of days in the last 7 that did each of the following: read newspaper, listened
 to radio, watched TV, used internet. ICT adoption index (2016) is comprised of the following variables: has Facebook account,
 knows how to use internet, and has internet on phone.




                                                                 41
                                Table 4: Civic and Media Engagement Outcomes


                              (1)           (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
                       Has voting        Voted in         Voted in last        Voted in         Voted in last
                             card     2012 national     District Assembly   2016 national     District Assembly
                            (2013)    election (2013)    election (2013)    election (2017)    election (2017)
 Panel A: All
 Treatment                  0.015         -0.025             -0.006             -0.016             -0.019
                            (0.008)      (0.018)             (0.021)           (0.021)             (0.024)
 P-value                    0.062         0.178               0.783             0.430               0.428
 Comparison mean            0.961         0.837               0.281             0.759               0.463
 N                           1980          1977               1979               1965               1965


 Panel B: Female
 Treatment                  0.016         -0.019             -0.032             -0.023             -0.054
                            (0.011)      (0.027)             (0.029)           (0.030)             (0.033)
 P-value                    0.128         0.476               0.272             0.446               0.105
 Comparison mean            0.962         0.817               0.269             0.739               0.461
 N                           1000          999                999                995                995


 Panel C: Male
 Treatment                  0.013         -0.032              0.020             -0.014              0.016
                            (0.012)      (0.025)             (0.031)           (0.028)             (0.034)
 P-value                    0.268         0.199               0.505             0.631               0.626
 Comparison mean            0.960         0.858               0.294             0.780               0.465
 N                           980           978                980                970                970


 P-val male=fem             0.833         0.734               0.247             0.786               0.129
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                        42
                                                Table 5: Fertility and Partners


                             (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
                            Ever        Had                                                               Most         Any
                      pregnant/      unwanted        Number          Ever      Currently      Still      recent       child
                            had a       first           of           lived      married      living    partner has   deceased
                       pregnant      pregnancy       children        with          or         with      tertiary      before
                        partner     (full sample)    ever had    partner      cohabitating   parents   education      age 3
                        (2013)         (2013)         (2019)     (2016)         (2019)       (2019)      (2019)       (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment               -0.048         -0.044         -0.104         -0.093      -0.058       0.039      0.019        -0.025
                        (0.021)       (0.019)         (0.053)    (0.022)        (0.023)      (0.022)     (0.026)     (0.021)
P-value                     0.021      0.024           0.052         0.000       0.011        0.085      0.462        0.227
Comparison mean             0.299      0.235           0.960         0.366       0.386        0.300      0.148        0.092
N                           1981        1965           1951          1995        1951         1952        946          789


Panel B: Female
Treatment               -0.070         -0.067         -0.152         -0.121      -0.062       0.003      0.071        -0.036
                        (0.033)       (0.032)         (0.082)    (0.033)        (0.034)      (0.033)     (0.039)     (0.025)
P-value                     0.037      0.038           0.065         0.000       0.067        0.933      0.071        0.143
Comparison mean             0.479      0.390           1.332         0.498       0.475        0.355      0.195        0.099
N                           1001        985             986          1007         986         986         575          556


Panel C: Male
Treatment               -0.020         -0.012         -0.026         -0.058      -0.047       0.078      -0.051       0.001
                        (0.020)       (0.017)         (0.060)    (0.026)        (0.030)      (0.031)     (0.022)     (0.036)
P-value                     0.325      0.475           0.671         0.027       0.117        0.011      0.022        0.987
Comparison mean             0.111      0.075           0.568         0.229       0.291        0.242      0.072        0.076
N                           980         980             965           988         965         966         371          233


P-val male=fem              0.211      0.136           0.246         0.138       0.703        0.097      0.008        0.419
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                                43
                                            Table 6: Labor Market Outcomes


                          (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                                                         Total       Could not
                      Worked for       Has wage         Job          Public     Lives                 earnings in    cope with
                      pay in past   contract with      with          sector    in urban     Self-        past 6      200 GHX
                       6 months        employer       benefits      employee     area     employed      months       emergency
                        (2019)          (2019)        (2019)         (2019)     (2019)     (2019)       (2019)         (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment                0.011           0.039         0.030         0.019      -0.015     -0.029       37.123         -0.027
                        (0.021)         (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.013)    (0.015)     (0.020)     (93.450)       (0.017)
P-value                  0.589           0.008         0.052         0.157      0.330      0.153         0.691         0.117
Comparison mean          0.730           0.084         0.099         0.077      0.123      0.245       1456.217        0.161
N                        1952            1951          1951          1952       1921        1952         1915           1951


Panel B: Female
Treatment                0.033           0.041         0.020         0.041      -0.029     -0.012       35.794         -0.044
                        (0.033)         (0.019)       (0.019)       (0.019)    (0.021)     (0.031)     (108.464)      (0.024)
P-value                  0.314           0.032         0.283         0.031      0.152      0.683         0.741         0.070
Comparison mean          0.602           0.063         0.075         0.063      0.119      0.287        951.456        0.176
N                         986             986           986           986        973        986           972           986


Panel C: Male
Treatment               -0.020           0.035         0.037         -0.003     -0.001     -0.042       -12.740        -0.009
                        (0.024)         (0.023)       (0.024)       (0.019)    (0.023)     (0.026)     (145.790)      (0.024)
P-value                  0.405           0.119         0.126         0.874      0.959      0.106         0.930         0.718
Comparison mean          0.864           0.106         0.125         0.092      0.128      0.201       1993.862        0.146
N                         966             965           965           966        948        966           943           965


P-val male=fem           0.207           0.856         0.572         0.092      0.421      0.536         0.838         0.319
Notes: See Table 2 notes. Total earnings in last 6 months winsorized at the 99% level. Labor market outcomes for 2017 shown in
Table A8, those for 2020 shown in Table 7.




                                                               44
                               Table 7: Labor Market Outcomes during COVID Crisis


                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)             (9)
                     Worked     Has wage                                                    Total                    Coeff. of
                     for pay    contract      Job       Public        Lives               earnings      Total        variation
                     in past      with        with      sector      in urban     Self-     in past    earnings      of monthly
                    6 months    employer    benefits   employee       area     employed   6 months      April    earnings (if > 0)
                      (2020)     (2020)      (2020)     (2020)       (2020)     (2020)     (2020)      (2020)     (GHX) (2020)
Panel A: All
Treatment             0.045       0.047      0.005      0.015        -0.019      -0.066    62.606      30.743         -0.776
                     (0.020)     (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.014)      (0.016)     (0.023)   (125.938)   (25.424)       (3.910)
P-value               0.027       0.003      0.732      0.303         0.238      0.004      0.619      0.227           0.843
Comparison mean       0.760       0.081      0.102      0.082         0.124      0.342    1808.426    252.299        76.538
N                     1737        1730       1730       1735          1714        1733      1672        1713           1251

Panel B: Female
Treatment             0.057       0.067      0.031      0.039        -0.039      -0.068    262.979     67.620        -10.473
                     (0.034)     (0.021)    (0.019)    (0.020)      (0.022)     (0.034)   (149.376)   (24.744)       (6.201)
P-value               0.092       0.001      0.107      0.046        0.074       0.048      0.079      0.006          0.092
Comparison mean       0.632       0.050      0.058      0.056         0.125      0.386    1008.077    115.131        89.819
N                      856         853        853        855           846        853        826        843            513

Panel C: Male
Treatment             0.028       0.027      -0.022     -0.009       0.001       -0.063    -167.123    -10.776        5.911
                     (0.021)     (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.021)      (0.024)     (0.031)   (191.467)   (42.674)       (5.024)
P-value               0.179       0.252      0.359      0.660        0.964       0.042       0.383      0.801         0.240
Comparison mean       0.887       0.112       0.146      0.108       0.124       0.298    2607.316    388.009        67.376
N                      881         877         877        880         868         880         846        870           738

P-val male=fem        0.463       0.234      0.097      0.097        0.256      0.849      0.089       0.128          0.037

Notes: See Table 2 notes. 2020 survey was administered over the phone (no in-person tracking) between May 19 and September 25
2020.




                                                               45
 Figure A1: Impact of Scholarship on Cognitive skills by school category and entrance exam quartile



                                                                                       .16
               Category A or B                            .25


                                                                                       .16
                   Category C                    .08



                   Category D -.2                                                     .14



                                           0                              0



                                                                                                   .3
                  Top Quartile                            .29

                                                                                .11
                  3rd Quartile                  .06

                                                                                             .24
                  2nd Quartile      -.1


               Bottom Quartile   -.14                                     .06


                                           0                          0


Notes: Cognitive skills data from test administered at 2013 survey. Left half of graph shows control means; right half
shows treatment effect. Top panel shows results by how selective schools are. We have few A and B schools (most selective)
in our sample since we sampled rural day schools. Bottom panel shows results by quartile of performance on the BECE
exam.




                                                           46
Figure A2: Effort Level on Cognitive Test "Games" by treatment status and gender, as assessed by surveyor (2013)



                     .8
                     .6
                   Share
                   .4.2
                     0




                                  No effort          Very little effort      Some effort          Full Effort*
                                                  Effort level as assessed by surveyor

                                                               Control               Treatment
                     .8
                     .6
                   Share
                   .4.2
                     0




                                 No effort***       Very little effort***   Some effort**        Full Effort***
                                                  Effort level as assessed by surveyor

                                                                  Female               Male


Notes: Data from 2013 in-person follow-up survey. The *** and * on axis category labels reflect the p-values from the test of whether
the group means of the given item are identical for treatment/control or male/female. *** signifies a p-value less than 0.01 and *
signifies a p-value less than 0.1.




                                                                      47
                                              Table A1: Attrition



                          (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)        (7)
                       Surveyed     Surveyed      Surveyed    Surveyed      Surveyed   Refused   Deceased
                        (2013)       (2016)        (2017)      (2019)        (2020)    (2019)     (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment                -0.005       0.009         0.001        0.020       0.049      -0.017    0.004
                        (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.016)    (0.005)   (0.006)
P-value                  0.608        0.263         0.882        0.045       0.003       0.001    0.537
Comparison mean           0.963       0.964         0.954        0.939       0.826      0.025     0.014
N                         2064        2064          2064         2064        2064        2064     2064

Panel B: Female
Treatment                0.001        0.007         -0.013       0.014       0.056      -0.017    0.006
                        (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.024)    (0.008)   (0.006)
P-value                  0.926        0.487         0.325        0.301       0.020       0.032    0.346
Comparison mean          0.967        0.970          0.967       0.947       0.809      0.027     0.006
N                        1036         1036           1036        1036        1036        1036     1036

Panel C: Male
Treatment                -0.011       0.011         0.016        0.025       0.040      -0.016    0.001
                        (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.014)      (0.015)     (0.022)    (0.007)   (0.010)
P-value                  0.440        0.379         0.275        0.087       0.074       0.020    0.913
Comparison mean           0.959       0.957         0.941        0.931       0.843      0.022     0.022
N                         1028        1028          1028         1028        1028        1028     1028

P-val male=fem           0.558        0.773         0.127        0.557       0.722      0.887     0.677
Notes: See Table 2 notes. There were no new deaths between 2019 and 2020.




                                                      48
                                         Table A2: P-values and Sharpened q-values

                                               (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                         All                            Female                            Male

                                             P-value   Sharpened q-val        P-value    Sharpened q-val       P-value    Sharpened q-val
 Education Outcomes
 Total years of education (2019)              .000             .001             .000           .001              .000            .001
 Completed SHS (2019)                         .000             .001             .000           .001              .000            .001
 Completed TVI (2019)                         .001             .006             .573           .319              .000            .001
 Completed tertiary (2019)                    .019             .035             .048           .090              .162            .254
 Ever in tertiary (2019)                      .016             .034             .002           .011              .709            .568

 Skills and Technology Adoption
 Total cognitive score (2013)                 .001             .005             .005           .019              .054            .176
 Political knowledge score (2013)             .040             .048             .192           .137              .126            .239
 Has a bank account (2013)                    .011             .027             .001           .010              .630            .568
 ICT adoption index (2016)                    .095             .079             .095           .099              .724            .568
 Used internet in past month (2019)           .013             .029             .023           .060              .310            .338

 Fertility, Health, and Partners
 (Partner) ever pregnant (2013)               .021             .036             .037           .075              .325            .338
 Num. children ever had (2019)                .052             .050             .065           .096              .671            .568
 Ever lived w/ partner (2019)                 .116             .079             .243           .159              .326            .338
 Partner completed tertiary (2019)            .462             .179             .071           .096              .022            .089
 Preventative health behavior (2013)          .004             .017             .023           .069              .061            .176
 Risky sexual behavior index (2013)           .040             .048             .568           .319              .021            .089

 Labor Outcomes
 Wage contract w/ employer (2019)             .008             .025             .032           .073              .119            .239
 Job w/ benefits (2019)                       .052             .050             .283           .176              .126            .239
 Public sector employee (2019)                .157             .089             .031           .073              .874            .674
 Self-employed (2019)                         .153             .089             .683           .370              .106            .239
 Cannot cope w/ 200 GHX emer. (2019)          .117             .079             .070           .096              .718            .568
 Total earnings past 6 mo. (2020)             .619             .167             .079           .085              .383            .358
Notes: Year of survey in parentheses. See Table 2 notes for description of controls. Columns 1, 3, and 5 show the p-value for the sharpened
form estimate of the treatment effect; columns 2, 4, and 6 show the sharpened q values, which account for false discovery rate given that
there are 22 outcome variables in use (Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli, 2006). See Table 2 for description of education outcomes, Table
3 for description of skills and technology adoption outcomes, Tables 5 and A7 for description of fertility, health behavior, and partner
outcomes, and Table 6 for labor outcomes.




                                                                     49
          Table A3: Additional Sample Characteristics at Baseline



                              (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)
                                      Perceived               Self-reported
                        Completed      returns                  financial
                          BECE         to SHS      Ever      situation, 1-5
                         in 2007       > 100%     had sex   (5 = very poor)
Panel A: All
Treatment                    0.005      0.008      -0.027        0.044
                            (0.016)    (0.025)    (0.022)       (0.032)
P-value                      0.767      0.740      0.218         0.168
Comparison mean              0.139      0.463       0.328        3.890
N                            2064       1782        2061         2046

Panel B: Female
Treatment                    0.020      0.000      -0.001        0.019
                            (0.030)    (0.036)    (0.033)       (0.044)
P-value                      0.514      0.990      0.981         0.668
Comparison mean              0.274      0.478       0.454        3.845
N                            1036        874        1034         1031

Panel C: Male
Treatment                   0.000       0.017      -0.044        0.064
                             (.)       (0.035)    (0.025)       (0.045)
P-value                       .         0.619       0.072        0.156
Comparison mean             0.000       0.448       0.199        3.936
N                           1028         908        1027         1015
Notes: See Table 1 notes.




                                      50
                                       Table A4: Additional Education Outcomes


                             (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                       Ever                         Currently                   Enrolled
                        Ever an       Completed       enrolled       Currently      enrolled in   Completed     in formal
                      apprentice     apprenticeship   in SHS        an apprentice    tertiary      tertiary   study/training
                        (2017)          (2017)        (2019)           (2019)         (2020)       (2020)        (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment                   -0.141       -0.080        0.260           -0.011         0.019         0.049         0.015
                        (0.023)         (0.018)       (0.022)          (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.018)       (0.012)
P-value                     0.000        0.000         0.000           0.399          0.099         0.006         0.203
Comparison mean             0.440        0.222         0.459           0.080          0.044         0.117         0.054
N                           1967         1967          1952             1951           1734         1742          1951


Panel B: Female
Treatment                   -0.143       -0.070        0.257           -0.032         0.021         0.077         0.032
                        (0.031)         (0.023)       (0.032)          (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.025)       (0.016)
P-value                     0.000        0.003         0.000           0.062          0.191         0.002         0.048
Comparison mean             0.409        0.184         0.403           0.087          0.037         0.100         0.041
N                            996          996           986             986            854           857           986


Panel C: Male
Treatment                   -0.142       -0.092        0.257           0.011          0.018         0.022         -0.003
                        (0.032)         (0.027)       (0.030)          (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.025)       (0.017)
P-value                     0.000        0.001         0.000           0.550          0.285         0.385         0.875
Comparison mean             0.473        0.262         0.518           0.073          0.051         0.134         0.068
N                            971          971           966             965            880           885           965


P-val male=fem              0.959        0.519         0.917           0.085          0.827         0.136         0.145
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                               51
                                    Table A5: Education Plan Outcomes



                          (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
                       Plans to        Plans to   Plans to apply    Sat for    Applied    Plans to
                       apply to        apply to     as Mature      WASSCE     as Mature   apply to
                       tertiary        tertiary     Applicant        exam     Applicant   tertiary
                        (2013)          (2017)        (2017)        (2019)      (2019)     (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment                0.241          0.150         0.098          0.263      0.012      0.149
                        (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.024)        (0.022)    (0.008)    (0.024)
P-value                  0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000      0.124      0.000
Comparison mean          0.430          0.489         0.384          0.464      0.020      0.366
N                        1979           1970          1970           1952       1952       1952

Panel B: Female
Treatment                0.268          0.150         0.122          0.261      0.014      0.179
                        (0.032)        (0.033)       (0.033)        (0.032)    (0.011)    (0.033)
P-value                  0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000      0.221      0.000
Comparison mean          0.363          0.427         0.337          0.403      0.018      0.286
N                        1001            997           997            986        986        986

Panel C: Male
Treatment                0.211          0.144         0.073          0.259      0.011      0.114
                        (0.032)        (0.032)       (0.034)        (0.030)    (0.012)    (0.034)
P-value                  0.000          0.000         0.032          0.000      0.356      0.001
Comparison mean          0.500          0.555         0.434          0.528      0.022      0.450
N                         978            973           973            966        966        966

P-val male=fem              0.240       0.879         0.294         0.935       0.883      0.169
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                    52
                       Table A6: Additional Cognition Outcomes



                           (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)
                        Reading       Math      Memory for       Memory for        Raven's
                           test        test     digit span        digit span      progressive
                          score       score      (forward)       (backward)        matrices
                         (2013)      (2013)        (2013)           (2013)          (2013)
Panel A: All
Treatment                  0.143      0.125          0.009           0.109            -0.001
                         (0.044)     (0.046)        (0.120)         (0.086)          (0.119)
P-value                   0.001       0.007          0.942           0.207            0.993
Comparison mean           -0.000      -0.000         7.544           4.541             6.954
N                          1983        1983          1983            1983              1981

Panel B: Female
Treatment                  0.159      0.170          -0.025          0.045            -0.041
                         (0.066)     (0.067)        (0.170)         (0.118)          (0.168)
P-value                   0.017       0.012          0.882           0.703            0.808
Comparison mean           -0.096      -0.191          7.381          4.374             6.558
N                          1002        1002           1002           1002              1001

Panel C: Male
Treatment                 0.129       0.069          0.037           0.158            0.019
                         (0.058)     (0.060)        (0.170)         (0.125)          (0.165)
P-value                   0.026       0.254          0.826           0.207            0.907
Comparison mean           0.100       0.199          7.714           4.714            7.368
N                          981         981            981             981              980

P-val male=fem            0.789       0.246         0.801            0.518            0.940
Notes: See Table 2 notes. Reading test score consists of: can read sentence aloud, can read
paragraph well (as rated by surveyor), each of: basic, intermediate, and advanced comprehension,
and fact identification. Math test score consists of: two basic computations, basic calculator
computation, numeracy, two levels of profit calculation questions, identifying mode, calculating
sums without help, calculating sums with explanation, calculating percentage, and an exchange
rate calculation. Both reading and math test scores are standardized.




                                               53
                         Table A7: Additional Fertility, Partners and Health Behavior Outcomes


                           (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)          (7)          (8)
                        Desired                   Risky sexual       Used                     Self-reported
                        fertility:   Preventive   behavior/STI     prenatal     Knowledge      COVID-19          Still    Currently
                          # of         health       exposure       care for       about           social        living     married
                        children      behavior        index          last       COVID-19       distancing        with         or
                       by age 50       Index      safe -> risky   pregnancy       Index           Index        parents   cohabitating
                         (2013)        (2013)        (2013)         (2019)       (2020)          (2020)        (2020)       (2020)
 Panel A: All
 Treatment               -0.025        0.105          -0.047         0.009         -0.023         0.009         0.052        -0.053
                        (0.048)       (0.037)        (0.023)        (0.007)       (0.023)        (0.026)       (0.021)      (0.025)
 P-value                 0.609         0.004           0.040         0.234          0.330         0.738         0.013         0.033
 Comparison mean         3.629         1.624           0.001         0.982         -0.006         -0.002        0.190        0.432
 N                        1978         1984            1980           970           1737           1737         1737          1731

 Panel B: Female
 Treatment               -0.045        0.119          -0.017         0.011         -0.006         -0.044        0.061        -0.096
                        (0.064)       (0.052)        (0.030)        (0.005)       (0.034)        (0.036)       (0.032)      (0.036)
 P-value                 0.486         0.023          0.568          0.027         0.867          0.222         0.056        0.008
 Comparison mean         3.639         1.691           0.095         0.989         -0.061          0.060        0.220         0.533
 N                        999          1002            1000           642           856             856          856           853

 Panel C: Male
 Treatment               -0.006        0.096          -0.076         0.010         -0.041         0.061         0.046        -0.008
                        (0.072)       (0.051)        (0.033)        (0.019)       (0.032)        (0.037)       (0.027)      (0.033)
 P-value                 0.937         0.061          0.021          0.595         0.198          0.097         0.097        0.805
 Comparison mean         3.619         1.555          -0.098         0.967          0.049         -0.063        0.161        0.333
 N                        979           982            980            328            881           881           881          878

 P-val male=fem          0.751         0.848          0.172          0.830         0.502          0.039         0.675        0.078
Notes: See Table 2 notes. Preventive health behavior index is comprised of the following questions: do you sleep under an insecticide-
treated net, do you use other mosquito protection, and did you use water and soap the last time you washed your hands. Index of risky
sexual behavior and STI exposure (2013) is comprised of the following variables: have you ever had sex, age when first had sex, number
of sexual partners in past 6 months, number of lifetime sexual partners, were you ever in a relationship with someone more than 20 years
older, were you ever in a relationship for gifts or money, have you ever had sex with a commercial sex worker, did you use contraception
the last time you had sex, have you ever used contraception when having sex, do you ever do anything to protect yourself from getting
infected with HIV/AIDs, have you had a sexually transmitted infection in the past 12 months, has partner ever told you that they had
a sexually transmitted infection, did you change how often you had sex after learning that partner was infected with STI. The COVID
knowledge index is composed of: number of each COVID facts, symptoms, precautions, and modes of spread could identify, whether
knows number of COVID deaths in Ghana, whether knows country of COVID origin, and whether knew especially COVID-vulnerable
groups. The COVID social distancing index is comprised of: number of precautions taken, whether going to crowded places, whether
did not leave house, number of people met in last 2 days, and whether used public transport. For COVID knowledge index and social
distancing index, controls also include week of survey.




                                                                  54
                Table A8: 2017 Labor Market Outcomes


                         (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)
                      Worked               Has wage
                      for pay    Public    contract     Job
                      in past    sector      with       with       Self-
                     6 months   employee   employer   benefits   employed
                       (2017)    (2017)     (2017)     (2017)     (2017)
Panel A: All
Treatment              0.031     0.032       0.033     0.045       -0.050
                      (0.021)   (0.010)     (0.013)   (0.015)     (0.020)
P-value                0.131     0.002       0.013     0.003        0.012
Comparison mean        0.733     0.026       0.061     0.084        0.255
N                      1970      1968        1968      1968         1968

Panel B: Female
Treatment              0.021     0.041       0.025     0.042       -0.076
                      (0.033)   (0.015)     (0.018)   (0.020)     (0.030)
P-value                0.516     0.005       0.166     0.035        0.010
Comparison mean        0.629     0.021       0.058     0.066        0.305
N                       997       996         996       996          996

Panel C: Male
Treatment              0.031     0.023       0.040     0.046       -0.020
                      (0.023)   (0.014)     (0.020)   (0.023)     (0.027)
P-value                0.188     0.108       0.043     0.048        0.452
Comparison mean        0.844     0.031       0.064     0.103        0.202
N                       973       972         972       972          972

P-val male=fem         0.835     0.385      0.566      0.894      0.146
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                   55
Table A9: Earnings Bounds for females not induced by the program to still be in tertiary


                                           Total earnings last 6 mo. (GHX)

                                               (1)               (2)
                                           Lower bound       Upper bound
                     Panel A: 2017
                     Treatment                 80.19            249.87
                                              (78.69)           (72.66)
                     P-value                   0.308             0.001
                     Comparison mean          647.49            647.49
                     N                          969               866

                     Panel B: 2019
                     Treatment                 35.79            251.52
                                             (108.46)          (101.78)
                     P-value                  0.741              0.014
                     Comparison mean          951.46            951.46
                     N                          972               916

                     Panel C: 2020
                     Treatment                262.98            377.81
                                             (149.38)          (130.41)
                     P-value                  0.079              0.004
                     Comparison mean         1008.08           1008.08
                     N                         826                775
                Notes: See Table 2 notes for controls. Panel A shows results for
                2019; Panel B for 2019; Panel C for 2020. We only compute bounds
                for females since there is no differential tertiary enrollment for
                males. Bounds are calculated in the following way: Let X be the
                treatment effect on currently attending tertiary school. For upper
                bounds, top X% of control earners removed. All respondents cur-
                rently enrolled in tertiary removed for bounds calculations. Lower
                bounds are the treatment effects shown in Table 6.




                                               56
                          Table A10: Impact of Scholarship on Mental Health and Satisfaction


                              (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                            If employed:                                                      If has
                            Mental         Satisfaction          job          Confident       If employed:                   earnings:
                            health             index        satisfaction       can get             job         Actively      actively
                             index              1-5              1-5          better job      satisfaction     searching    searching
                              1-5            (1=very          (1=very        1-5 (5=very      1-5 (1=very         for           for
                        (1=depressed)      unsatisfied)     unsatisfied)      confident)      unsatisfied)        job          a job
                            (2013)            (2013)           (2017)           (2017)           (2019)         (2019)        (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment                    -0.002           -0.001           -0.196            0.071           -0.195          0.075         0.092
                            (0.048)           (0.038)          (0.084)          (0.030)          (0.077)        (0.022)       (0.027)
P-value                      0.968             0.972            0.020            0.018            0.011          0.001         0.001
Comparison mean              -0.000            3.318            3.773            4.811            3.750          0.242         0.197
N                            1981              1981             1218             1221             1286           1952          1172


Panel B: Female
Treatment                    -0.019            0.097           -0.085            0.077           -0.143          0.085         0.144
                            (0.065)           (0.052)          (0.127)          (0.044)          (0.120)        (0.030)       (0.039)
P-value                      0.775             0.062            0.501            0.080            0.234          0.004         0.000
Comparison mean              -0.037            3.310            3.819            4.814            3.761          0.198         0.115
N                            1001              1001              542              543              541            986           482


Panel C: Male
Treatment                    0.013            -0.095           -0.266            0.066           -0.240          0.062         0.054
                            (0.069)           (0.054)          (0.113)          (0.040)          (0.100)        (0.032)       (0.037)
P-value                      0.849             0.082            0.018            0.102            0.016          0.051         0.140
Comparison mean              0.038             3.327            3.734            4.808            3.742          0.288         0.254
N                             980               980              676              678              745            966           690


P-val male=fem               0.828             0.012            0.291            0.868            0.531          0.619         0.083
Notes: See Table 2 Notes. The mental health index consists of asking whether the respondent was each of the following in the past
few days: bothered by usually unbothersome things, having trouble focusing, depressed, feeling that everything they did was an
effort, hopeful about the future, fearful, and sleeping restlessly. The satisfaction index consists of the following: life satisfaction,
financial satisfaction, and satisfaction of life compared to that of others.




                                                                  57
Appendix A: Model Proofs


Proof of Proposition 1:

                                                                                              1
(i) Given that the lower support of the shock in the skill production function is  >  - 1,  -
                                                                                              

                                                1-
   , offspring's skill level will be at least        . With effort of 1, they can therefore have income
                                                

higher than 1 in self-employment sector. This ensures that they equalize the marginal utility from
consuming good 1 to 1 and consume positive quantity of good 2. They will therefore behave as if
they are risk neutral.



The utility maximization problem faced by the offspring is:
                                                        1
                                        max      1
                                                   + 2 - 2 +  
                                          1  2
                                      { ,  ,  }         2
                                                . . 1 +  2   []
Since this labor market is competitive, fixed costs in the competitive private sector are borne by the
worker and hence expected wages in the competitive sectors are  [ ] =   +  in self-
employment and  [ ] =   +  ­  in the private competitive sector. In the public sector,
                                                            
wage is fixed at  =   +  ­  . Solving the UMP gives rise to  = 1 in the self-employment

and competitive private sectors and   = 0 in the public sector, as (i) states.
(ii) Moreover, optimum consumption of good 1 is 1 for all three sectors and maximum expected
                                  1                                     1
utilities are  [ ] =   - 2 +   ,  [ ] =   -  - 2 +   and  [ ] =   +  -

 - 1 +   , respectively.



A worker will therefore be indifferent between working in the self-employment and the competitive
                                                                             1                1
private sector if maximal expected utility is equalized, that is,   - 2 =   -  - 2. So, highly
                                      
skilled workers with skill s>            will prefer to work and be paid their marginal product in the
                                   - 

                                                                                                          
competitive private sector to working in the self-employment sector while those with skill s< 
                                                                                                           - 

will choose self-employment.



                                                          58
                                          
Highly skilled workers with skill s>            and tertiary education will prefer to work in the public
                                          - 

             1
sector.   2 implies workers will always have higher utility in the public sector than in the private
competitive sector, regardless of their skill level. This gives the result in (ii).


Proof of Proposition 2: (i) Let  ( ) =  [ | = 1] -  [ | = 0] denote the gain in
perceived expected utility of the offspring if the household chooses to enroll them in secondary
school.

Substituting the budget constraints in the objective function, we have that the household with a
wealth level   1 +  will solve the following problem:

                                                                                 3
                   max  1           1
                         0 +  ­   -  +  ( [ | = 0] -                               +  )
                     1
                  { , 0 }                                                        2
As explained in the proof for Proposition 1, offspring will earn at least  > 1 and hence will be
consuming on the linear portion of their utility function. Their income therefore enters linearly in
the parents' utility function. This condition seems reasonable since all the children in the sample
completed primary education and scored well enough to pass the BECE exam and gain admission to
secondary school, and since Ghana has experienced robust economic growth since 2017.

                                           1    1
The first order conditions with respect to   is  = 1. This implies that the household with a

wealth level  > 1 +  will choose secondary education  = 1 if and only if

                                                                        3
                  1
                            1
                    +  ­  ­  +   [ | = 0] -                               +  
                                                                        2
                                     1      1
                                                                                      3
                                       +  ­  +   [ | = 0] -                             
                                                                                      2

This simplifies to     .

                                                                            1
Households with wealth level 1 <  < 1 +  will have to choose between buying   = 1 and

spending the rest on 2                                             1
                      or buying education and spending the rest on  . Hence,  = 1 if and

only if

                         3                            3
    ( ­  ) +   [ | = 0] - +    1 +  - 1 +   [ | = 0] - 
                         2                            2



                                                      59
This simplifies to     - 1 - ( -  ).


Households with   1 will be unable to consume in the region where their utility increases
linearly, that is, they will be unable to consume any good 2. They will invest in secondary education
if and only if:

                                               3                     3
          ( ­  ) +   [ | = 0] -                  +     +   [ | = 0] - 
                                               2                     2

Rearranging this gives     - ln( ­  ).


Therefore, the thresholds for choosing  = 1 by households with different wealth levels are:


                  (a)     if   1 + 

                  (b)     - 1 - ( -  ) if 1 <  < 1 + 

                  (c)     - ( ­  ) if   1


Noting that  =  if  = 0 and  if  = 1 with    and the thresholds for   are

increasing in the cost of education, it is clear that households with   1 will face a lower threshold
for choosing  = 1 in the treatment group compared to that in the comparison group. For the
other two possibilities, we need to account for the factor that a change in the cost of education
might change the classification of the household. For example, households with wealth level
1 <  < 1 +  would have either 1 +  >   1 +  or 1 <  < 1 +  . If they were
chosen for the treatment group, in the first case, the corresponding threshold would change from
 - 1 - ( -  ) to  - 1 - ( -  ), and in the second to  . It is easy to see that in the
first case the threshold decreases if the household receives the treatment. In the second case, there is
also a decrease since  <  + 1 and therefore  - 1 - ( -  ) >  >  . Hence, for any
wealth level , households in the treatment group will face a lower threshold for weighted utility
gain   from choosing  = 1 than households in the comparison group (we refer to this result

as I).


We have that the reward from enrollment in secondary education for the offspring is:

                               (
                                 ) =  [ | = 1] -  [ | = 0]

                                                  60
Taking the derivative of  with respect to perceived ability, we get:

                                   [ | = 1]  [ | = 1]
                                 
                                  =        -          =
                                                

                             [ | = 1]  | =1 [ | = 0]  | =0
                                           -
                              | =1            | =0     
                                                                   


                 [ | =1]  [ | =0]                     [ | =1]       [ | =0]
We know that         | =1
                            ,     | =0
                                           > 0 and     | =1
                                                                         | =0
                                                                                . The derivatives will be
                                                                          

identical if secondary school does not lead the offspring to choose a different sector in the labor
market while the strict inequality will hold otherwise. Note from the results in Proposition 1 that an
increase in skill will never lead the offspring to choose another sector with lower return to skill than
the original one.

                       | =1  | =0
We also know that        
                         
                           ,   
                               
                                         > 0 and due to the complementarity between education and
                      

ability in the skill technology, and since an investment in secondary education increases the
                                     | =1         | =0          
education level of the offspring,     
                                        
                                             >     
                                                   
                                                         . Hence 
                                                                  
                                                                   > 0 and by continuity there exists a
                                                                     

threshold level of the estimate of child ability above which all households will invest in education
which gives the result in (i).

(ii) All else equal, this threshold level of ability will be greater for households in the comparison
group than the treatment group given the derivation in (i) above. This yields the result in (ii).

Proof of Proposition 3: (i) If all households are identical in wealth and if all households weigh
boys' and girls' utility equally, all households will face the same ability threshold  . Scholarships
lowering the cost of education from  to  will lead all households to lower this threshold for
ability given Proposition 2. Therefore, the marginal children getting education in response to this
scholarship will have lower ability. This gives the result in (i).
(ii) On the other hand, if there is heterogeneity in wealth and thus thresholds, it is possible that
marginal secondary school students could have higher initial ability than inframarginal secondary
school students. To see this, consider an extreme case in which there are two types of household
with the same  : rich with  > 1 +  and poor with  < 1. Suppose that   =  for the

rich households so that they send their children to secondary school whereas   <  -

( ­  ) for the poor households so that they do not send their children to school. For  < 1,

                                                      61
 - ( ­  ) >  , so we can further assume   >  , for the poor households. Then a
                  -( - ) exp(    )
scholarship of                        which ensures that   =  - ( ­  ) for the poor
                    exp(     )

households will induce them to send their children to school while leaving the decisions of the rich
households unchanged. These marginal children will have a higher ability than the inframarginal
children since  faced by the poor households is greater than that faced by the rich households and
 is increasing in ability as shown in Proposition 2. This proves the result in (ii).

(iii) Similarly, if households are heterogenous in their level of altruism for the child's welfare, with
some caring more about their children, for example, because of preferences for boys, then the
marginal children induced to secondary education may have higher ability than inframarginal
children.
To see this, assume there are two types of households, household  with higher level of parental
altruism for their child's welfare  ,  with lower level  and a child with higher ability, all other
parameters are equal. Neither faces credit constraint, i.e.,  =  > 1 +  . As  > , it can be
that   >     >   , in other words household  send their children to secondary
education, while household  whose child has higher ability does not. A scholarship such that
  >  will mean that marginal children induced to enroll in secondary education due to the
scholarship will have higher ability than the marginal children. This proves (iii). This also implies that
if there is heterogeneity in gender bias, then the marginal girls induced into school by free secondary
education may have higher ability than inframarginal girls.

(iv) Finally, if there is heterogeneity in ability perception, it is also possible that marginal students
have higher initial ability than inframarginal ones. Consider again two households where one
perceives the offspring's ability following function  () and the other following a function  (),
where  () >  () over the entire support of , we also know that  >  . The income levels
are such that  =  > 1 +  and all other parameters are the same. Under this scenario, it could
be the case that     >   . Once again, scholarship that guarantees   >  would lead
the pessimistic household (l) to invest in secondary education and the marginal offspring would have
higher ability than the inframarginal. This proves (iv).


                                     
Proof of Proposition 4: (i) Since  > 0 and wages increase with skill in all sectors, marginal
students are guaranteed to improve their utility either through a transfer or through changes in


                                                     62
wages with a scholarship. Inframarginal students, however, will not change their education level with
the scholarship and therefore will remain with the same skill level and wages. So, for them, the
scholarship represents only a transfer. This proves (i).
(ii) Suppose initially a population where no household chooses  = 1 and all offspring choose the
private wage-employment sector regardless of the scholarship. A scholarship induces  = 1 for the
entire population and some manage to graduate from secondary school, although no one completes
tertiary education even with the scholarship. In this case, a scholarship would increase the skill
distribution of the population and their wages in the private competitive sector, consequentially
increasing average earnings.
Alternatively, consider that the entire population completes secondary education regardless of the
scholarship (all inframarginal students). In this case, a scholarship would have no impact on average
earnings.
Finally, suppose that the population includes one high skilled worker with skill 1 such that
                                                                                   
1 =0 >            and one low skilled worker with skill 2, such that 2 =0 <             , in the absence
             -                                                                     - 

of the scholarship, no one completes secondary education and worker 2 chooses self-employment.
The average earnings without the scholarship is simply 0.5 ×  (1) +  (2). Now consider
that with the scholarship, both offspring complete secondary education and the high skilled worker
completes tertiary education, becoming eligible for the public sector. The skill levels increase to
                                      1-                                          
1 =1 and 2 =1 where 1 =0 +             
                                           > 1 =1 > 1 =0 and 2 =1 =                    > 2 =0. Note
                                                                                  - 

that since  =   +  ­  and  =   +  ­  we will have  1 =1  <  1 =0 .

Therefore, the high skilled worker will experience an increase in utility but a decrease in wage with
the transfer. Additionally, the low skilled worker will be able to join the competitive private sector
with the scholarship but earning a lower wage than  (1) since 2 =1 < 1 =0 . Both changes
lead the average earnings in the wage sectors to decrease. It can also lead to a decrease in overall
average earnings if  1 =0  -  1 =1  >  2 =1  -  2 =0 . These three
examples prove (ii).

Proof of Proposition 5: (i) The argument for the proof is as follows. At t=2, secondary graduates
who do well enough in school continue to tertiary education while the rest joins the labor market.
Those who are in tertiary education at t=2 might earn more at t=3 than those that were already in
the labor market. However, at t=2, those in tertiary education certainly do not have any earnings
(foregone due to education), therefore earning less than those in the labor market. With a

                                                   63
scholarship for secondary education, there will be marginal students who will go to secondary
education, of which some will eventually end up progressing to tertiary education, only joining the
labor market at t=3. Hence the difference of earnings between the treatment group and the
comparison group will be larger at t=3. This gives (i).

(ii) At t=3, high ability agents who secure public sector jobs will reduce their effort and take part of
their rents as increased utility. In the treatment group, a share of the marginal tertiary graduates will
be able to get premium jobs and simultaneously increase their utility beyond an increase in wage.
Therefore, comparing the difference in earnings conditional on employment between the treatment
and control group will underestimate the welfare effect. This gives (ii).

Proof of Proposition 6: We know that production in the public sector is given by  =   +
            
 ­  . Let  [ ] denote the maximum expected utility of public sector workers. Solving the utility

maximization problem as before gives  [
                                        ] =   +  -  - 1 +  , which is the case for
                        
 = 0, which leads to  [ ] =   ­  . Consider a scenario where a single offspring received the
                                                                                    
scholarship, experiencing an increase in skill level from  =0 to  =1 , where              <  =0 <
                                                                                    - 

 =1. The expected variation in net economic output caused by this cross-sectoral switch is:
                           out
                           i   =   =1 -  -   =0 - 1 +  - 

We use  to capture the cost to society of the extra individual in secondary education. If  is
sufficiently greater than  and/or  =1 sufficiently greater than  =0 such that   =1 -
  =0 >  + 1 -  +  then there will be an expected production gain from the cross-sectoral

switch. In this case, if the household decides to invest on education, we can also expect a positive
gain in terms of net economic output. This scenario could also motivate a scholarship program to
capture the incentives of production gain, which are not reflected in the institutionalized wage. In
the opposite case, where   =1 -   =0 <  + 1 -  +  , the household would have
private gains from having the offspring migrating from the private wage-employment sector to
public, all else equal, while the net economic output would decrease. In this scenario, it could even
make sense to tax education to reduce entry in the public sector.

We can easily build an analogous case where the migration happens from self-employment to the
public sector, in this case the left-hand side would be   =1 -   =0 and the right-hand side
would be  + 1. Once again, if   =1 -   =0 >  + 1 +  , the scholarship would lead to



                                                    64
net economic production gains, and if   =1 -   =0 <  + 1 +  the scholarship will lead
to losses.

                                                                            
Consider now that there are 2 workers in the economy, one with skill             < 1 and  = 1 in the
                                                                            - 


absence of the scholarship and skill 1 = 3,  > 1 and  = 3 with the scholarship. Worker 2 is
an inframarginal secondary school student and has skill that follows 2 = 2 > (3, ) and  = 3
regardless of the scholarship. Worker 1 chooses the private sector in the absence of the scholarship
and the public sector in the counterfactual scenario. Worker 2 always chooses the public sector. We
assume that there is only one position in the public sector. In the absence of the scholarship,
economic production is given by:

                                   |=0 =  2 ­  +  1 + 1­ 

Where we assume  = 0. In the scenario with the scholarship there are two possibilities of
outcomes since both workers prefer the public sector. In the first case, worker 2 is selected to the
public sector and the total economic production is:

                             |=1 =  2 ­  +  1 + 1­  >  |=0

We abstract away the education cost in this example to focus on the impact of the lottery selection,
which does not change our conclusions. In the second case, if worker 1 is selected to work in the
public sector, the total economic production is:

                             |=1 =  1 ­  +  2 + 1­  >  |=0

In the latter case, there is certain loss of production in the public sector and certain gain in
productivity in the competitive private sector. So, it could be the case that:

                                      2 +  1 >  1 +  2

This could be the case even if we have:

                                       1 -  1 >  + 1 - 

Implying that  |=0 >  |=1 despite the individual improvement in productivity for the worker
that migrated to the public sector. A simple example is enough to prove this such as:  = 2,  =
1, 1 = 3, 1 = 4, 2 = 6,  = 0.5,  =  = 1.5.



                                                    65
Appendix B: Comparison between OLS, IV and DML estimate

This section computes instrumental variable (IV) estimates of the effect of an extra year of education,
compares them to the OLS, and tests whether the IV estimates can be recovered through recent new
non-experimental machine learning techniques.

For the IV, we assume that net non-educational effects and effects on infra-marginal applicants can
be neglected, and estimate:

                                          =  +   + 

where Si is the number of years of education for individual i and yi is the outcome of interest. We use
winning the scholarship as an instrument for years of education. This estimates the local treatment
effect of education on compliers. It is therefore of interest to know how compliers compare to always-
takers in background characteristics. Tables B1 and B2 show the difference in background
characteristics between treatment and control groups, among those who completed senior high school.
Interestingly, we find no difference in the junior high school exit exam score, suggesting that compliers
and always takers were performing equally, and confirming the premise that ability to pay fees is the
key barrier to enrollment for compliers.

Before using the scholarship as an instrument, however, we need to discuss its validity. We now argue
that non-educational channels of scholarship effects are likely to be small, and that while exclusion
restrictions are probably not literally satisfied, instrumental variable estimates of the effect of education
based on using random assignment of scholarship receipt are likely to be reasonable approximations
of the causal effect of education.

A first concern with using the scholarship assignment as an instrument is that the scholarship
represented a wealth transfer to infra-marginal families who would have paid for senior high school
in the absence of the scholarship. But it also reduced earnings by children induced to attend senior
high school by the scholarship during the period of senior high school enrollment. We estimate that
these effects roughly offset each other in our context.

To see this, note that for those who would have paid for senior high school themselves in the absence
of a scholarship ("always takers"), the scholarship is akin to GHX 33 2,328 cash transfer to the family


33   All numbers reported in 2017 GHX.

                                                     66
of the student. As they make up about 50% of the scholarship winners (based on the control group,
58% would have enrolled anyway and 54.3% would have completed all four years absent the
scholarship), this makes the wealth transfer GHX 1,164 on average for the treatment group as a whole.

In contrast, those who go to secondary school due to the scholarship ("compliers"), forego labor
market earnings while in school and incur extra expenditure on school materials. Based on our
estimates of foregone earnings while in senior high school and extra schooling expenditure over the
lifetime of the scholarship (Table B3), we calculate a total cost in 2017 GHX of 1,294. Reductions in
unpaid household labor by students induced to attend senior high school by the scholarship
presumably increase this amount, but we do not have the data to put a GHX value on this. Overall,
the positive and negative effects on household income are comparable in size and seem to offset each
other (though obviously the gains and losses are experienced by different households ­ the always
takers for the reduction in school fees and the compliers for the reduction in earnings-- and at different
time periods). We also find no impact of the scholarship on the educational attainment of siblings,
consistent with the hypothesis that wealth effects on household investments due to the scholarship
are small.

There could also be psychological effects of winning a lottery that are different from the effects of a
scholarship per se. We collected data to check for this channel. As shown in Table B3, we do not see
large effects on risk or time preferences. We also see no evidence that the scholarship affected
confidence levels (see Figure B1).

Overall the non-education impacts of the scholarship appear modest, suggesting that using the
scholarship as an instrument for years of education may provide a reasonable approximation of the
true effect.

One other potential channel through which the exclusion restriction could be violated is if the
scholarships affected later outcomes such as tertiary education, fertility, or labor market outcomes,
not only by increasing the chance that marginal students ("compliers") would attend secondary school,
but also by affecting effort in school, or other determinants of academic success, by infra-marginal
students ("always takers"). Hypothetically, scholarships could have increased effort for these infra-
marginal students by making them less likely to have been temporarily kicked out of school for failure
to pay school fees, or to have experienced stress around this possibility, or by making them more
certain that they would be able to afford to complete school. Of course, it is also possible that



                                                   67
scholarships reduced effort among these students because they no longer had to fear withdrawal of
financial support if they did not maintain high academic performance.

Table B4 reports OLS and IV estimates of the returns to education for our key outcomes: test scores,
fertility, health behavior, type of employment, earnings. The OLS estimates are based on the control
group only. The IV estimates use the full sample and instrument years of education with the
randomized scholarship treatment assignment. We present the OLS results without any controls, the
OLS results controlling for BECE score, and the IV. The OLS estimates are at times higher
(educational attainment, learning) and at times lower (earnings, preventative health behavior) than the
IV estimates of the returns.


We perform a Lalonde (AER 1986)-type exercise to test whether we can recover the IV estimates
from the control group with recent Machine Learning (ML) techniques. Specifically, we ask: can causal
effects be recovered by controlling for the very rich set of control variables (over 1,000) that we
collected at baseline?


To select from among the many available observables that can be used as control, we apply the Double
Machine Learning method proposed in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). In a nutshell, the estimate works
by using a random forest to flexibly partial out the effect of the baseline control variables from both
the outcome variables and the education variable, to recover the causal effect of education, under the
assumption that assignment is as good as random, once these sets of variables is controlled for.


The results suggest that, despite the wealth of control variables available, the machine learning
estimates are generally quite close to OLS estimates, suggesting that the observed covariates do very
little to account for the selection bias into education. For most outcomes, the weighted DoubleML
estimate is closer to the IV estimate than the raw OLS estimate, but in most cases less than half of the
gap is closed. For example, the OLS estimates of the effect of education on test scores (0.25 for
females and 0.16 for males) is larger than the IV estimate (0.15 for females and 0.09 for males), perhaps
reflecting a standard ability bias. The DoubleML estimate is 0.22 for females and 0.16 for males­a
little lower than the OLS, but not by much.


One possible reason why the IV and the DoubleML estimates are different even if both are causal
estimates is that the OLS and IV estimate effects for different subgroups: the IV estimates the local
average treatment effect on compliers (those who can only attend secondary education if they get a

                                                   68
scholarship) while the OLS estimates effects for always takers. To account for this, we developed a
weighted DoubleML estimate, which uses DoubleML to estimate the average treatment effect for
those who share the observable characteristics of the compliers. In practice, we first use a random
forest to obtain an estimate of conditional average treatment effect (CATE) as a function of the
baseline variable. This allows us to predict, as a function of the observable variable, the probability
that each person is a complier. These estimates are then used to weight the observation in the second
stage to obtain the estimates for a sample that is observationally equivalent to the complier group. A
finding that the "weighted DoubleML" estimate is close to the IV estimate would imply that any
difference between the regular DoubleML and the IV are due to the fact that the IV recovers a
different estimate, suggesting that the (unweighted) DoubleML may be a good estimate of the ATE
on education. As it turns out, the weighted DoubleML does get closer to the IV for most outcomes,
though not always.


Overall, these results suggest that despite the challenges and costs associated with longitudinal
datasets, identifying other sources of experimental or quasi-experimental variation in educational
attainment coupled with long-run follow up-data is going to be key to accurately measure the effect
of secondary education. On a side note, it also suggests that continuing to stress-test the DoubleML
approach by comparing experimental and non-experimental variation would be very valuable.




                                                  69
                  Figure B1: Effects of Scholarship on accuracy of beliefs about relative performance


                                                                           Female




                                                                                                                 .0005
                                       400  300




                                                                                                                            .0004
                               Perceived rank




                                                                                                                      Density
                                   200




                                                                                                                 .0003
                                       100




                                                                                                                 .0002
                                       0




                                                  0                  500     1000      1500               2000
                                                                           Real rank

                                                      Linear fits:           Control          Treatment
                                                      Densities:             Control          Treatment



                                                                            Male




                                                                                                                 .0005
                                       400




                                                                                                                           .0004
                                          300
                               Perceived rank




                                                                                                                     Density
                                200




                                                                                                                 .0003
                                       100




                                                                                                                 .0002


                                                  0                  500     1000      1500               2000
                                                                           Real rank

                                                      Linear fits:           Control          Treatment
                                                      Densities:             Control          Treatment


Notes: "Real rank" is the rank on the math and reading comprehension test administered during the 2013 follow-up survey. "Perceived
rank" is the rank that the respondent reported when asked, immediately after the test: "We are administering this survey to around
2,000 youths your age (1,000 boys and 1,000 girls). All of those we are interviewing completed JHS around the same time as you, in
2007 or 2008. Overall, how do you think your performance on the games will compare to that of the others? Try to guess your rank
between 1 and 2,000, with 1 being the person with the highest/top score and 2,000 being the person with the lowest score." The density
(right-hand y-axis) shows the distribution of the real rank, by treatment group. The linear fits show the relationship between the real
rank (x-axis) and the perceived rank (left-hand y-axis), by treatment group.




                                                                             70
                                                Table B1: Comparing Compliers and Always-Takers: Education


                        (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)        (12)
                                                    BECE                     Years of       Highest    Perceived    Perceived                                      Ever
                    Completed        BECE        performance    Admitted    education     education     returns      returns    Reading     Math       Total     enrolled
                      BECE            exam           data          to         of HH      of HH head:    to SHS       to SHS        test      test    cognitive      in
                     in 2007      performance      missing      academic       head         tertiary      (%)        > 100%       score     score      score     tertiary
                      (2008)         (2008)         (2008)       major        (2008)         (2008)     (2008)       (2008)      (2013)    (2013)     (2013)      (2019)
Panel A: All
Treatment              0.035          -0.002        0.014         0.022       -0.456        -0.021       25.959       0.017      -0.018     0.024      0.006      -0.029
                      (0.018)        (0.005)       (0.015)       (0.029)     (0.316)       (0.013)      (35.790)     (0.031)    (0.042)    (0.052)    (0.047)    (0.026)
P-value                0.047           0.603        0.356         0.462       0.149         0.113        0.468        0.592      0.669      0.642      0.892       0.270
Comparison mean        0.080           0.632        0.064         0.410        6.127         0.066      281.445       0.468       0.391     0.302      0.403      0.289
N                      1193            1110         1193          1166         1188          1188         1036        1036        1164      1164       1164        1152

Panel B: Female
Treatment              0.079          -0.009        0.004         -0.014      -0.713        -0.036       38.254       0.007      -0.059     0.071      0.016      0.024
                      (0.037)        (0.007)       (0.022)       (0.044)     (0.471)       (0.020)      (52.827)     (0.048)    (0.065)    (0.081)    (0.074)    (0.040)
P-value                0.033           0.175        0.843         0.752       0.130         0.066        0.469        0.878      0.367      0.381      0.832      0.552
Comparison mean        0.180           0.631        0.065          0.450       6.377         0.079      293.682       0.490       0.427     0.182      0.344      0.276
N                       530             495          530            514         529           529         450          450         517       517        517        510

Panel C: Male
Treatment              0.000          0.003         0.020         0.047       -0.200        -0.009       21.456       0.026      0.016      -0.010     0.002      -0.066
                        (.)          (0.006)       (0.020)       (0.039)     (0.426)       (0.017)      (48.026)     (0.042)    (0.056)    (0.068)    (0.060)    (0.035)
P-value                  .            0.647         0.329         0.226       0.639         0.619        0.655        0.529      0.770      0.882      0.973      0.061
Comparison mean        0.000          0.633         0.063         0.379       5.926          0.055      271.895       0.451      0.363       0.396     0.450      0.299
N                       663            615           663           652         659            659         586          586        647         647       647        642

P-val male=fem         0.032         0.194          0.616         0.284       0.372         0.294        0.862        0.760      0.396      0.454     0.887       0.106

Notes: See Table 1 notes. Controls include region dummies. Compliers and always-takers are determined by those who had completed SHS as of 2020 (or any year prior).




                                                                                  71
                                         Table B2: Comparing Compliers and Always-Takers: Descriptive Characteristics


                       (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)          (11)                (12)
                                                                                           House walls                         HH member      Meal w/o          Self-reported
                                          No male    Number                  Yearly          made of:    Number                  went to      meat/fish           financial
                                          head in     of HH       Ever         HH          mud, wood,    of rooms    Toilet    bed hungry     because no       situation, 1-5
                     Age in              household   members     had sex   expenditure       plastic,    in house   in house   in last mo.   money in last    (5 = very poor)
                      2008     Female      (2008)     (2008)     (2008)      (2008)        iron (2008)    (2008)     (2008)      (2008)       mo. (2008)             2008
Panel A: All
Treatment             0.154     -0.001     0.027       -0.103     -0.004     127.902          -0.012      0.055      -0.027       0.055           0.014            0.071
                     (0.087)   (0.029)    (0.029)     (0.139)    (0.025)    (129.240)        (0.028)     (0.144)    (0.029)      (0.019)         (0.023)          (0.040)
P-value               0.078     0.978      0.350       0.461      0.886       0.323           0.673       0.704       0.366       0.005           0.539            0.077
Comparison mean      17.048      0.445     0.410       5.715      0.239     2603.802           0.438      3.016       0.413       0.095           0.182            3.853
N                     1191       1193      1192         1192       1192       1190             1190       1169        1120        1189            1182             1185

Panel B: Female
Treatment             0.299     0.000      -0.006      -0.055     0.002      159.277          0.003       0.106      -0.010       0.021           0.036            0.060
                     (0.128)     (.)      (0.044)     (0.196)    (0.042)    (185.400)        (0.042)     (0.229)    (0.044)      (0.027)         (0.033)          (0.059)
P-value               0.019       .        0.896       0.779      0.958       0.391           0.937       0.644      0.813        0.436           0.274            0.315
Comparison mean      16.852     1.000      0.435       5.663      0.340     2565.644          0.392       3.043      0.413        0.098           0.142            3.797
N                      528       530        530         530        529         528             529         522        502          530             525              529

Panel C: Male
Treatment             0.031     0.000      0.053       -0.122     -0.012     101.079          -0.027      0.006      -0.042       0.080           -0.003           0.080
                     (0.118)     (.)      (0.039)     (0.197)    (0.028)    (181.954)        (0.039)     (0.183)    (0.040)      (0.027)         (0.032)          (0.054)
P-value               0.795       .        0.173       0.536      0.665       0.579           0.490       0.976      0.294        0.003            0.926           0.139
Comparison mean      17.205     0.000      0.391       5.756      0.157     2634.349           0.475      2.995      0.414        0.092            0.213           3.899
N                      663       663        662         662        663         662              661        647        618          659              657             656

P-val male=fem        0.114       .        0.306       0.865      0.718       0.805           0.567       0.711      0.568        0.137          0.399             0.799

Notes: See Table 1 notes. Controls include region dummies. Compliers and always-takers are determined by those who had completed SHS as of 2020 (or any year prior).




                                                                                      72
                        Table B3: Impact of Scholarship on Foregone earnings, Preferences



                            (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)
                        Avg. mo.
                         earnings               Amt. willing    Amt. needed                          Extremely
                           btw.                 to invest in       in two                            impatient
                        Jan 2009       Trust    high-payoff        days to                            in both
                           and          in       but risky        forgo 40       Time      Present    present
                        July 2012     general     business       GHS today    consistent    bias     and future
                          (2013)      (2013)       (2013)          (2013)       (2013)     (2013)      (2013)
 Panel A: All
 Treatment                   -7.581    0.083       1.011           -0.993       0.014       0.001      -0.002
                            (1.162)   (0.035)     (1.365)         (5.917)      (0.024)     (0.021)    (0.013)
 P-value                      0.000    0.018       0.459           0.867        0.541       0.964       0.857
 Comparison mean            12.249     0.000      51.077          100.783       0.409       0.258       0.087
 N                            1939     1981        1981             1981        1981        1981        1984

 Panel B: Female
 Treatment                   -5.564    0.150       0.374           -2.128       0.009       0.003      -0.008
                            (1.214)   (0.048)     (1.970)         (8.110)      (0.033)     (0.030)    (0.018)
 P-value                      0.000     0.002      0.850           0.793        0.787       0.912       0.646
 Comparison mean             8.996     -0.044     51.136          99.727        0.400       0.270      0.085
 N                             978      1001       1001             1001        1001        1001        1002

 Panel C: Male
 Treatment                   -9.796    0.012       1.838           0.285        0.018       -0.001     0.004
                            (1.982)   (0.050)     (1.889)         (8.644)      (0.034)     (0.029)    (0.019)
 P-value                      0.000    0.814       0.331           0.974        0.595        0.982     0.845
 Comparison mean            15.640     0.047      51.015          101.885       0.418        0.245     0.089
 N                             961      980         980             980          980          980       982

 P-val male=fem             0.062     0.060        0.634           0.859        0.819       0.964      0.670
Notes: See Table 2 Notes.




                                                           73
                                 Table B4: Can IV estimates be recovered with ML?

                                 (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)
                                Total        Number      Preventive        Ever           Wage        Earnings      Earnings
                            standardized     children       health       enrolled     contract w/       in last      in last
                                score        ever had       index       in tertiary     employer        6 mos.       6 mos.
                               (2013)         (2017)        (2013)        (2019)         (2019)         (2019)       (2020)
  Panel A: Female
  OLS with no controls          0.263         -0.205        0.003          0.092          0.026        137.936      206.999
                               (0.018)        (0.015)      (0.016)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (31.230)     (45.730)
  OLS with controls             0.254         -0.205        -0.007         0.091          0.025        139.457      200.938
                               (0.018)        (0.015)      (0.017)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (32.452)     (44.864)
  DoubleML                      0.217         -0.160        -0.009         0.084          0.021        129.643      158.062
                               (0.021)        (0.018)      (0.016)        (0.005)        (0.004)       (26.564)     (32.445)
  Weighted DML                  0.205         -0.127        -0.001         0.095          0.023        148.526      207.576
                               (0.020)        (0.018)      (0.017)        (0.005)        (0.004)       (27.902)     (35.928)
  IV                            0.154         -0.149        0.095          0.061          0.033         28.326      193.045
                               (0.049)        (0.052)      (0.041)        (0.015)        (0.013)       (85.815)    (100.333)


  Panel B: Male
  OLS with no controls          0.167         -0.086        0.017          0.101          0.013         22.115      207.645
                               (0.018)        (0.014)      (0.017)        (0.005)        (0.006)       (34.621)     (55.471)
  OLS with controls             0.158         -0.086        0.018          0.099          0.013         14.629      192.883
                               (0.018)        (0.014)      (0.017)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (34.425)     (55.398)
  DoubleML                      0.095         -0.060        0.025          0.098          0.009         30.284      192.452
                               (0.016)        (0.013)      (0.014)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (33.930)     (47.894)
  Weighted DML                  0.119         -0.058        0.026          0.099          0.007         23.495      221.721
                               (0.018)        (0.012)      (0.016)        (0.005)        (0.005)       (34.081)     (52.930)
  IV                            0.094         -0.029        0.080          0.009          0.031        -11.072      -141.235
                               (0.047)        (0.040)      (0.044)        (0.022)        (0.019)      (125.353)    (167.290)
Notes: See text section 8 for details. Panel A shows results for females; Panel B for males. Row 1 shows results from an OLS
regression (control group only) with years of education as the dependent variable and without any controls. Row 2 shows results
from an OLS regression (control group only) with years of education as the dependent variables and controlling for region fixed
effects, JHS finishing exam score (BECE), and missing JHS finishing exam scores. Row 3 shows results using the Double Machine
Learning (DML) procedure for the control group. Row 4 shows results using the DML procedure, weighting the control group
to be representative of a sample resembling the treatment group compliers, based on baseline observables. Row 5 shows results
from IV regressions, instrumenting years of education with treatment, and with the same controls as in the OLS with controls
specification. Refer to Table A7 for the components of the preventive health index. Earnings are winsorized at the 99% level. In
2013, 1,280 observations for OLS and 1,907 observations for IV. In 2017, 1,266 observations for OLS and 1,891 for IV. In 2019,
1,297 observations for OLS and 1,951 for IV. In 2019, 1,131 observations for OLS and 1,722 for IV.




                                                              74
