                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HETEROGENEITY IN THE IMPACT OF PRIVATIZING SOCIAL HEALTH INSURANCE:
           EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA'S MEDICAID PROGRAM

                                       Mark Duggan
                                      Craig Garthwaite
                                    Adelina Yanyue Wang

                                      Working Paper 28944
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28944


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We are grateful to Anna Aizer, Jon Gruber, Atul Gupta, Emilie Jackson, Timothy Layton, Ajin
Lee, Boris Vabson, Amanda Starc, and seminar participants at the 2019 ASHEcon Conference,
the 2020 NBER Health Care Meeting, and University of Maryland for very helpful feedback. We
also thank Betty Henderson-Sparks, Aaron Maggetti, Amy Peterson, and Jon Teague of the
California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development for their assistance in providing
the hospital / ER discharge data. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mark Duggan, Craig Garthwaite, and Adelina Yanyue Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneity in the Impact of Privatizing Social Health Insurance: Evidence from California's
Medicaid Program
Mark Duggan, Craig Garthwaite, and Adelina Yanyue Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28944
June 2021
JEL No. H0,H1,I1,I10,I13,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

State governments face the classic "make or buy" decision for the provision of Medicaid services.
Over the past two decades, the majority of states have outsourced the provision of social health
insurance through Medicaid Managed Care (MMC) programs. These programs have been
extensively studied in the literature ­ with little evidence of large positive or negative effects.
However, most states initially allowed older and sicker enrollees to remain enrolled in the
government run fee for service (FFS) programs. It is possible that these more fragile enrollees
could have a different experience in managed care. In this paper we study California's mandatory
enrollment of the senior and persons with disabilities (SPD) population in MMC. We find this
mandatory enrollment caused an increased use of the emergency department and transfers
between hospitals. This was not simply a hassle cost for enrollees ­ we also estimate an increase
in mortality for the affected population. These effects were strongest for the sickest enrollees ­
the types of enrollees that might be expected to have a different experience with managed care.
Our results suggest the adverse impact of MMC varies by the enrollee health, which should
inform the optimal outsourcing decision for governments.

Mark Duggan                                      Adelina Yanyue Wang
Stanford University                              National Bureau of Economic Research
Department of Economics                          1050 Massachusetts Ave.
579 Serra Mall                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                          adywang@nber.org
and NBER
mgduggan@stanford.edu

Craig Garthwaite
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu
          Since its creation in the 1960s, Medicaid has grown from a small program covering roughly 20

million indigent and disabled individuals to its current size of nearly 73 million enrollees (CMS, 2019).1

This makes Medicaid the largest health insurer in the United States and one of the largest in the world.

Unlike other social insurance programs such as Social Security and Medicare, Medicaid is administered

and partially funded by state governments and as a result the program varies greatly across states.

          One dimension of variation is the degree of privatization. As Medicaid expanded, each state

debated its own proverbial "make or buy" decision, i.e. is it optimal for the government to directly

provide insurance services or should they instead outsource these economic activities to private firms.2

Over time, states have increasingly chosen outsourcing through the creation and expansion of

Medicaid managed care (MMC) programs. Under MMC, state governments contract with (often for-

profit) managed care firms. Payments are made on a "capitated" basis, with private firms receiving a

lump sum payment and assuming responsibility for all beneficiary medical spending. Firms retain any

difference as profits (or suffer losses if spending exceeds the capitated payment).3

          MMC's growing popularity can be seen in Figure 1a, which shows that by 2016 the share of

Medicaid enrollees covered by these programs stood at nearly 80 percent. These initial MMC programs

have been extensively studied, with a resulting literature providing little evidence that privatization

caused either great benefits or harms (e.g. Aizer, Currie and Moretti 2007; Currie and Fahr 2005;

Duggan 2004; Lee 2020; Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater 2018).

          Despite the growth of MMC over time, a number of beneficiaries remained in the traditional

government run fee-for-service (FFS) system. These FFS enrollees were primarily sicker and/or older



1 This expansion happened in several waves, starting with the inclusion of more pregnant women in the late-80s, children from higher
income families in the mid-90s, and culminating with the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010. Along with covering more
people, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) changed the program from one of categorical eligibility to an entitlement available to all low-
income individuals residing in states adopting the expansion.
2 There is a similar debate in Medicare regarding the creation and operation of the Medicare Advantage program ­ which is a voluntary

managed care program for the elderly.
3 In most cases these payments are risk adjusted so firms get larger payments for insuring individuals who have medical conditions that

are expected to lead to higher spending.

                                                                  1
individuals that policymakers exempted from mandatory MMC enrollment. Though small in number,

the complexity involved in treating these patients made them exceptionally costly. As a result, Figure

1b shows that, despite the massive MMC enrollment growth, the majority of Medicaid spending

remained in the FFS system.

          Searching for potential savings on these expensive patients, and perhaps comforted by the lack

of meaningful harms from the initial MMC programs covering healthier and younger patients, many

states have recently expanded privatization to include disabled and elderly Medicaid patients. Such

policy decisions, however, may be premature. If the effect of privatization systematically varies across

patients based on their health status, then the existing literature likely sheds little light on the optimality

of these expanded privatization efforts.

          In this paper, we directly examine heterogeneity in the effect of privatizing social health

insurance. Specifically, we examine California's decision to mandate MMC enrollment for the 240,000

seniors and persons with disabilities (SPD) that had not already voluntarily enrolled in such programs.4

We identify the causal effect of mandatory MMC enrollment by exploiting both variation in when

beneficiaries were required to enroll in MMC and geographic variation in MMC exposure.

          The optimality of privatizing government services is the subject of a rich theoretical economics

literature that extends well beyond healthcare. The primary goal of privatization is often to leverage

the fact that as the residual claimant on spending, private firms have a greater incentive than

government employees to control costs. Of course, such cost reduction efforts could have negative

consequences. Of particular relevance to this paper, Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) demonstrate that

in a world of incomplete contracts, this potential for negative consequences makes the optimal



4While California had previously mandated SPDs to enroll in MMC in 14 of the 30 counties where such programs were available, this
policy reform expanded that program to the remaining 16 counties. This was undertaken as part of the state's preparations for
implementing the Affordable Care Act and implemented under the auspices of the "Bridge to Reform" section 1115 waiver. Part o f this
waiver mandates SPD Medicaid beneficiaries to enroll in Medicaid Managed Care in a selection of counties where SPDs previously
could voluntarily choose whether or not to enroll in MMC.

                                                                 2
solution unclear.5 The authors predict that while outsourcing is optimal in many settings, states will

prefer government control of services where there is a greater concern about adverse consequences

resulting from decreased quality. Therefore, our question of heterogeneity in the consequences of

"contracting out" is central to economics of the government's optimal policy decision.

          Consider our setting of privatizing social health insurance. Ideally, the cost reductions created

by private firms would result from better preventive care, early diagnosis and treatment, and more

efficient care management. There is, of course, also a fear that firms may lower costs by reducing

quality in ways that cannot be easily governed by the contract with the government. This could occur

for several reasons. Capitated payments may create inappropriately strong incentives to cut costs in a

setting where firms are not forced to internalize the full impact of lower quality ­ perhaps because

such cost cutting is unobservable and is affecting vulnerable patients who may be less vocal about the

adverse consequences. Compounding this concern, firms may find it profitable to provide low quality

services to enrollees who are expected to generate higher costs than the capitated payment.6 This

concern is even more salient if higher spending patients were more likely to move across plans in

response to low quality care, perhaps because they place greater value on access to higher cost medical

services (Shepard, 2016).

          Regardless of the mechanism, it is conceivable that the impact of the lower quality caused by

cost reduction efforts might be more consequential for high acuity patients who could suffer

meaningful harms (up to and including death) from even minor disruptions in access to care. The

insights from Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) suggest that it is precisely such concerns about adverse




5 In a complete contracting environment, the state is indifferent between government control and private ownership. After all, it can
use these complete contracts to motivate its employees or private firms.
6 States attempt to counteract this gaming by risk adjusting payments. This was not a feature of many initial MMC programs, and could

have led to adverse consequences (Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater 2018). That said, even in a system where capitated payments
are risk adjusted, within each risk score there are enrollees who have above average spending that firms may attempt to persuade to
switch to another plan (Geruso, Layton, and Prinz, 2019).

                                                                 3
consequences that drove states to continue to directly provide insurance services to their older, sicker,

and most vulnerable beneficiaries.

        If such concerns about variation in the adverse consequences of cost reductions based on the

health of patients were valid, we would predict two patterns in our setting that focuses on the most

complicated Medicaid patients. First, privatization should cause greater harms than in the existing

literature, which primarily focuses on programs covering largely healthier populations. Second,

privatization should differentially impact enrollees within our sample based on actual underlying patient

health -- with sicker enrollees suffering greater harms. Our empirical results are broadly consistent

with both predictions.

        We first find a meaningful negative effect of MMC on these older and sicker Medicaid

enrollees, effects that were largely absent from the estimated effects of the original MMC programs.

Requiring California's SPD beneficiaries to enroll in MMC caused an increase in visits to the hospital

emergency department (ED), which would be consistent with a change in access to other medical

services and/or a decrease in the underlying health of patients. Examining the conditions that led to

increased ED visits, we find evidence that suggests they result (at least in part) from a lack of access

to other medical services. For example, we find consistent evidence of an increase in preventable ED

visits, non-emergent ED visits, and visits for psychiatric care ­ visit categories likely to be impacted

by more restrictive non-hospital provider networks.

        We also observe an increase in the number of inpatient visits that began as transfers from

another hospital. This would be consistent with the implementation of stricter provider networks

leading to a dislocation in the usual source of hospital care. Such disruption was a common concern

expressed by patients and their advocates prior to the reform (Harbage & King, 2012). Further

supporting that these transfers are likely the result of differing networks, we find that most of these

transfers began as visits to the ED of the transferring hospital.

                                                    4
          Consistent with concerns about adverse consequences for sicker patients, we find these

changes in patterns of care represent more than just a hassle cost for enrollees. Indeed, we estimate

that mandatory MMC enrollment caused an approximately 12 percent increase in mortality for the

affected population. This increase begins immediately after a beneficiary's was required to enroll in

MMC. Supporting that a lack of access to care is a potential mechanism driving the immediate

mortality increase, we find the most consistent evidence of such an effect for patients suffering from

circulatory conditions. These medical conditions, which include hypertension and coronary artery

disease, are a plausible source of an immediate mortality effect from a decrease in access to medical

services. In contrast, we find no increase in mortality among those with conditions that should be less

likely to result in such immediate dire consequences from a temporary dislocation in care (such as cancer

patients).

          We further demonstrate the importance of heterogeneity in the impact of privatization by

examining systematic differences within our sample based on patient health. We measure patient

health based on both whether a patient had an above median use of inpatient and ED hospital services

and on the nature of the patient's underlying health conditions.7 Across both of these measures, we

find the estimated increase in ED visits, transfers, and mortality was concentrated among sicker

beneficiaries, precisely the beneficiaries that policymakers were likely concerned would suffer greater

adverse consequences from MMC.8

          Our results contribute to a better understanding of the optimal system for providing health

insurance to society's most vulnerable individuals. It joins work by Layton et al. (2019) which examines

similar expansions to older and disabled populations in Texas and New York. These authors find the




7 Both measures are calculated using data from prior to the reform and therefore are not influenced by features of MMC enrollment
such as limited access to care or more intensive coding of medical conditions.
8 For mortality, there is stronger and more consistent evidence for this heterogeneity when patient health is measured by the

Elixhauser score (i.e a measure based on the number of conditions) rather than utilization. This is discussed in more detail below.

                                                                5
expansion either had relatively little effect (New York) or generally increased access to services (Texas).

They find no evidence of negative health effects in either state.

        The divergence in results across these studies reflects the economically meaningful variation

in the effects of Medicaid policies across states. Such variation makes it difficult to broadly generalize

from the estimated effects of a particular policy choice (Garthwaite et al. 2019). Instead, policymakers

and economists interested in making such comparisons must consider the specific economic factors

that may be similar across contexts.

        Our results also contribute to the growing literature about the health and mortality effects of

health insurance. Numerous studies found few health effects of increased insurance coverage (Levy

and Meltzer 2008; Finkelstein and McKnight 2008; Finkelstein et al., 2012). However, more recent

work has demonstrated decreased mortality among individuals gaining access to insurance (Sommers,

Baicker and Epstein, 2012; Sommers, Long, and Baicker, 2014; Miller et al. 2019; Goldin, Lurie and

McCubbin 2019). Our work expands this literature by demonstrating the importance of the form of the

insurance contract and not simply the extensive margin of insurance. In this way, it joins the work of

Abaluck, Bravo, Hull, and Starc (2021) which finds differential mortality for enrollees based on which

firm manages their Medicare Advantage (i.e. voluntary managed Medicare) plans.


I. The Medicaid Program

        The Medicaid program was created in 1965 and since that time has provided health insurance

for an increasing number of low-income Americans. By 2018, the monthly enrollment for Medicaid

was 73 million individuals and the annual total spending was $597 billion (CMS, 2019).

        While required to comply with federal guidelines and jointly funded by the federal government,

each state administers Medicaid independently and has a considerable degree of autonomy in terms

of eligibility requirements, service provision, delivery networks, and payment schemes. Meanwhile,

even within each state, Medicaid covers a population with a wide array of health conditions and care

                                                    6
intensity, resulting in a highly skewed cost distribution. 9 This results in marked heterogeneity in

Medicaid's operations both across and within states.


I.A. Medicaid Managed Care

          Increasingly confronted with the challenge of rising and unpredictable costs as well as

fragmented care delivery systems, states have been shifting enrollees from the traditional fee-for-

service (FFS) system to Medicaid managed care (MMC) plans since the early 1990s. Prior to the

implementation of the ACA in 2014, the share of Medicaid recipients enrolled in MMCs rose from

10.6 percent in 1991 to 55.6 percent in 1999 and 73.5 percent in 2013. Accordingly, payment to MMC

plans as a share of total Medicaid expenditures also rose steadily from 11.0 percent in 1999 to 30.1

percent in 2013 (Duggan and Hayford 2013; CMS 1999; CMS 2014; CMS 2015). Following the

expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, the scope of managed care grew as these

programs covered both the majority of newly eligible Medicaid recipients as well as wider groups of

existing Medicaid enrollees with more complicated needs and health conditions. As can be seen in

Figures 1(a) and 1(b), by 2016 approximately 80 percent of Medicaid beneficiaries were enrolled in

managed care, and payments to managed care plans accounted for 45 percent of total Medicaid

expenditures.

          MMC changes the economic incentives within this social insurance program. Instead of

directly reimbursing providers for all services provided to Medicaid recipients, under MMC states

contract with insurance plans and pay a fixed (usually risk-adjusted) capitation amount for each

covered Medicaid enrollee. The various MMC plans then manage the purchase of healthcare goods

and services for their enrollees and bear the marginal cost of each service. The goal is to give private


9For example, in fiscal year 2014 the average spending per recipient (including both full and partial benefit) was $13,063 for seniors and
$16,859 for people with disabilities, but only $2,577 for children and $3,278 for adults. In other words, even though seniors (~7.4 million
enrollees) and people with disabilities (~11.1 million enrollees) account for around 23% of total Medicaid recipients, they cost roughly
61% of total expenditure due to the complexity and severity of their health conditions (Kaiser Family Foundation 2014a; Kaiser Family
Foundation 2014b).

                                                                    7
payers stronger incentives to eliminate unnecessary services, increase efficiency, and improve the

coordination of care among different providers within the same network. However, the impacts of

managed care are still largely unclear on the fronts of both access and quality improvement and actual

cost saving.

        From the perspective of care quality and coordination, MMC is inevitably subject to the

problem of incomplete contracting that affects many other government procurement programs. The

more complicated the health condition of enrollees, the more challenging it is for the government to

write a complete contract with the managed care organizations. Having a government agency

administer these programs directly does not solve the incomplete contracting problem for complex

patients. It does, however, decrease the incentives to cut costs in ways that could cause adverse

consequences for the sickest patients. This could tilt the optimal decision in favor of the government

run fee-for-service program for especially vulnerable populations where there are greater concerns

about adverse health consequences (Hart, Shleifer, Vishny, 1997).


I.B. Existing Evidence on Medicaid Managed Care

        The initial MMC programs requiring enrollment only for healthier populations has produced

a substantial literature examining a variety of outcomes. Some studies find no significant impacts of

MMC on the health outcomes of newborns (Duggan 2004; Lee 2020), while others have found

evidence for both worse health outcomes likely due to reduced quality of prenatal care (Aizer, Currie,

& Moretti, 2007) and risk selection arguably through differential quality of services (Currie and Fahr

2005; Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater 2018).

        Given that most states did not require seniors or disabled individuals to enroll in MMC, these

initial studies are unable to examine whether these programs have different effects for these more

complicated patient populations. That said, there have been many papers examining the impact of



                                                  8
Medicare Advantage (MA) plans on care utilization and health outcomes. 10 MA is the voluntary

managed care program for Medicare, which covers virtually all seniors in the U.S. This may lead some

to believe that estimates from the MA literature can provide insight into the likely effect of requiring

MMC enrollment for older and sicker Medicaid beneficiaries. Before extrapolating from the MA

literature, however, it is important to recognize the substantial differences between these markets in

terms of the competitive structure and underlying regulations. At a minimum, MA is a voluntary

program, where both the decision to take part in managed care and the selection of the plan is made

by the individual. There is existing evidence that those signing up for coverage are healthier on average

than those that remain in the traditional FFS Medicare program (Brown et al, 2014; Geruso & Layton,

2020).

          In many ways, this makes MA more similar to the initial MMC programs requiring younger

and healthier enrollees to enroll but giving aged and disabled beneficiaries the option to do so.

Therefore, our paper complements existing studies of MA by providing insights into the impacts of

managed care for the less healthy seniors and persons with disabilities who opted to remain in

Medicaid FFS. This may be particularly important as there are policy discussions about a wider use of

MA style plans through premium support or other programs (Chandra & Garthwaite, 2019). Such

policies would force all Medicare enrollees into managed care without clear evidence of the likely

impact on the sickest beneficiaries.


II. California's Medicaid Managed Care Reform

          Created in 1966, the Medicaid program in California (aka Medi-Cal) provides health insurance

coverage to low-income families, children, pregnant women, and persons with disabilities. By 2016,


10 For example, exploiting MA plan exits in New York counties, Duggan, Gruber and Vabson (2018) show that MA plans are associated
with a significant reduction in utilization by limiting access to nearby hospitals and reducing elective admissions. However, these authors
find no evidence of increased quality or improved health outcomes from this change in utilization. Analyzing Medicare claims data,
Curto, et al. (2019) find evidence consistent with MA plans encouraging substitution into less expensive care, though traditional Medicare
and MA plans have similar level of spending per encounter/hospital admission.

                                                                    9
after decades of reforms and expansions, Medi-Cal had become the state's largest health care

purchaser and offered health insurance for more than 13 million individuals (roughly 1 out of every 3

Californians), costing more than $83 billion in total government expenditures (CMS 2018a; CMS

2018b).

          Currently, all 58 counties in California offer MMC plans and all but one (San Benito County)

has mandated either certain groups or all Medicaid beneficiaries enroll in these plans. The types of

MMC plans adopted and characteristics of the mandates differ substantially across different counties

in California and over time. By July 2016, there were 6 different models of MMC plans covering more

than 10.6 million individuals in California, roughly 77 percent of all (nearly 14 million) Medicaid

beneficiaries and 50 percent of all Medicaid expenditures (CMS 2018a; CMS 2018b).

          MMC was first mandated in California in 1983 with the introduction of a County Organized

Health System (COHS) in Santa Barbara County. By 2012, 14 counties had adopted COHS Medicaid

managed care plans where all Medicaid recipients (including seniors and persons with disabilities) were

mandated to enroll in the single MMC plan administered by the county (with few exceptions such as

undocumented immigrants). In these COHS counties there is no competition, i.e. enrollees have only

one plan choice. 11 In the additional 16 counties that serve as the focus of our study, competition

among MMC plans existed and the SPD population was not previously mandated to enroll in these

plans.12 As of 2012, an estimated 140,000 SPD beneficiaries in these counties had voluntarily opted

into these MMC plans (Harbage & King, 2012).

          In 14 of these 16 counties with competition, the market consisted of only two plans: (1) a

"local initiative" plan that was organized by the county and focused on maintaining access to safety


11 In 2013, MMC was expanded into rural counties where 8 counties adopted COHS model, 18 counties adopted regional model, and
Imperial and San Benito counties each adopted their own model. In the regional and Imperial model, the government contracts with
two commercial plans and mandates MMC enrollment for a subset of Medicaid beneficiaries. In the San Benito model, MMC enrollment
is voluntary for all individuals.
12 Our sample is composed of counties that implemented the Bridge to Reform mandate and had no other concurrent MMC-related

reforms during our analysis period.

                                                              10
net providers and (2) a commercial plan. While the local initiative plan was organized by the county,

in some of the counties these services were administered by a commercial entity. Sacramento and San

Diego implemented a Geographical Managed Care (GMC) model, in which Medicaid managed care

enrollees could choose among several commercial plans contracting with the government and

competing for enrollees.

          The policy change that we study in this paper is the 2010 SPD Medicaid Managed Care

mandate for Two Plan and GMC counties. 13 This policy was intended to reduce costs as well as

improve care coordination. It was implemented between June 2011 and May 2012 according to the

month of birth for the affected individual (Harbage & King, 2012). For example, all Medicaid

recipients born in July were transferred to MMC plans in July 2011, and all those born in January were

transferred in January 2012.14 Those born in the month of May were the first ones required to enroll

and those born in April were shifted last.

          The government sent out plan information and enrollment instructions three months before

the designated transfer month for each Medicaid enrollee according to her birth month and conducted

extensive outreach programs to ensure timely and effective implementation. 15 Figure 2 shows the

variation in MMC discharges in our sample based on birth month and demonstrates the impact of this

staggered enrollment process on actual enrollment.




13 This policy was part of the Bridge to Reform (BTR) Section 1115 Waiver that started California's transition into the full
implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the policy mandates all SPD Medicaid recipients (except for dual eligibles, children in foster
care, and beneficiaries in long term care) in the affected counties to enroll in managed care plans.
14 Note that in our data individuals born in May appear to be the first group to move into MMC (as early as May 2011), though by policy

documentation they should have been the last group to switch. In our empirical analysis we follow the policy adoption pattern observed
in the data to construct policy change indicators, rather than the government documentations.
15 Enrollees who failed to sign up for MMC plans on their own were automatically signed up in default plans. Approximately 40 percent

of affected beneficiaries actively chose a plan. Among those not making an active selection, the state attempted to match them to a plan
based on their previous use of medical services. Initially, the majority of those not selecting a plan were assigned to a random default
plan. However, over time the state was able to better match beneficiaries based on past providers and as a result a smaller fraction were
randomly allocated to a plan and provider network (Harbage & King, 2012).


                                                                   11
III. Data

          Our main data sources are the official records of all hospital patient discharges and emergency

room (ED) visits in California from 2008 until 2013. Each year, there are approximately 4 million

hospital discharges and 10 million ED visits (excluding those transferred to inpatient care and instead

captured by the hospital patient discharge data). For each discharge and ED visit, we observe detailed

information on the demographics of the patient, main source of payment, diagnoses and procedures,

along with admission and disposition routes. Additionally, for the patient discharge data, we also

observe charges and enrollment status in MMC. 16 Importantly, both datasets contain (encrypted)

social security numbers of the patients, which enables us to link the two datasets together and to track

each individual over time. This includes the ability to track patients across payers over time. Therefore,

if a patient moves into Medicare (e.g. through eligibility under the Social Security Disability Insurance

Program) or into commercial health insurance coverage, she would still be present and accounted for

in our data.17

          We augment the patient discharge data (PDD) with official California death records from 2009

until 2013. For all individuals with a hospital discharge between 2009 and 2013 and who have died by

the end of 2013 (either in hospital or after discharge), we link their death record to our inpatient

utilization data through the encrypted social security number. As a result, our sample for the mortality

analysis only includes individuals who had at least one inpatient stay (either before or after the

reform).18 These linked death files enable us to construct a sample of panel data that tracks healthcare

utilization for each patient over time that correctly accounts for the lack of observed utilization after



16 Note that managed care indicator is only available in hospital discharge data. Thus in ER records we cannot tell apart MMC and
Medicaid fee-for-service. Additionally, it appears that some discharge and especially ER visits paid by MMC may have been miscoded
as "private" in the datasets, and thus may explain why we observe first -stage effect of the mandate on private payers as well.
17 Table 1 shows that, while no one in the analysis sample had any Medicare covered hospital discharge in 2009Q2-2010Q1, by the end

of 2013, around 14 percent of hospital discharges in treatment counties (19 percent in COHS counties) have Medicare as the main payer.
18 We run a robustness check of the mortality analysis limiting to just those with an inpatient stay prior to reform. The main results are

qualitatively similar, though more transitory with the more restrictive sample. We also find smaller differences between the high vs. low
baseline utilizers, likely driven by the smaller differences in baseline health condition when compared with the larger sample.

                                                                   12
death. It also allows us to estimate the mortality effects of mandating MMC enrollment for the SPD

population of beneficiaries. Having complete death records (rather than solely claims data) is critical

for our analysis since approximately two-thirds of the deaths among individuals in our sample occur

outside of the hospital.

          Our main analysis sample is a person-quarter level linked panel data set of hospital discharges,

ED visits, and mortality for the individuals most likely affected by the SPD mandate. In order to

determine initial insurance status, we restrict our sample to individuals who ever had one or more

hospital discharges or ED visits covered by Medicaid (and no discharge or ED visit covered by

Medicare19) between the second quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010. We also restrict our

sample to those who were born before 1969 to focus on the older individuals most likely affected by

the policy change and to individuals who were born after 1950 to ensure that all individuals are below

age 65 (to avoid the transition via aging to Medicare) in our sample period. Some individuals in our

sample do transition into Medicare because of enrollment in the Social Security Disability Insurance

(SSDI) program. Importantly our data still allows us to capture the health care use of these "dually

eligible" (for both Medicare and Medicaid) individuals.

          To further restrict our sample to those most likely affected by the reform, we exclude several

groups from the data. The largest excluded group includes all birth or pregnancy related discharges, a

category of beneficiaries which is discussed extensively in the existing literature and were largely

unaffected by the reform.20 To minimize the confounding effects of concurrent policy changes, most

notably the implementation of the ACA since January 2014, we restrict the analysis period to April

2009 until December 2013, and restrict residence to Two-Plan, GMC, and COHS counties that had



19To reduce confound from Medicare policies, especially since dual-eligible beneficiaries are exempt from the mandate.
20We also drop observations with missing social security number and those with multiple birth dates associated with the same social
security number to improve accuracy and comparability with the analysis sample. We also winsorize length of stay at 365 days in the
hospital discharge data since stays longer than 365 days are very likely to be errors. The constructions of working samples are identical
for PDD and ED, except that the restriction on length of stay is not applicable to the ER visits.

                                                                   13
no other concurrent changes in MMC policies.21 After merging the PDD and ED data, we drop

individuals with disagreeing birth dates. We then drop person-quarter level observations after the

recorded death, after dropping individuals with erroneous death records (e.g. individuals with multiple

death records or with observed discharge and ED visit after recorded death, which occurs for less

than 0.03 percent of our observations).

          Each person-quarter cell contains information on individual characteristics (age, gender,

county of residence) and healthcare utilization (total number of hospital discharges by payer, total

number of ER visits by payer, total length of stay, and number of procedures associated with hospital

discharges). We then construct policy change indicators based on individual birth month, county of

residence,22 and quarter of observation. Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for our sample. Panel A

contains data for only individuals living in treatment countries while Panel B contains data on those

living in COHS counties. Overall, our final sample begins with 132,635 patients and declines over time

to 128,245 with individuals exiting our sample as they die.23

          An important consideration caused by our selection criteria is that individuals enter our sample

only if they have an inpatient hospital or ER visit between the second quarter of 2009 and the first

quarter of 2010. As would be expected, these individuals exhibit some degree of mean reversion. This

can be seen in the relatively large decline in utilization between the sample selection and the pre-

reform time periods detailed in Table 1. For three reasons this is unlikely to cause economically




21 In the 16 Two-Plan and GMC counties that implemented the mandate, 3 counties (Fresno, Madera, and Kings) are excluded from
the analysis sample since they formed Regional Two-Plan model in March 2011. In the 14 COHS counties that implemented MMC
before 2012, 5 counties (Ventura, Sonoma, Merced, Marin, and Mendocino) are excluded from the analysis sample since they adopted
COHS MMC in 2009-2011. Hence the treatment counties in our analysis sample include: Los Angeles, San Diego, Riverside, San
Bernardino, Santa Clara, Alameda, Sacramento, Contra Costa, Kern, San Francisco, San Joaquin, Stanislaus, and Tulare. The COHS
control counties in our analysis sample include: Orange, San Mateo, Santa Barbara, Solano, Monterey, San Luis Obispo, Santa Cruz,
Yolo, and Napa. In our raw hospital discharge data, 86 % of observations are for residents in these counties in 2009Q2-2013Q4 (similar
ratio when restricting to those with Medicaid as primary payer). In our raw ER visit data, 84 % of observations are for residents in these
counties in 2009Q2-2013Q4 (80% when restricting to those with Medicaid as primary payer).
22 Note that there are around 5% individuals in the PDD analysis sample and 10% individuals in the ED analysis sample who have been

observed in multiple counties. We drop all individuals who have been observed in more than one county throughout our analysis period.
23 One limitation of our data is that we do not know if an individual moved out of state.


                                                                   14
meaningful problems for our analysis. First, we exploit the staggered enrollment of individuals into

MMC based on their month of birth. Since mean reversion is occurring for all members of the sample

and should be unrelated to birth month, this plausibly exogenous variation should limit any bias.

Second, similar mean reversion is happening in the COHS county sample in Panel B ­ which serves

as an additional control in our second set of specifications. To the extent we were concerned about a

relationship between birth month and the timing of mean reversion, this additional control group

should help to address that issue. Finally, in our empirical analyses, we do not use data from the sample

selection period, so the higher utilization during that time period does not directly affect our estimation.

In particular, the baseline utilization of medical services that we use to interpret the magnitude of our

coefficients is based on the pre-reform and not the sample selection period in Table 1.


IV. Demographics of the Seniors and Persons with Disabilities Fee-for-Service Population

        The primary contribution of our paper is estimating heterogeneity in the effect of privatization

based on patient health. In particular, we are interested in whether there are adverse consequences for

the sicker and more vulnerable populations originally exempted from mandatory MMC enrollment.

We begin by demonstrating that those affected by the reform were in fact meaningfully different from

California's original MMC enrollees on many dimensions that may i nfluence the effect of contracting

out the coordination and financing of care to private insurers.

        Prior to the reform studied in this paper, SPD beneficiaries in reform counties were not

required to enroll in MMC. While approximately 140,000 beneficiaries did voluntarily enroll, an

additional 240,000 remained in FFS (Harbage and King, 2012). Our treatment group is comprised of

these FFS enrollees. Table 2 contains data on three groups of enrollees: beneficiaries in MMC before




                                                    15
and after the reform, those switching from FFS to MMC because of the reform, and those who

remained in FFS before and after the reform.24

          Table 2 documents that individuals moving from FFS to MMC were meaningfully older than

those already enrolled in MMC. We then examine measures of health status including the average

length of stay in the hospital and total hospital charges (which provide an approximate measure of the

intensive margin of the use of hospital services). Overall, individuals who moved from FFS to MMC

had longer lengths of stay and greater hospital charges on average prior to the reform than those who

were already in MMC.


V. Econometric Strategy

          In order to estimate the causal effect of enrollment in managed care on healthcare utilization

and health outcomes, we exploit two main sources of variation in the implementation of California's

program. Our main specification is a differences-in-differences analysis that leverages the fact that

individuals were mandated to enroll in MMC based on their birth month. Specifically, we estimate:

                              = 0 + 1  +  +  +                                                       (1)


in which  is a variable that measures exposure to the mandate based on the individual's

birth month and quarter of observation,  are quarter fixed effects,  are individual fixed effects,

and  is an idiosyncratic error term. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. The variable

 codes whether individuals are affected by the mandate given their birth month and the

current year-quarter.25


24 The mandate allows some groups such as dual-eligibles (i.e. individuals eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid) and those in long-
term care to remain in FFS.
25 This  variable is coded as either 0, 1/3, 2/3 or 1 based on what fraction of the quarter of observation an individual was
                 
exposed to an MMC mandate. For example, an individual born in August was required to enroll in August of 2011. For those individuals,
during the third quarter of 2011  is coded as 2/3 reflecting the individual was required to enroll in MMC for 2 of the 3
months of that quarter. Similarly, an individual born in September would be coded as 1/3 during that quarter. In each subsequent
quarter, the  variable value for those individuals is coded as 1. Note the special case for individuals born in May: should shift


                                                                 16
         When considering the outcome of mortality, we are obviously unable to include individual

fixed effects. Therefore, our mortality analysis involves the following steps. First, we exclude

individuals without any hospital discharges between the second quarter of 2009 and the fourth quarter

of 2013 from the analysis sample, since we can only track deaths outside hospitals for those with

discharge records. We then run linear regressions of our death indicator variable on mandate

indicator(s), county FEs, quarter FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator with standard errors clustered at

the county level.

         Our main identifying assumption is that the timing of MMC enrollment is orthogonal to other

factors that might affect an enrollee's utilization of healthcare services and health outcomes. This

assumption is reasonable since enrollment is based on the calendar month of birth across all ages. Of

course, there could still be two concerns about identifying the effect of MMC in this way. The first is

that there is an underlying relationship between month of birth and the use of healthcare services.

While we are unaware of any such factor, we attempt to address this concern by estimating event-

study specifications that allow us to examine the time path of outcomes before and after the reform-

induced shift to managed care. This allows us to more clearly examine both the pre-trends in our

outcomes of interest and the time path of the estimated changes after mandatory enrollment.

Specifically, we estimate the following specification:


                  = 4
                    -3  ( =   + ) +  +  +  .                                                             (2)


We include a full set of pre (up to 3 quarters prior to) and post (up to 4 quarters post) mandate

indicator variables (with the quarter before indicator excluded) for each individual that depends on




to MMC in May 2012 but shown to have shifted to MMC in May 2011; coding the mandate indicator according to the data pattern for
the beneficiaries born in May.

                                                              17
his/her birth month, county of residence, and the quarter observed. 26 , 27 When considering the

outcome of mortality, we estimate a specification of equation (2) that is modified in the same manner

as our discussion of equation (1) above.

          There could also be a second concern about broader changes in the provision of healthcare

services that occur at the same time as the mandate. These could include changes in the supply of

healthcare in response to the reform that could occur for all enrollees regardless of their birth month.

To address this concern, we estimate a second specification in which we include data from enrollees

that live in the COHS counties. These individuals were enrolled in MMC programs prior to the reform

and therefore their experiences can control for these secular trends. For these individuals, 

is always coded as zero as they are unaffected by the mandate.

          Furthermore, in light of the recent and growing literature on potential concerns with common

two-way fixed effects difference-in-differences analyses, we run additional robustness checks using

stacked event study (Goodman-Bacon 2020; Callaway and Sant'Anna 2020; Sun and Abraham 2020;

Baker et al 2021). These specifications are similar to those in Cengiz et al 2019; Deshpande and Li

2019). We provide more detail on these robustness checks in Appendix A. In nearly all cases, the

results from these exercises concur with our main estimates. Where there are meaningful differences

that would impact the interpretation of our main estimates (e.g. when examining heterogeneity in the

effect on mortality based on health status defined using prior utilization) we discuss those differences

in more detail.




26 Note that in the event study specification without COHS control groups, we only include indicator for T-3 instead of T-3+ to address
the collinearity concern of time FE, relative time FE, and individual FE.
27 Note that the indicator for quarter of mandate implementation (r=0) is scaled by the fraction of the quarter (1/3, 2/3, or 1) exposed

to an MMC mandate. For example, for an individual in the treatment group born in August, T-3+ indicator is coded as 1 in 2010Q2,
2010Q3, and 2010Q4 and 0 in all other quarters27, T-2 indicator is coded as 1 in 2011Q1 and 0 in all other quarters, T-1 indicator is
coded as 1 in 2011Q2 (but excluded in actual regression with coefficient normalized to 0), T indicator is coded as 2/3 in 2011Q3, T+1
indicator is coded as 1 in 2011Q4, T+2 indicator is coded as 1 in 2012Q1, T+3 indicator is coded as 1 in 2012Q2, and T+4+ indicator
is coded as 1 in 2012Q3 ­ 2013Q4.

                                                                  18
          Our primary outcomes of interest are inpatient hospitalizations, ED Visits, and mortality. For

inpatient hospitalizations, we are interested in both the total number of visits and the source of

admission. For mortality, we have a person-quarter level indicator for mortality (both in and out of

the hospital) and we drop all observations for individuals after their death.

          As discussed above, we use data from the second quarter of 2009 through the first quarter of

2010 to select our sample and to construct the baseline characteristics for our heterogeneity analysis.

We then estimate the effect of mandatory MMC enrollment using data from the second quarter of

2010 through the fourth quarter of 2013 (i.e. we do not use data from the sample selection period in

our analysis). This allows us to have a meaningful length of time after the reform while avoiding the

primary impact of the 2014 ACA insurance expansions, which could have effects on both the

operation of Medi-Cal but also on the operations of providers. Starting the analysis period in the

second quarter of 2010 also limits the impact of mean reversion from our sample selection process.

          Given our interest in heterogeneity in the effect of MMC, we then estimate models that allow

the effect of the mandate to vary based on the beneficiary's health status. We measure health status

based on the pre-reform health of individuals. We begin by classifying individuals based on their pre-

reform use of healthcare services. Specifically, we group patients based on whether they had an above

or below median number of inpatient hospitalizations and ER visits from the second quarter of 2009

to the first quarter of 2010. Our second measure of health status is based on an enrollee's underlying

condition. This is measured using an Elixhauser score which is a count of the chronic conditions that

are indicated by a patient's principal diagnosis or co-diagnosis in either the inpatient discharge data or

the ED visit data.28




28These Elixhauser scores are unweighted, i.e. all conditions count equally to the score. An alternative measure of sickness would by a
Charlson Comorbidity Index, which weights conditions based on their contribution to an individual's ten -year mortality. Appendix
Tables A10 and A11 replicated our Elixhauser score results using the Charlson index as the measure of morbidity. These results are
remarkably similar to our main estimates.

                                                                  19
             Finally, we examine the effect of market structure on our outcomes by estimating models that

allow the effect to vary based on whether enrollees are in markets with a large local initiative plan (i.e.

a two-plan county) or in a market with a large number of private commercial competitors (i.e. a GMC

county).



VI. The Effect of Medicaid Managed Care on the Use of Healthcare Services

             We begin by looking at the effect of the reform on MMC enrollment. After confirming that

the reform suddenly shifted a large portion of our sample from FFS to MMC, in section VI.B we

estimate the change in the use of hospital services for those who moved into MMC and in VI.C we

examine heterogeneity in the magnitude of these changes. In Section VI.D we examine the mortality

effects of mandatory enrollment in MMC and then in VI.E we estimate whether our estimates vary

based on the structure of the Medicaid managed care market.


VI.A. Effect of Reform on the Share of SPD Patients Enrolled in MMC

             Our analysis hinges on the assumption that the requirement that SPD beneficiaries in the

reform counties enroll in MMC based on their birth month beginning in June 2011 actually impacted

the insurance status of the patients in our sample. Panel A of Figure 3 shows the share of total

discharges29 in reform counties covered by Medicaid MMC and FFS over time. Prior to June 2011,

MMC discharges are largely stable at approximately 5 percent of all discharges. Similarly, FFS

discharges were a relatively flat 14 percent of total discharges. Beginning in June 2011, the share of

MMC swiftly increases over the next year until it stabilizes at approximately 10 percent of all hospital

discharges. Over the same time period, the FFS discharge share declines until it stabilizes at

approximately 10 percent of all discharges.



29
     Including discharges for all ages (i.e., not just the cohorts included in our analysis sample).

                                                                       20
             Panel B of Figure 3 shows the share of MMC discharges by age cohort. As would be expected,

the pre-existing carve-out for older and disabled Medicaid recipients caused the share of pre-reform

discharges covered by MMC to be decreasing in age. For example, in January 2011 the share of MMC

discharges was approximately 4% for the cohort born 1950-1955 and 9% for the cohort born between

1971 and 1985. However, after the reform there was far less variation in the enrollment share by

beneficiary age ­ with the gap in discharges between the oldest and youngest cohort shrinking from 5

to just -0.2 percentage points in January 2013.

             Table 3 contains our estimated effects of the change in MMC discharges in our sample caused

by the reform. Panel A displays estimates from our main specification. The first two columns contain

estimates from the hospital inpatient discharge data and the data are intended to directly measure

MMC status, albeit with some degree of measurement error. The first column confirms the mandate

increased the number of discharges in the sample covered by the Medicaid MMC system. As a result

of the reform, there was an increase of 0.023 discharges per person/quarter covered by MMC. The

second column shows a corresponding decrease of 0.026 in the number of per person/quarter

discharges covered by Medicaid FFS. These changes are similar in magnitude, which demonstrates

that the reform largely moved people from FFS to MMC. As shown in the third column, we also find

a modest increase in the number of privately insured hospital discharges, which could reflect

classification errors if hospital officials mistakenly code some commercial MMC patients as privately

insured.30

             Figure 4(a) contains the event study estimates for our main specification that leverages only

the month of birth of the beneficiary. Coefficients prior to the mandate are generally flat and close to

zero ­ supporting our identifying assumptions. After the mandate, there is a swift increase in MMC

enrollment and a decline in the number of discharges in our sample covered by the FFS system.


30   It could also conceivably represent individuals moving from Medicaid into private insurance as a result of the mandate.

                                                                    21
        Our second specification relies on COHS counties serving as an additional control group.

Figure 5(a) shows the share of MMC discharges across different county groups. Prior to the reform,

all counties have a broadly flat trend. Beginning in June 2011, the share of MMC escalates quickly in

the reform counties and remains high in the COHS counties. After the reform is fully implemented,

the share of discharges in reform counties is flat. In the COHS counties there is a modest one-time

decline in the share of MMC, which is otherwise stable during our study period. Figure 5(b) contains

the share of Medicaid visits that are covered by MMC. Starting shortly after the reform there is a

discrete drop in this share. We are unaware of any reason for this one-time change but note that it

does happen in all COHS counties.

        Panel B of Table 3 contains estimates of the change in insurance states for discharges from

our second specification that includes beneficiaries in the COHS counties as an additional control

group. Broadly speaking, these estimates are quite similar to those in Panel A of the same Table. For

inpatient discharges, we estimate that the mandate substantially increased the number of discharges

covered by MMC. This is accompanied by a similarly large decline in the number of Medicaid FFS

discharges (and increase in privately insured discharges) ­ which would be expected given our policy

reform. Similarly, Figure 4(b) contains the event study coefficients for the change in insurance status

for this specification. These are largely similar to those in Panel A.

        As the fifth column of this same table shows, there is a substantial decline in the number of

Medicaid FFS visits to the emergency department. As discussed above, in contrast to the hospital

discharge data, MMC ED visits are apparently coded as "private" in the ED data. The sixth column

shows an even larger increase in this measure.


VI.B Effect of Medicaid Managed Care on the Use of Hospital Services

        We next examine the impact of mandatory MMC enrollment on the use of hospital services.

Panel A of Table 4 contains our primary estimates of the impact of this shift in insurance coverage

                                                      22
using only variation in the birth month for beneficiaries in the reform counties. As shown in the

second column of Table 4, we do not find that MMC enrollment changed the overall number of

inpatient discharges. We do, however, find that it caused a 2.4 percent increase in the number of ED

visits compared to what would have occurred if the SPD beneficiaries had remained in the FFS system.

Panel B contains the estimates for our specification that also uses beneficiaries in COHS counties as

a set of controls for changes in the provision of medical care in the absence of the reform. For this

specification, the pattern of estimates is largely the same.

        Figures 6(a) and 6(b) contain the event study estimates of the change in ED use for both

specifications. In both figures, the pre-trends prior to the mandate are relatively flat and close to zero.

This provides support for our identifying assumption that the imposition of the reform was unrelated

to trends in the pre-reform use of the ED. For both specifications, the increase in ED visits occurs in

the quarter immediately after an individual's birth month required them to enroll in MMC.

        For our main specification, the pattern of estimates suggests the increase in ED visits is largely

transitory as the estimated effect is trending back towards zero over time. This could be evidence that

the change in ED visits is temporary and is perhaps the result of individuals moving into new and

more restrictive insurance networks for the first time. However, the specification using COHS

counties as a comparison group shows a more persistent increase in the use of the ED because of

enrollment in MMC. This suggests some of the transitory nature of the change in ED visits in the

main specification may be the result of the either: (1) the lack of a comparison group in the first

specification to control for the evolution of healthcare services after the reform is fully implemented;

or (2) the fact our earliest treated observations are effectively in the control group for later

observations (particularly for the specification without COHS counties). To address the second

concern, Appendix Figure A1(a) contains results from the stacked event study ­ as specification that




                                                    23
should not be impacted by the staggered nature of adoption. These estimates demonstrate a far less

transitory effect on the use of the ED for individuals who are moved into MMC.

          To further understand the nature of the increase in ED visits we also examine the underlying

reason for the visit. An increase in the ED could reflect many things. First, the visits could reflect a

difficulty in receiving non-emergent medical services in an outpatient setting or physician's office.

Second, it could reflect poor primary care management resulting in emergency services that should

have been avoidable. Finally, it could reflect certain types of medical services that may be difficult to

access in a more restricted network. In Appendix Table A1 31 we find evidence that suggests the

increase in ED visits reflects all of these channels. Across both specifications we find an increase in

visits that required the ED but were preventable, were non-emergent and were for psychiatric

conditions.32 Taken together, this analysis of visit types suggests that at least part of the increase in

ED visits is the result of reduced access to healthcare services outside of the hospital.

          We also find that MMC enrollment is associated with a large and statistically significant

increase in the number of inpatient admissions that began as transfers from other hospitals. Figure

7(a) suggests that this increase is largely transitory. However, similar to the results pertaining to ED

visits above, the stacked event study in Appendix Figure A1(b) provides evidence that the effect is

more persistent. In considering a potential mechanism for these transfers, we note that many of these

transfers could have begun in the emergency room of the initial hospital. If that hospital were out of

network for the private MMC plan the patient would be transferred to an in-network hospital after

being stabilized for their inpatient admission. Supporting this point, Appendix Table A2 contains

estimates based on the initial hospital admission that demonstrates that most of these transfers are




31 We classify the types of ED visits according to the ICD-9 code groups developed by the NYU Center for Health and Public Service
Research (https://wagner.nyu.edu/faculty/billings/nyued-background).
32 In our specification that includes COHS counties we also found an increase in visits for conditions that were non-preventable and

emergent, however we did not find evidence of this in our main specification.

                                                                24
actually from individuals that entered the hospital through the ED of the transferring hospital. 33 In

this way these estimates provide evidence of some both an increased use of the ED and the role of

hospital networks in the implementation of MMC.

             Looking at other types of hospital visits, we find little evidence of other changes in the use of

the inpatient hospital or the ED. For example, we estimate negative but not statistically significant

coefficients for non-transfer non-ED hospitalizations and scheduled hospitalizations. If MMC firms

were expending efforts to reduce "unnecessary" hospitalizations, these are categories of visits where

we might expect to see a reduction. This provides some evidence of the limits in how much of a

change in the use of hospital services the MMC firms achieved in the SPD population. We also find

no evidence that the shift to MMC increased the number of inpatient visits admitted from each

hospital's own ED.

             It is possible that rather than decreasing the quantity of visits, MMC firms implement selective

networks to steer patients to lower price or higher value facilities. To examine this possibility, we next

examine changes in discharges at various types of hospitals. These estimates are contained in Appendix

Table A3 and Appendix Figures A2 ­ A9. We observe an increase in discharges at for-profit hospitals

and a decline in discharges at non-profit and government hospitals, which may reflect the

characteristics of providers in the MMC networks. While we observe an increase in ED visits at most

types of facilities, the increase in most pronounced at non-profit and government hospitals. We also

see a decline in discharges from teaching hospitals. Given that these hospitals tend to be more

expensive, these estimates are indicative of cost-reducing measures of the MMC plans. That said, we

do not find precise estimates across both specifications.




33   We can identify the original admission for approximately 60 percent of the transfers.

                                                                     25
VI.C Effect of Medicaid Managed Care on Mortality

        If the increase in ED visits and hospital transfers simply represents a learning or transaction

cost for new MMC enrollees, it might not be particularly concerning. After all, every policy has some

degree of transition cost during implementation. However, particularly sick individuals could suffer

meaningful adverse health consequences from even relatively minor disruptions in access to care

(Buchmueller, Jacobson and Wold 2006; Baum et al. 2019). Notably, this includes difficulty in

accessing not just the hospital visits we observe but also primary care physicians, specialists, and other

non-ED outpatient facilities that would also be affected by a more restrictive managed care network.

In addition, MMC firms can impact the use of pharmaceuticals which could impact the health of

enrollees (Layton et al. 2019).

        These very concerns about differential adverse consequences drove the initial decision of

California (and other states) to exempt the SPD population from mandatory MMC enrollment in the

first place. Obviously, the most consequential health outcome an enrollee could experience is death,

which we observe through our linked mortality files. Table 5 contains estimates of the effect of the

reform on mortality. Panel A contains the estimate from our main specification, which shows that the

MMC mandate increases mortality by a statistically significant 0.09 percentage points. This is a nearly

12 percent increase over baseline mortality. Panel B contains the estimate from our specification

including COHS counties. This estimate suggests a slightly smaller, but still statistically significant, 11

percent increase in mortality.

        Figures 8(a) and 8(b) contain the event study coefficients for the outcome of mortality for the

two specifications. Prior to the mandate, the estimated coefficients are generally small and not

statistically distinguishable from zero. There are also no demonstrable pre-trends in these estimates.

However, after the reform the estimates are uniformly positive and larger. While the estimates are not




                                                    26
always statistically significant, the pattern of coefficients suggests our estimate of increased mortality

in Table 5 is not simply a statistical artifact.

        To further investigate whether the estimated mortality increase is caused by mandating MMC

enrollment, we next present a series of exercises intended to explore both the robustness and the

plausibility of our estimates. First, Appendix Figure A10 includes the stacked event study specification

for mortality. The pattern and magnitude of estimates is largely similar to those from our main

specification ­ supporting the finding that transitioning the SPD population into MMC increased

mortality.

        Second, we note that there could be a concern that since mortality is a relatively infrequent

outcome, the linear probability model is an inappropriate choice for estimating the effect of MMC on

this outcome. To address this concern, we estimated a logit model and plotted the average marginal

effects in Appendix Figure A11. Reassuringly, the average marginal effects from the logit model follow

an almost identical pattern as the OLS event study estimates.

        Third, there could be an additional concern that our estimated mortality increase is simply

reflecting an unrelated change in a particular locality rather than a widespread response to mandatory

MMC enrollment. To examine this possibility, Appendix Table A4 contains the estimates from a leave

one out analysis at the county level. Each coefficient in the table is the estimate from a specification

that leaves out the respective county. For comparison purposes, the overall estimate is included in the

first row. These estimates provide no compelling evidence that the change in mortality is a statistical

artifact driven by just one county.

        Finally, to examine the plausibility of our estimated mortality increase, we consider whether

the mortality increases were concentrated in individuals with medical conditions where temporary

disruptions in care could plausibly result in such adverse health consequences. Table 6 contains the

estimated change in mortality rates for samples based on whether an individual had an inpatient

                                                   27
hospital visit for a particular medical condition (defined at the level of ICD-9 codes). The estimates in

this table are from our main specification (in Appendix Table A5 we provide similar estimates for the

specification including beneficiaries in COHS counties).

        In Panel A of Table 6, we find the largest and most consistently estimated effects for

individuals suffering from circulatory conditions. These conditions include hypertension, ischemic

heart disease, heart failure, and other cardiac conditions. It is plausible that for individuals suffering

from these conditions even limited disruptions in care could cause an increased risk of death. For

these individuals, mandatory enrollment in MMC causes an approximately 27 percent increase in

mortality. The magnitude of this effect is broadly consistent across our two specifications.

        In Panel A of Table 6 and Appendix Table A5 we also estimate statistically significant increases

in mortality for a number of other conditions. However, the estimates for these other conditions are

generally smaller and are not consistently estimated across the specifications. These estimates also

include the effect of individuals with comorbidities of cardiac conditions and these other outcomes.

In Panel B of Table 6 and Appendix Table A5, we provide estimates for these medical conditions after

removing all individuals with circulatory conditions. After removing those individuals, the estimated

effect for individuals with infectious and parasitic diseases is far less precisely estimated. The estimated

effect for individuals with Diseases of the Blood and Blood-forming Organs is still large and

consistently estimated across the specifications. These conditions make up a relatively small part of

the overall sample and also are conditions where individuals could be quite medically frail and

disruptions to care could have severe health consequences.


VI.D Heterogeneity in the Effect of Privatization by Patient Health

        Compared to the existing literature, our estimates provide initial evidence that the consequence

of privatization varies across patients. We next look for additional evidence of such heterogeneity

within our sample of SPD beneficiaries, which was itself not homogenous in health status. To that

                                                        28
end, we split our sample based on two measures of health status. Our first measure is based on

whether an individual had an above or below median use of inpatient and ED hospital services prior

to the reform.34 Our assumption is that those with a greater use of hospital services prior to the reform

represent the type of sicker population that might suffer more adverse consequences from mandatory

MMC enrollment. There could be a concern that the use of hospital services provides an incomplete

measure of health. Therefore, our second measure of health status relies on the underlying conditions

that caused individuals to seek treatment at the hospital. The severity measure is based on whether an

individual had an above or below median35 number of baseline chronic conditions (the Elixhauser

score), calculated from the principal and co-diagnoses of all their inpatient hospitalizations and ED

visits in 2009Q2 ­ 2010Q1.

           Table 7 contains estimates where the effect of mandatory enrollment in MMC is allowed to

vary by these measures of health status. We find that the overall change in ED visits discussed above

is almost entirely driven by less healthy SPD enrollees. For example, we find that the population with

an above-median use of hospital services prior to the reform had a 4 percent increase in ED visits as

a result of the reform. This estimate is statistically distinct from the below median utilizers, who had

a change in ED visits that was negative and not statistically distinguishable from zero. This was also

true for our specification including COHS counties. Moreover, Appendix Table A6 shows almost

identical patterns of MMC effect heterogeneity, using the severity measure based on baseline

Elixhauser scores. Figure 9 and Appendix Figure A13 contain the event study coefficients from both

specifications, using the utilization measure and severity measure. These event studies provide

compelling evidence of a casual effect for the sicker patients and no meaningful change in ED visits




34 We classify an individual as heavy utilizer if the total number of hospital discharge and ER visits in 2009Q2 ­ 2010Q1 is greater than
or equal to the median, which is 2 in our sample.
35 The median baseline Elixhauser score is 1. Thus an individual is classified as high severity patient if baseline Elixhauser score is greater

than or equal to 2.

                                                                      29
for those with lower baseline utilization or severity across both specifications. Appendix Figures A12(a)

and A14(a) contain the stacked event study figures for ED visits and they are largely consistent with

these main estimates.

        Looking at non-ED transfer hospitalizations, we also see this is primarily driven by less healthy

enrollees. Similarly, in Appendix Tables A7 and A8, we see that the changes in discharges and ED

visits by facility types are mainly driven by the high utilizers.

        Finally, to further analyze the causal role of mandatory MMC enrollment on mortality, we next

examine heterogeneity based on health status. Recall that the estimated change in ED visits and

hospital transfers are concentrated among those who had either an above median use of hospital and

ED services or an above median co-morbidity prior to enrollment in MMC (i.e. those who we assume

are the sicker members of the sample). If the estimated mortality increase was driven by mandatory

MMC enrollment, then it would be reasonable to expect this change in mortality is also driven by

these potentially sicker individuals.

        To examine this question, Column (2) of Table 5 contains estimates that allow the effect of

MMC on mortality to vary by the pre-reform use of hospital services and the severity of medical

conditions. These estimates demonstrate that the increase in mortality is driven almost entirely by

patients with decreased health status. As can be seen in the event study estimates in Figures 10 and

11, the evidence of this heterogeneity for mortality is most consistent when health status is measured

by the Elixhauser score rather than by the previous utilization of medical services. The estimated effect

for mortality for the low utilization sample does increase in the quarters after implementation and is

eventually the same magnitude as for those with high utilization. The same is not true when health

status is defined by the Elixhauser score. The same pattern is seen in the stacked event study estimates

in Appendix Figures A12(b) and A14(b). This may demonstrate that utilization of medical care in




                                                     30
previous years is not as good of a measure of medical frailty as a definition based on the specific

conditions afflicting patients.

        Overall, we find a pattern of estimates where our main mortality effects were broadly driven

by the same groups that experienced changes in the use of the hospital services. This provides further

evidence that the effect is caused by mandatory MMC enrollment for this population rather than

another unobserved confounder. It also demonstrates the importance of considering such

heterogeneity when considering the effects of MMC across different patient populations.


VI.E. Heterogeneity in the Effect by Market Structure

        The results above demonstrate that the concerns about the adverse consequences of the

incentives to reduce costs have some basis. However, it is also possible that a more competitive

environment among MMC firms could ameliorate some of these outcomes by changing the firms'

incentives. In order to examine this point, we next take advantage of the variation in the structure of

California's Medicaid program.

        As described above, within the reform counties in our sample there are two dominant market

structures: GMC and two-plan counties. Enrollees in a two-plan county had two choices for insurers:

a quasi-public local-initiative plan run by the county or a commercial plan. The majority of enrollees

in these counties enrolled in the local-initiative plan ­ thus while they are in the MMC program they

are not typically served by a private firm who is the residual claimant on the capitated payment. However,

two counties were organized as GMC counties where enrollees could pick between several privately

run MMC plans but did not have an option for a government run plan.

        If the competition between privately run plans changes the incentives and actions of the

private firms, we should observe differences in the use of hospital services by enrollees that were

mandated to enroll in MMC in GMC counties compared to Two-Plan counties. Table 8 contains



                                                        31
estimates of the effect of the reform where the estimates are allowed to vary by county type. Results

are presented for both the use hospital services and health outcomes.

        Overall, we estimate little difference in the effect by the type of Medicaid managed care. The

only meaningful difference is that enrollees in GMC counties had a greater reduction in scheduled

inpatient hospital services. These types of visits are a category where we might expect a managed care

firm to implement utilization management techniques to decrease the use of low value care. This

provides some limited evidence that market structure may affect the actions of Medicaid managed

care firms ­ though the identifiable scope of this impact in our setting is quite small.


VII. Conclusion

        Our estimates provide new evidence about the effects of requiring more complicated patients

to enroll in privately operated managed care plans. On the whole, these estimates demonstrate

heterogeneity in the effects of MMC and show that the sickest patients suffer adverse consequences

from the requirement to enroll in MMC. Specifically, we find that individuals who were sicker (as

indicated by a higher use of hospital services while in the FFS system or by a greater disease burden)

experienced an increase in the use of ED services, hospitals transfers, and mortality. We found limited

evidence of an overall reduction in the use of hospital services or other indications of reduced

spending from the hospital sector. This suggests states may want to exhibit caution before broadly

expanding the set of patients required to enroll in MMC. It also may also cast doubt on the desirability

of requiring mandatory managed care enrollment in other programs such as Medicare Advantage.

        Our results demonstrate that the effects of insurance extend beyond simply the extensive

margin of coverage. Changes in the form of the insurance contract can impact both the use of

healthcare and mortality. In that way, this study contributes to an emerging literature about the

mortality consequences of health insurance coverage. For example, both Miller et al. (2019) and

Goldin, Lurie and McCubbin (2019) find that the increases in insurance coverage caused by the ACA

                                                   32
decreased mortality among affected populations. Similarly, Abaluck, Bravo, Hull, and Starc (2021)

estimate mortality increases across MA plans.

        Our results stand in marked contrast to those of Layton et al. (2019) which also examines the

question of MMC for older and sicker populations in other states. Examining managed care in Texas,

these authors found MMC allowed for an increase in the use of prescription drugs and a reduction in

inpatient use. The types of inpatient use where they see a reduction are visits that are likely responsive

to an increased use of prescription drugs. Looking at New York they found a large reduction in the

use of inpatient services. They posit that this reduction is likely the result of stinting by the private

firms that are residual claimants on healthcare spending. While we find no reduction in the use of

inpatient services overall, if we examine the markets where commercial firms are competing for

business we do find suggestive evidence of limited declines in inpatient admissions. For some

outcomes these declines are statistically significant and overall we cannot rule out fairly large declines

in admissions that are either scheduled or did not begin in the ED.

        Rather than viewing the difference in results across the two studies as a point of contention,

we believe it demonstrates the important local nature of state Medicaid systems. Examining our results

in combination with those of Layton et al. (2019) serves to reinforce the oft-stated maxim, "if you've

seen one Medicaid program, you've seen one Medicaid program" (Adams, 2013). As a result,

policymakers and economists should exhibit meaningful caution in attempting to generalize results

across both states and types of patients.

        At a minimum, the generosity and structure of the FFS program is important. For example,

the largely positive effects for Texas appear to be driven by a rather stringent cap on pharmaceuticals

in the FFS program ­ restrictions which do not exist in our setting. In addition, the lack of large

negative health effects (such as the mortality effects we find) could be driven by the exclusion of




                                                   33
inpatient spending in the MMC program for disabled residents in Texas, which is again not a feature

of the California expansion.

        We also would caution anyone from drawing any broad conclusions from our estimates about

the overall welfare implications of California moving complicated patients into MMC. We show that

for the most complicated patients, MMC appears to have adverse consequences in terms of both an

interruption in the usual source of care and an increase in mortality. However, there were many less

complicated patients that were included in the SPD population and appear to have been largely

unaffected by the policy change. It is possible that there were great savings or benefits for these

individuals from the move to MMC that could offset the costs to the more complicated patients. At

a minimum, our results demonstrate that the potential costs of such a move are meaningful and cannot

be predicted by the experiences of either younger or healthier patients in California or of similar patient

populations in other states.




                                                    34
Bibliography


Abaluck, J., Bravo, M., Hull, P., & Starc, A. (2021). Mortality Effects and Choice Across Private
       Health Insurance Plans, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Adams, R. (2013, April 19). State Medicaid Officials Consider Multi-Tiered Benefits, Cost-Shareing Under
      Overhaul. Retrieved April 12, 2020, from The Commonwealth Fund:
      https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/newsletter-article/state-medicaid-
      officials-consider-multi-tiered-benefits-cost

Aizer, A., Currie, J., & Moretti, E. (2007, August). Does Managed Care Hurt Health? Evidence from
        Medicaid Mothers. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 385-399.

Baker, A.C., Larcker D.F., & Wang C.C.Y. (2021). How Much Should We Trust Staggered
       Difference-In-Difference Estimates? ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance, Working Paper N
       736/2021.

Baum, A., Barnett, M., Wisnivesky, J., & Schwartz, M. (2019). Association Between a Temporary
      Reduction in Access to Health Care and Long-term Changes in Hypertension Control
      Among Veterans After a Natural Disaster. JAMA Network Open, e1915111.

Brown, J., Duggan,M., I. Kuziemko, & W. Woolston. (2014) How Does Risk Selection Respond to
       Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program. American Economic
       Review, 104(10), 3335-3364.

Buchmueller, T., Jacobson, M., & Wold, C. (2006). How Far to the Hospital? The Effect of Hospital
     Closures on Access to Care. Journal of Health Economics, 740-761.

Callaway, B., & Sant'Anna, P.H.C. (2020). Difference-in-Difference with Multiple Time Periods.
       Journal of Econometrics, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2020.12.001.

Cengiz, D., Dube, A., Lindner, A. & Zipperer, B. (2019). The Effect of Minimum Wages on Low-
       Wage Jobs. The Quarterly Journal of Econometrics, 134(3): 1405-1454.

Chandra, A., & Garthwaite, C. (2019). Economic Principles for Medicare Reform. The Annals of the
      American Academy, 63-92.

CMS. (1999). Medicaid Financial Management Report - Net Services (CMS-64) FY1999.

CMS. (2014). Medicaid Financial Management Report - Net Services (CMS-64) FY 2013.

CMS. (2015). Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment and Program Characteristics, 2013. Mathematica Policy
       Research.


                                                     35
CMS. (2018a). Medicaid Financial Management Report - Net Services (CMS-64) FY 2016.

CMS. (2018b). Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment and Program Characteristics, 2016. Mathematica Policy
       Research.

CMS. (2019, December 17). National Health Expenditure Data. Retrieved April 11, 2020, from
       CMS.gov: https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-
       and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical

Currie, J., & Fahr, J. (2005). Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children's Medicaid Coverage and
        Utilization. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 85-108.

Curto, V., Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Levin, J., & Bhattacharya, J. (2019). Health Care Spending and
       Utilizaton in Public and Private Medicare. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 302-
       332.

Deshpande, M. & Li, Y. (2019). Who is Screened Out? Application Costs and the Targeting of
      Disability Programs. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4): 213-248.

Duggan, M. (2004). Does Contracting out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs?
      Evidence from Medicaid HMOs. Journal of Public Economics, 88, 2549-2572.

Duggan, M., & Hayford, T. (2013). Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid Expenditures?
      Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 505-
      535.

Duggan, M., Gruber, J., & Vabson, B. (2018). The Consequences of Health Care Privatization:
      Evidence from Medicare Advantage Exits. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 153-186.

Finkelstein, A., & McKnight R. (2008). What did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of Medicare on
        Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public Economics, 92:1644-1668.

Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J., Allen, H., Baicker,
        K., & Oregon Health Study Group. (2012). The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
        Evidence from The First Year. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1057-1106.

Garthwaite, C., Graves, J., Gross, T., Karaca, Z., Marone, V., & Notowidigdo, M. (2019). All
      Medicaid Expansions Are Not Created Equal: The Geography and Targeting of the Affordable Care Act.
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Garthwaite, C. & Notowidigdo, M. (2020). Plan Value-Added: Evaluating Medicaid Managed Care
      Plans Using Random Assignment, working paper.

Geruso, M., Layton, T. & Prinz, D. (2019) Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from the ACA
      Health Insurance Exchanges. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(2): 64-107.



                                                   36
Geruso, M., & Layton, T. (2020). Upcoding or Selection? Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk
      Adjustment. Journal of Political Economy, 128(3): 984­1026.

Geruso, M., Layton, T., & Wallace J. (2020). Are all Managed Care Plans Created Equal? Evidence
      from Random Plan Assignment in Medicaid, working paper.

Goldin, J., Lurie, I., & McCubbin, J. (2019). Health Insurance and Mortality: Experimental Evidence
       from Taxpaer Outreach. NBER Working Paper 26533.

Goodman-Bacon, A. (2020). Difference-in-Difference with Variation in Treatment Timing, working
     paper.

Harbage, P., & King, M. (2012). A Bridge to Reform: California's Medicaid Section 1115 Waiver. California
      HealthCare Foundation.

Hart, O., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. (1997). The Proper Scope of Government: Theory and An
       Application to Prisons. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1127-1161.

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014a). Medicaid Enrollees by Enrollment Group. Retrieved April 11, 2020,
       from https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/distribution-of-medicaid-enrollees-by-
       enrollment-
       group/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%
       22:%22asc%22%7D

Kaiser Family Foundation. (2014b). Medicaid Spending per Enrollee (Full or Partial Benefit). Retrieved
       April 11, 2020, from https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-spending-per-
       enrollee/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort
       %22:%22asc%22%7D

Kuziemko, I., Meckel, K., & Rossin-Slater, M. (2018). Does Managed Care Widen Infant Health
      Disparities? Evidence from Texas Medicaid. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3),
      255-283.

Layton, T., Maestas, N., Prinz, D., & Vabson, B. (2019). Private vs. Public Provision of Social Insurance:
       Evidence from Medicaid. NBER Working Paper 26042.

Lee, A. (2020). How Do Hospitals Respond to Managed Care? Evidence From At-Risk Newborns.
        Journal of Public Economics.

Levy, H., & Meltzer, D. (2008) The Impact of Health Insurance on Health. Annual Review of Public
       Health, 29: 399-409.

MACPAC. (2019). MACStats: Medicaid and CHIP Data Book.

Marton, J., Yelowitz, A., & Talbert, J. (2014). A Tale of Two Cities? The Heterogeneous Impact of
      Medicaid Managed Care. Journal of Health Economics, 47-68.


                                                     37
Miller, S., Altekruse, S., Johnson, N., & Wherry, L. (2019). Medicaid and Mortality: New Evidence from
         Linked Survey and Administrative Data. NBER Working Paper 26081.

NYU Center for Health and Public Service Research. Accessed May 29 , 2020.
     https://wagner.nyu.edu/faculty/billings/nyued-background

Sommers, B., Baicker, K., & Epstein, A. (2012). Mortality and Access to Care among Adults after
     State Medicaid Expansions. The New England Journal of Medicine, 367(11): 1025-1034.

Sommers, B., Long, S., & Baicker, K. (2014). Changes in Mortality After Massachusetts Health Care
     Reform. Annals of Internal Medicine, 160(9): 585-593.

Sun, L. & Abraham, S. (2020). Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies with
        Heterogeneous Treatment Effects. Journal of Econometrics,
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2020.09.006.

Tater, M., Paradise, J., & Garfield, R. (2016). Medi-Cal Managed Care: An Overview and Key Issues. The
        Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.




                                                   38
  Appendix A: Difference-in-Differences with Two Way Fixed Effects Robustness Checks

There has been a recent and growing literature on potential bias in common two-way fixed effect DiD
analysis with staggered treatment timing (Goodman-Bacon 2020; Callaway and Sant'Anna 2020; Sun
and Abraham 2020; Baker et al 2021). In this appendix, we discuss how our main specifications may
be affected by such concerns, and describe how we check the robustness of our main analysis using
the stacked event study method (similar to specifications in Cengiz et al (2019) and Deshpande and
Li (2019)).

In our main analysis, we estimate the effect of the MMC mandate using the following DiD
specification, regressing outcome variables on an indicator of mandate status and controlling for time
and individual fixed effects:
                               = 0 + 1  +  +  + 

In our setting of the staggered implementation of the MMC mandate, 1 it is a weighted average of
DiD estimators of all 2-by-2 pairs of different treatment and timing groups (Goodman-Bacon 2020).
While the Goodman-Bacon DiD decomposition can be used to illustrate the weight of each group, it
is not applicable in our case since we do not have a balanced panel. In general, Goodman-Bacon (2020)
shows that the weights are proportional to group size and variance of the treatment indicator in the
pair, and suggests that 1 may be biased towards the treatment effects of groups treated in the middle
of the panel.

Hence for robustness, we turn to an event study version of the analysis using the following
specification, regressing outcome variables on a vector of indicators for time relative to mandate
implementation and controlling for time and individual fixed effects:
                         4

                   =   ( =   + ) +  +  + 
                         -3
While this specification overcomes the weighting issue discussed in Goodman-Bacon (2020), it can
still be problematic due to heterogeneous treatment effects. As illustrated in Callaway and Sant'Anna
(2020), Sun and Abraham (2020), Baker et al (2021), already-treated units can be part of the control
group just like units that are not yet treated, and thus the estimations from common event study
specification can still be biased when treatment effects are heterogeneous. The aforementioned papers
propose and discuss various alternative methods to restrict control group to not-yet-treated units and
reduce bias in estimation.

In light of these discussions, we check the robustness of our results using the stacked event study
method, following similar analysis in Cengiz et al (2019) and Deshpande and Li (2019).

We first create separate (sub)datasets for different treatment-control pairs. Since the MMC mandate
is implemented month by month according to the birth month of beneficiaries, in each (sub)dataset,
the treatment group include individuals of a particular birth month in treatment (Two-Plan/GMC)
counties, and the control group include all individuals in the COHS counties. Thus, we ensure that
already-treated individuals never enter the control group, which consists only of never-treated
individuals. Note that this method has an additional benefit of balancing the number of observations
in treatment and control groups, as there are approximately ten times as many beneficiaries in Two-
Plan/GMC counties than in COHS counties in our sample.

                                                  39
We then stack these (sub)datasets together to form the sample for robustness analysis, labeling each
of the treatment-control pair with treatment cohort indicators.

With this stacked sample, we estimate treatment effects of the MMC mandate that are averaged across
these treatment cohorts, by running the event study specification in our main analysis, except
interacting individual/county fixed effect, time fixed effect, and any time-varying control variables
with the cohort indicators. The estimated coefficients are plotted in Figures A1, A10, A12, and A14
and discussed in the main text. Reassuringly, the estimations are similar to what we find using our
main specifications.




                                                 40
Tables

                                            Table : Summary Statistics

Panel A: Treatment Counties
Time Period                     Sample Selection    Pre-Implementation   Implementation   Post-Implementation
                                    Q -      Q            Q -    Q          Q -     Q            Q-    Q
Number of patients                      ,                    ,                  ,                  ,
Number of obs                           ,                    ,                   ,                  ,

Demographics
                 Average age            .                     .                 .                   .
                Share female           .                    .                  .                  .
                 Share black           .                     .                  .                  .
               Share hispanic          .                     .                  .                  .

Average Utilization
   Number of discharge/qtr              .                   .                  .                  .
         Number of ER/qtr              .                    .                  .                  .

Discharge Payer Share
                     MMC               .                    .                  .                   .
                   MCDFFS              .                    .                  .                   .
                   Medicare            .                    .                   .                 .
                    Private            .                    .                  .                  .
                       Self            .                    .                  .                  .
                     Other             .                    .                  .                  .

ER Payer Share
                       MCD             .                    .                   .                 .
                     Medicare          .                    .                  .                  .
                      Private          .                    .                   .                 .
                         Self          .                    .                  .                  .
                       Other           .                    .                  .                  .
 Panel B: Control Counties
 Time Period                              Sample Selection            Pre-Implementation              Implementation             Post-Implementation
                                              Q -      Q                    Q -    Q                     Q -     Q                      Q-    Q
 Number of patients                                  ,                            ,                             ,                             ,
 Number of obs                                       ,                             ,                            ,                              ,

 Demographics
                    Average age                       .                             .                            .                             .
                   Share female                      .                             .                            .                             .
                    Share black                      .                             .                            .                             .
                  Share hispanic                     .                             .                            .                             .

 Average Utilization
  Number of discharge/qtr                            .                             .                            .                             .
        Number of ER/qtr                             .                             .                            .                             .

 Discharge Payer Share
                    MMC                               .                            .                            .                             .
                 MCDFFS                               .                            .                            .                             .
                  Medicare                           .                             .                             .                            .
                    Private                          .                             .                            .                             .
                       Self                          .                             .                            .                             .
                     Other                           .                             .                            .                             .

 ER Payer Share
                            MCD                      .                             .                            .                             .
                          Medicare                   .                             .                            .                             .
                           Private                   .                              .                            .                             .
                              Self                   .                             .                            .                             .
                            Other                    .                             .                            .                             .

Notes: This table shows summary statistics of the analysis sample in di erent time periods. Panel A contains data for only individuals living in treatment
countries while Panel B contains data on those living in COHS counties. Demographics and average utilization are computed by taking average over person-
quarter level observations (unit of regression analysis). Payer shares are computed from total number of discharges and ER visits of di erent payers across all
individuals in respective time periods of the analysis sample.
                                                Table : Distribution by MMC Status

                   Panel A: Age                           MMC Always               MMC Switch               MCDFFS Always
                   Average                                             .                     .                            .
                   Share by Group
                     -                                             .                         .                           .
                     -                                             .                         .                           .
                     -                                             .                         .                           .
                    -                                              .                         .                            .

                   Panel B: Length of Stay                MMC Always               MMC Switch               MCDFFS Always
                   Average                                         .                         .                           .
                   Share by Group
                    - days                                         .                         .                          .
                     - days                                        .                         .                          .
                     - days                                        .                          .                         .
                      - days                                       .                         .                          .
                      - days                                       .                         .                          .
                      - days                                       .                         .                          .
                      - days                                       .                         .                          .
                      + days                                       .                         .                          .

                   Panel C: Charge                        MMC Always               MMC Switch               MCDFFS Always
                   Average                                                 .                      .                           .
                   Share by Group
                   $ - k                                           .                         .                          .
                   $ - k                                           .                         .                          .
                   $ - k                                           .                         .                           .
                   $ - k                                            .                         .                         .
                   $ - k                                           .                         .                          .
                   $ - k                                           .                         .                          .
                   $ k+                                            .                         .                          .
                   missing                                         .                         .                          .

Notes: Based on universe of hospital discharges in California from      q to       q that are non-birth related for individuals residing in the same reform
county in      q -     q , born in     - , with valid RLN, and having at least one Medi-Cal covered hospital discharge in both        q -      q and      q
-    q . Each observation is the average outcome for the individual across all dischrges in    q -      q . Table displays the distribution by MMC status
before and after the SPD mandate, which was implemented from         q to       q .
                                                                                        Table : First Stage

                                             ()                      ( )                    ()               ( )                  ()                            ( )                           ( )
                                     Inpatient                 Inpatient
Panel A:                                                                             Inpatient            Inpatient         Emergency Room           Emergency Room                Emergency Room
                                     Medicaid                  Medicaid
No Control Group                                                                      Private             Medicare             Medicaid                  Private                      Medicare
                                    Managed Care             Fee for Service
mandate                                   . ***                  - . ***                .           ***     .                  - . ***                       . ***                         .
                                          ( . )                   ( . )               ( .             )   ( .           )       ( . )                        ( . )                       ( .          )

Time FE                                          Y                    Y                      Y                      Y              Y                                Y                            Y
Individual FE                                    Y                    Y                      Y                      Y              Y                                Y                            Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                          .                       .                      .                   .                  .                            .                            .
Observations

                                     Inpatient                 Inpatient
Panel B:                                                                             Inpatient            Inpatient         Emergency Room           Emergency Room                Emergency Room
                                     Medicaid                  Medicaid
COHS Control Group                                                                    Private             Medicare             Medicaid                  Private                      Medicare
                                    Managed Care             Fee for Service
mandate                                    . ***                 -.         ***         .           ***    .                   - . ***                        . ***                       - .        **
                                         ( .    )                ( .          )       ( .             )   ( .           )       ( . )                        ( . )                        ( .         )

Time FE                                          Y                      Y                       Y                Y                 Y                                Y                           Y
Individual FE                                    Y                      Y                       Y                Y                 Y                                Y                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                          .                         .                    .                   .                  .                            .                              .
Observations

Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in  Q -     Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicator, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors
clustered at individual level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                             Table : E ect of MMC on Hospital Services

                                             ()              ( )                 ()                 ( )                       ()                     ( )
Panel A:                                                                   Non-ER               Non-ER               Admitted from
                                       ER Visit        Discharge                                                                                Scheduled
No Control Group                                                           Transfer            Non-transfer            Own ER
mandate                                  .  **              .                .           **       - .                        .                    - .
                                        ( . )             ( .       )      ( .            )      ( .         )             ( .        )          ( .          )

Time FE                                      Y                  Y                    Y                Y                           Y                      Y
Individual FE                                Y                  Y                    Y                Y                           Y                      Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                          .                  .                .                   .                        .                      .
Observations

Panel B:                                                                   Non-ER               Non-ER               Admitted from
                                       ER Visit        Discharge                                                                                Scheduled
COHS Control Group                                                         Transfer            Non-transfer            Own ER
mandate                                  . ***           - .                .            ***     - .                       - .                   - .
                                        ( . )             ( .       )      ( .            )      ( .         )             ( .        )          ( .          )

Time FE                                      Y                  Y                 Y                      Y                     Y                         Y
Individual FE                                Y                  Y                 Y                      Y                     Y                         Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                          .                  .                .                   .                        .                      .
Observations
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicator, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01.
                                                  Table : E ect of MMC on Mortality

Panel A: No Control Group                                           ()                   ( )                ()                   ( )                  ()
                                                                                          By Utilization                    By Elixhauser Score
mandate                                                    .             ***
                                                          ( .             )
mandate (low severity)                                                           .                                          .
                                                                               ( .                )                       ( .              )
mandate (high severity)                                                          .             ***      .        **        .             ***      .        ***
                                                                               ( .                )   ( .          )     ( .                )   ( .           )
Time FE                                                             Y                    Y                                           Y
County FE                                                           Y                    Y                                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                             .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low severity)                                                  .                                        .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high severity)                                                 .                                            .
N
N (low severity)
N (high severity)
Panel B: COHS Control Group
                                                                                          By Utilization                    By Elixhauser Score
mandate                                                    .             ***
                                                          ( .             )
mandate (low severity)                                                             .                                         .
                                                                                ( .              )                       ( .               )
mandate (high severity)                                                          .              ***  .                     .             ***     .           **
                                                                                ( .              ) ( .              )    ( .                )   ( .           )
Time FE                                                             Y                    Y                                           Y
County FE                                                           Y                    Y                                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                           .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low severity)                                                   .                                       .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high severity)                                                  .                                        .
N
N (low severity)
N (high severity)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge
in      Q -       Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in       Q -      Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in
      Q -      Q . The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs,
county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level. Column shows the results from full sample. Column shows
the coe cients for high and low baseline utilizers separately by interacting all RHS variables with high utilizer indicator, which is equivalent to running the
regressions separately for the two groups. Column tests for statistical signi cance of the di erences between high vs. low utilizer coe cients, by regressing
outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high utilizer indicator. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total
number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is higher than or equal to the median (which equals in the analysis sample). Column shows the
coe cients for those with high and low baseline Elixhauser scores separately. Column tests for statistical signi cance of di erences between the coe cients
for those with high and low baseline Elixhauser scores. High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose total unweighted number of chronic conditions
(Elixhauser score) based on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at baseline is higher than the median (which equals
in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                                  Table : E ect of MMC on Mortality by Baseline Health Condition (No Control Group)
                                                                           Endocrine, Nutritional and             Diseases of
                      Infectious and                                                                                                                                 Diseases of the           Diseases of the                Diseases of the
Panel A:                                               Neoplasms            Metabolic Diseases, and           Blood and Blood-              Mental Disorders
                     Parasitic Diseases                                                                                                                              Nervous System          Circulatory System             Respiratory System
                                                                             Immunity Disorders                forming Organs
mandate                   .               *              - .                         .                             .            ***            - .                      - .                        .               **               .
                         ( .              )             ( .           )            ( .              )             ( .             )            ( .       )              ( .           )           ( .               )            ( .            )

Time FE                               Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
County FE                             Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)            .                            .                                .                           .                        .                        .                                .                           .
Observations

                                                                                                                Diseases of the
                      Diseases of the                 Diseases of the            Diseases of the                                                                     Symptoms, Signs,
                                                                                                            Musculoskeletal System        Congenital Anomalies                               Injury and Poisoning       Supplementary Classi cation
                     Digestive System              Genitourinary System   Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue                                                           and Ill-de ned Conditions
                                                                                                            and Connective Tissue
mandate                       .                          .                          .                                  .                         .                        .                        .                            - .
                        ( .                   )         ( .           )           ( .                   )        ( .                  )        ( .       )              ( .           )          ( .                )            ( .            )

Time FE                               Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
County FE                             Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                .                       .                             .                              .                         .                            .                        .                               .
Observations

                                                                                                             Excluding Individuals with Circulatory Conditions
                                                                           Endocrine, Nutritional and             Diseases of
                      Infectious and                                                                                                                                 Diseases of the           Diseases of the                Diseases of the
Panel B:                                               Neoplasms            Metabolic Diseases, and           Blood and Blood-              Mental Disorders
                     Parasitic Diseases                                                                                                                              Nervous System          Circulatory System             Respiratory System
                                                                             Immunity Disorders                forming Organs
mandate                    .                            - .                        - .                              .            *              .                       - .                                                        .
                         ( .              )             ( .           )             ( .             )             ( .             )            ( .       )              ( .           )                                          ( .            )

Time FE                               Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                                                         Y
County FE                             Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                                                         Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)             .                              .                         .                               .                        .                            .                                                    .
Observations

                                                                                                                Diseases of the
                      Diseases of the                 Diseases of the            Diseases of the                                                                     Symptoms, Signs,
                                                                                                            Musculoskeletal System        Congenital Anomalies                               Injury and Poisoning       Supplementary Classi cation
                     Digestive System              Genitourinary System   Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue                                                           and Ill-de ned Conditions
                                                                                                            and Connective Tissue
mandate                   .                              .                        - .                              .                             .                        .                        .                              - .
                        ( .                   )         ( .           )           ( .                   )         ( .             )            ( .       )              ( .           )          ( .                )            ( .            )

Time FE                               Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
County FE                             Y                           Y                             Y                           Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                            Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)             .                          .                             .                           .                            .                            .                     .                                   .
Observations

Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in      Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge in       Q -      Q . Panel B based on same sample
while excluding all individuals with any discharge/ER visit for circulatory conditions at baseline. The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicator
(shown in tables), quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                                                Table : Heterogeneity in the use of Hospital Services

                                               ()            ( )          ()           ( )           ()               ( )               ( )                ( )              ( )            ( )         ( )          ( )
Panel A:                                                                                                   Non-ER                        Non-ER                            Admitted from
                                                     ER Visit                  Discharge                                                                                                                   Scheduled
No Control Group                                                                                           Transfer                     Non-transfer                         Own ER
mandate (low util)                            - .                      - .                         .                                - .         *                          .                          - . **
                                             ( . )                      ( .      )               ( .     )                        ( .               )                     ( . )                      ( .    )
mandate (high util)                           . ***        . ***           .           .            . ***         .         **     - .                    .                .               .          - .           .
                                             ( . )        ( . )        ( .       )   ( .     )    ( . )         ( .           )     ( .         )        ( .     )       ( . )            ( .    )   ( .    )     ( .     )

Time FE                                          Y                         Y                           Y                                 Y                                   Y                           Y
Individual FE                                    Y                         Y                           Y                                 Y                                   Y                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                  .                         .                          .                                  .                                   .                           .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                 .                           .                        .                                  .                                    .                         .
N (low util)
N (high util)

Panel B:                                                                                                   Non-ER                        Non-ER                            Admitted from
                                                     ER Visit                  Discharge                                                                                                                   Scheduled
COHS Control Group                                                                                         Transfer                     Non-transfer                         Own ER
mandate (low util)                            .                          .                        .                                -    .                                   .                        - .
                                            ( . )                       ( . )                  ( .   )                            (     .       )                        ( .          )              ( .     )
mandate (high util)                          . ***         . ***        - .           - .        . ***            .          *    -    .                 - .               - .            - .          .            .
                                            ( . )         ( . )        ( . )         ( .     ) ( .   )          ( .           )   (    .            )   ( .          )    ( .     )       ( .    )   ( .      )   ( .     )

Time FE                                         Y                          Y                           Y                                    Y                                Y                           Y
Individual FE                                   Y                          Y                           Y                                    Y                                Y                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                  .                         .                          .                                 .                                    .                          .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                 .                         .                          .                                  .                                    .                         .
N (low util)
N (high util)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in         Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in    Q -      Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with
standard errors clustered at individual level. The odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for high and low baseline utilizers separately by interacting all RHS variables with high utilizer indicator, which
is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of the di erences between high vs. low utilizer coe cients, by regressing
outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high utilizer indicator. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is
higher than or equal to the median (which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                                                   Table : Heterogeneity by GMC vs. Two-Plan

                                                         ()          ( )            ()         ( )               ()              ( )          ( )           ( )        ( )      ( )          ( )          ( )
Panel A:                                                                                                              Non-ER                   Non-ER                 Admitted from
                                                              ER Visit              Discharge                                                                                                    Scheduled
No Control Group                                                                                                      Transfer                Non-transfer              Own ER
mandate (Two-Plan)                                     . **                         .                      .           **                   - .                          .                - .
                                                      ( . )                       ( . )                  ( .            )                  ( .     )                  ( . )               ( .    )
mandate (GMC)                                           .         - .             - .         - .            .              - .              - .          - .          - .     - .        - . **        - .       *
                                                      ( . )        ( .       )    ( . )      ( .     )   ( .            )   ( .        )    ( . )         ( .     )   ( . )    ( .    )    ( . )        ( .       )
Time FE                                                   Y                          Y                            Y                              Y                        Y                   Y
Individual FE                                             Y                          Y                            Y                              Y                        Y                   Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y) (Two-Plan)                             .                         .                            .                             .                        .                   .
Pre-Reform Mean(y) (GMC)                                .                            .                           .                             .                        .                   .
N (Two-Plan)
N (GMC)

Panel B:                                                                                                              Non-ER                   Non-ER                 Admitted from
                                                              ER Visit              Discharge                                                                                                    Scheduled
COHS Control Group                                                                                                    Transfer                Non-transfer              Own ER
mandate                                                . ***        . ***        - .          - .         .           ***     .             - .            - . *      - .      - .           .          - .
                                                      ( . )         ( . )          ( . )     ( . )       ( .           )    ( .        )   ( .        )   ( .    )     ( . )   ( . )      ( .       )   ( .       )
Time FE                                                  Y             Y              Y         Y                 Y               Y               Y           Y            Y       Y          Y               Y
Individual FE                                            Y             Y              Y         Y                 Y               Y               Y           Y            Y       Y          Y               Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y) (Two-Plan and COHS)                   .                           .                           .                            .                          .                   .
Pre-Reform Mean(y) (GMC and COHS)                                        .                     .                                 .                          .                    .                        .
N (Two-Plan and COHS)
N (GMC and COHS)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -        Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in  Q -     Q . Outcome variables
are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual
FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level. In panel A, the odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for GMC and Two-Plan counties separately by interacting all RHS variables with GMC
indicator, which is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of the di erences between GMC vs. Two-Plan county
coe cients, by regressing outcome variables on relative event time indicators and relative event time indicators interacted with GMC indicator. In panel B, the odd-numbered columns show the coe cients
from regressions with sample that includes both Two-Plan and COHS control counties, and the even-numbered columns show the coe cint from regressions with sample that includes both GMC and
COHS control counties. GMC counties include San Diego and Sacramento.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
Figures
                      Figure : Medicaid Manged Care Enrollment and Expenditure in the US




Notes: Medicaid expenditure data from CMS Medicaid Financial Management Report - Net Services (CMS- )            -    . Medicaid expenditure is based on
total net expenditure on medical services reported in CMS forms, excluding CHIP spending and administrative spending. MCO spending does not include
expenditures on MCO evaluation and management, prepaid ambulatory health plan, and prepaid inpatient health plan. Expenditure data are in ation
adjusted (reported in $    ). Medicaid enrollment data from CMS Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment Reports           ,    ,   ,     ,   ,     ,      ,
and CMS Medicaid Managed Care Trends and Snapshots           -     . Table reports Medicaid enrollment as of June th for      -     and July st for
-     . The unduplicated managed care enrollment gures include enrollees receiving comprehensive bene ts and limited bene ts.
                                           Figure : MMC Enrollment by Birth Month




Notes: Based on universe of hospital discharges in California from q to      q that are non-birth related for individuals residing in reform counties and
born in     - . Figure plots MMC discharges as share of Medicaid discharges in each month for each birth month. Policy implementation period is from
   q to       q .
                                            Figure : MMC Share of Hospital Discharge
                             (a) MMC and MCDFFS Share of Total Discharge in Reform Counties




                            (b) MMC Share of Total Discharge in Reform Counties by Birth Cohort




Notes: Based on universe of hospital discharges in California from          q to      q that are non-birth related for individuals residing in reform counties,
not restricting year of birth in panel A and restricting to those born in     - in panel B. Figure plots MMC and MCDFFS discharges as share of all hospital
discharges in each month. Policy implementation period is from           q to     q .
                                              Figure : MMC Enrollment Event Study
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                   Figure : MMC Share of Hospital Discharge by COHS vs. Reform Counties
                                                    (a) MMC Share of Total Discharge




                                                 (b) MMC Share of Medicaid Discharge




Notes: Based on universe of hospital discharges in California from    q to       q that are non-birth related for individuals residing in reform and COHS
counties. Figure plots MMC discharges as share of all hospital discharges in each month in panel A and as share of Medi-Cal discharges in panel B. Policy
implementation period is from       q to      q .
                                                     Figure : ER Visit Event Study
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                  Figure : Non-ER-Transfer Hospitalization Event Study
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                                    Figure : Mortality Event Study
                                                             (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge
in      Q -      Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in     Q -       Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in
     Q -      Q . The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, county FEs, age
FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level.
                          Figure : ER Visit Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Utilization
                                                               (a) Main Speci cation




                                                              (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in        Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in       Q -       Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from separate
regressions by baseline utilization of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual
level. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is higher than or equal to the median (which equals
  in the analysis sample).
                        Figure : Mortality Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Utilization
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                             (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in      Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge
in      Q -     Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in        Q -       Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in
    Q -       Q . The coe cients are from separate linear regression by baseline utilization of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators,
quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total
number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is higher than or equal to the median (which equals in the analysis sample).
                     Figure : Mortality Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Elixhauser Score
                                                               (a) Main Speci cation




                                                             (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -        Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge in
      Q -      Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in   Q -       Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in   Q
-     Q . The coe cients are from separate linear regression by baseline Elixhauser score of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators,
quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level. High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose
total unweighted number of chronic conditions (Elixhauser score) based on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at
baseline is higher than the median (which equals in the analysis sample).
Appendix

                                                                         Table A : E ect of MMC on ER Visit by Types

                                             ()                  ( )                   ()                   ( )             ()             ( )          ( )            ( )               ( )               ( )
                                                        ED Needed               ED Needed                Emergent
Panel A: No Control Group                ER (All)                                                                       Non Emergent    Alcohol        Drug          Injury         Psych               Unclassi ed
                                                       Not Preventable          Preventable             PC Treatable
mandate                                     . **              .                    .           **           .               . **        - .           .              - .             .           **         .
                                           ( . )            ( .            )     ( .                )     ( .       )      ( . )        ( .      )   ( .        )   ( .        )   ( .             )      ( .       )

Time FE                                       Y                      Y                     Y                    Y             Y             Y               Y              Y                 Y                  Y
Individual FE                                 Y                      Y                     Y                    Y             Y             Y               Y              Y                 Y                  Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                           .                  .                 .                        .                .             .               .           .                 .                  .
Observations

                                                        ED Needed               ED Needed                Emergent
Panel B: COHS Control Group              ER (All)                                                                       Non Emergent    Alcohol        Drug          Injury         Psych               Unclassi ed
                                                       Not Preventable          Preventable             PC Treatable
mandate                                    . ***             .           ***       .            *          . ***            . ***        - .           .            - .              .           ***       .
                                          ( . )            ( .              )    ( .            )         ( .  )           ( . )        ( .      )   ( .        )   ( .        )   ( .              )    ( .        )

Time FE                                       Y                      Y                     Y                    Y             Y             Y               Y              Y                 Y                  Y
Individual FE                                 Y                      Y                     Y                    Y             Y             Y               Y              Y                 Y                  Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                           .                .                       .                    .                .             .               .           .                 .                  .
Observations
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in   Q -     Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicator, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors
clustered at individual level. The outcome variable in column is the total number of ER visits in each person-quarter cell (same as column in Table , included here for comparison). The outcome variables in
columns - are the numbers of ER visits by types, classi ed according to the ICD- groups developed by NYU Center for Health and Public Service Research (https://wagner.nyu.edu/faculty/billings/nyued-
background).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                  Table A : E ect of MMC on Non-ER Transfer by Source

                                                                ()                     ( )                             ()                       ( )
                                                          Non-ER                 From                       From                           Source
    Panel A: No Control Group
                                                          Transfer            ER Admission             Non-ER Admission                   Unknown
    mandate                                                 .           **         .         **                    .                          .
                                                          ( .            )       ( .          )                  ( .         )              ( .        )

    Time FE                                                         Y                   Y                                Y                         Y
    Individual FE                                                   Y                   Y                                Y                         Y
    Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                         .                      .                           .                              .
    Observations

                                                          Non-ER                 From                       From                           Source
    Panel B: COHS Control Group
                                                          Transfer            ER Admission             Non-ER Admission                   Unknown
    mandate                                                .            ***        .         ***                     .                        .
                                                          ( .            )       ( .           )               ( .           )              ( .        )

    Time FE                                                      Y                     Y                                 Y                       Y
    Individual FE                                                Y                     Y                                 Y                       Y
    Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                         .                      .                           .                            .
    Observations
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -        Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in       Q -    Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by        at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicator, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level. The outcome variable in column
 is the number of inpatient hospitalizations that are transfers from other hospitals (same as column in Table , included here for comparison). The outcome
variables in columns - are the numbers of these hospitalizations by the initial source of admission at the transferring hospital.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01.
                                                        Table A : E ect of MMC on Hospital Services by Facility Type

                                                    ()              ( )               ()                 ( )            ()               ( )             ( )            ( )            ( )           ( )
Panel A: No Control Group                              All                          For-Pro t                            Non-Pro t                    Government                         Teaching
                                               Discharge           ER          Discharge     ER                      Discharge   ER                Discharge  ER                    Discharge     ER
mandate                                           .               . **            .           **        .            - .                  .         - .                 . **        - .               .
                                                 ( .     )       ( . )          ( .                )   ( .       )    ( .       )       ( .    )   ( .            )    ( . )        ( .        )    ( .          )

Time FE                                              Y               Y                    Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y            Y               Y              Y
Individual FE                                        Y               Y                    Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y            Y               Y              Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                  .               .                .                  .              .                 .              .               .            .                  .
Observations

Panel B: COHS Control Group                            All                          For-Pro t                            Non-Pro t                    Government                         Teaching
                                               Discharge           ER          Discharge     ER                      Discharge   ER                Discharge  ER                    Discharge     ER
mandate                                          - .              . ***           . ***                 . ***         - .                . ***     - .           ***    .           - .       **   - .           ***
                                                  ( .    )       ( . )          ( .   )                ( . )         ( .            )   ( . )      ( .             )   ( .      )   ( .        )   ( .             )

Time FE                                              Y               Y                    Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y
Individual FE                                        Y               Y                    Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y              Y             Y                  Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                  .               .              .                    .              .                 .              .              .             .                  .
Observations
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in  Q -     Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicator, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors
clustered at individual level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                                           Table A : Leave-one-out Mortality Analysis at County Level

Panel A: No Control Group                       All Counties               Alameda            Contra Costa                  Kern                      LA          Riverside          Sacramento (GMC)
mandate                                           .            ***         .            ***     .            ***       .            **        .             *     .            ***       .            ***
                                                 ( .            )         ( .             )    ( .            )       ( .            )      ( .             )    ( .            )       ( .             )
Time FE                                                    Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
County FE                                                  Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                                     .                        .                    .                      .                     .                    .                      .
Observations
                                            San Diego (GMC)             San Francisco         San Joaquin          San Luis Obispo          Santa Clara          Stanislaus                  Tulare
mandate                                           .            ***         .            ***      .           **        .            **       .             ***    .            ***       .            ***
                                                 ( .            )         ( .            )     ( .            )       ( .            )      ( .             )    ( .            )       ( .             )
Time FE                                                    Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
County FE                                                  Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                                     .                        .                    .                      .                     .                    .                      .
Observations
Panel B: COHS Control Group                     All Counties               Alameda            Contra Costa                  Kern                      LA          Riverside          Sacramento (GMC)
mandate                                           .            ***         .            ***     .            ***       .            ***      .             ***    .            ***       .            ***
                                                 ( .            )         ( .            )     ( .            )       ( .            )      ( .             )    ( .             )      ( .             )
Time FE                                                    Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
County FE                                                  Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                                     .                        .                    .                      .                     .                    .                      .
Observations
                                            San Diego (GMC)             San Francisco         San Joaquin          San Luis Obispo          Santa Clara          Stanislaus                  Tulare
mandate                                           .            ***         .            ***     .            ***       .            ***      .             ***    .            ***       .            ***
                                                 ( .            )         ( .            )     ( .             )      ( .            )      ( .              )   ( .            )       ( .            )
Time FE                                                    Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
County FE                                                  Y                        Y                    Y                      Y                     Y                    Y                      Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                                     .                        .                    .                      .                     .                    .                      .
Observations
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in     Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge in    Q -       Q . Panel B based on all observations
in the analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in      Q -      Q . The table contains the estimates from a leave-one-out analysis at the county level, with
each column showing results excluding the respective county. The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, county
FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                          Table A : E ect of MMC on Mortality by Baseline Health Condition (COHS Control Group)
                                                                                 Endocrine, Nutritional and           Diseases of
                      Infectious and                                                                                                                                        Diseases of the           Diseases of the                Diseases of the
Panel A:                                              Neoplasms                   Metabolic Diseases, and         Blood and Blood-                 Mental Disorders
                     Parasitic Diseases                                                                                                                                     Nervous System          Circulatory System             Respiratory System
                                                                                   Immunity Disorders              forming Organs
mandate                   .               **           - .                                .                             .              ***           - .                        - .                       .               **             .
                         ( .               )            ( .             )                ( .            )             ( .                 )           ( .       )              ( .           )           ( .              )            ( .                   )

Time FE                               Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
County FE                             Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                .                             .                              .                               .                        .                            .                            .                              .
Observations

                                                                                                                    Diseases of the
                      Diseases of the                Diseases of the                   Diseases of the                                                                      Symptoms, Signs,
                                                                                                                Musculoskeletal System           Congenital Anomalies                               Injury and Poisoning       Supplementary Classi cation
                     Digestive System             Genitourinary System          Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue                                                            and Ill-de ned Conditions
                                                                                                                and Connective Tissue
mandate                    .              *             .                                - .                           .                                .                        .                        .                *              .
                        ( .                   )        ( .              )               ( .                 )        ( .                     )        ( .       )              ( .           )          ( .                )            ( .              )

Time FE                               Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
County FE                             Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                .                         .                              .                               .                            .                            .                        .                                  .
Observations

                                                                                                                 Exclusing Individuals with Circulatory Conditions
                                                                                 Endocrine, Nutritional and           Diseases of
                      Infectious and                                                                                                                                        Diseases of the           Diseases of the                Diseases of the
Panel B:                                              Neoplasms                   Metabolic Diseases, and         Blood and Blood-                 Mental Disorders
                     Parasitic Diseases                                                                                                                                     Nervous System          Circulatory System             Respiratory System
                                                                                   Immunity Disorders              forming Organs
mandate                    .              *             - .                                .                           .               ***             .                       - .                                                        .
                         ( .              )            ( .              )                ( .            )             ( .                )            ( .       )              ( .           )                                         ( .               )

Time FE                               Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                                                           Y
County FE                             Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                                                           Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)             .                                .                               .                              .                        .                         .                                                          .
Observations

                                                                                                                    Diseases of the
                      Diseases of the                Diseases of the                   Diseases of the                                                                      Symptoms, Signs,
                                                                                                                Musculoskeletal System           Congenital Anomalies                               Injury and Poisoning       Supplementary Classi cation
                     Digestive System             Genitourinary System          Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue                                                            and Ill-de ned Conditions
                                                                                                                and Connective Tissue
mandate                       .                         .                                - .                            .                              .                         .                        .                *             .
                        ( .                   )       ( .                   )             ( .           )            ( .                     )        ( .       )              ( .           )          ( .                )            ( .              )

Time FE                               Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
County FE                             Y                             Y                               Y                              Y                        Y                            Y                            Y                              Y
Pre-Reform Mean(y)                .                         .                              .                               .                            .                            .                        .                                  .
Observations

Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in      Q -        Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in     Q -      Q . Panel B based on same sample while excluding all individuals with any
discharge/ER visit for circulatory conditions at baseline. The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicator (shown in tables), quarter FEs, county FEs,
age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                       Table A : Heterogeneity in the use of Hospital Services by Baseline Elixhauser Score

                                                      ()          ( )          ()                  ( )         ()               ( )         ( )            ( )         ( )        ( )          ( )            ( )
Panel A:                                                                                                             Non-ER                   Non-ER                  Admitted from
                                                           ER Visit                    Discharge                                                                                                   Scheduled
No Control Group                                                                                                     Transfer                Non-transfer               Own ER
mandate (low Elixhauser)                             .                       - .                             - .                         - .    *                      .                    - .        **
                                                   ( . )                     ( .         )                   ( .    )                    ( .    )                    ( .     )              ( .         )
mandate (high Elixhauser)                           . ***        .      **     .                   .           . ***        .     ***     - .           - .            .          .          - .              .
                                                   ( . )        ( .      )   ( .         )       ( .     )   ( .    )     ( .        )    ( . )          ( .     )   ( .     )   ( .    )    ( .       )    ( .     )

Time FE                                                Y                           Y                             Y                              Y                       Y                          Y
Individual FE                                          Y                           Y                             Y                              Y                       Y                          Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Elixhauser)                   .                       .                                .                           .                          .                       .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Elixhauser)                 .                            .                           .                             .                          .                      .
N (low Elixhauser)
N (high Elixhauser)

Panel B:                                                                                                             Non-ER                   Non-ER                  Admitted from
                                                           ER Visit                    Discharge                                                                                                   Scheduled
COHS Control Group                                                                                                   Transfer                Non-transfer               Own ER
mandate (low Elixhauser)                             . *                .                                       .                        - .                            .                    - .
                                                   ( . )              ( .                    )               ( .   )                     ( .        )                ( .     )              ( .        )
mandate (high Elixhauser)                           . ***       . ***  - .                        - .          . ***        . **          - .           - .           - .        - .           .              .
                                                   ( . )        ( . ) ( .                )       ( .     )   ( .    )     ( .   )        ( .        )   ( .      )    ( .    )   ( .    )   ( .        )    ( .     )

Time FE                                               Y                            Y                             Y                              Y                       Y                       Y
Individual FE                                         Y                            Y                             Y                              Y                       Y                       Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Elixhauser)                  .                        .                                .                           .                          .                       .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Elixhauser)                 .                            .                           .                            .                           .                      .
N (low Elixhauser)
N (high Elixhauser)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in      Q -        Q . Outcome variables
are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual
FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level. The odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for those with high and low Elixhauser scores separately by interacting all RHS variables with high
Elixhauser score indicator, which is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of di erences between the coe cients for
those with high vs. low Elixhauser scores, by regressing outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high Elixhauser score indicator. High severity patient is de ned as
individuals whose total unweighted number of chronic conditions (Elixhauser score) based on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at baseline is higher than the median
(which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                        Table A : Heterogeneity in the use of Hospital Services (Discharge by Facility Type)

                                                      ()              ( )             ()             ( )              ()              ( )                 ( )               ( )           ( )              ( )
Panel A: No Control Group                        Discharge                      For-Pro t                      Non-Pro t                         Government                            Teaching
mandate (low util)                                - .                              .                             - .                                  - .         *                     - .
                                                   ( .     )                     ( .    )                         ( . )                             ( .               )                ( .            )
mandate (high util)                                   .              .             . **             .              - .              - .              - .                    .             .                 .
                                                  ( .       )      ( .      )     ( . )           ( .      )      ( . )            ( .      )         ( .         )       ( .     )     ( .       )       ( .    )

Time FE                                                Y                              Y                                  Y                                    Y                               Y
Individual FE                                          Y                              Y                                  Y                                    Y                               Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                        .                              .                               .                                    .                               .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                        .                              .                              .                                    .                                .
N (low util)
N (high util)

Panel B: COHS Control Group                      Discharge                      For-Pro t                      Non-Pro t                         Government                            Teaching
mandate (low util)                                  .                                .                             .                                 -    .                             - .
                                                   ( . )                          ( .   )                        ( .    )                           (    .          )                   ( .        )
mandate (high util)                                - .             - .              . ***          . *            - .               - .             -    .        ***     - .     **    - .       **       - .
                                                  ( . )           ( .       )      ( . )          ( . )           ( . )            ( .      )       (    .          )     ( .      )   ( .          )     ( . )

Time FE                                                Y                               Y                                 Y                                    Y                               Y
Individual FE                                          Y                               Y                                 Y                                    Y                               Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                        .                              .                               .                                    .                               .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                       .                              .                               .                                    .                               .
N (low util)
N (high util)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in         Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in    Q -      Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with
standard errors clustered at individual level. The odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for high and low baseline utilizers separately by interacting all RHS variables with high utilizer indicator, which
is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of the di erences between high vs. low utilizer coe cients, by regressing
outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high utilizer indicator. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is
higher than or equal to the median (which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                         Table A : Heterogeneity in the use of Hospital Services (ER Visit by Facility Type)

                                                    ()             ( )                           ()     ( )           ()            ( )               ( )               ( )            ( )             ( )
Panel A: No Control Group                       ER Visit                      For-Pro t                            Non-Pro t                   Government                          Teaching
mandate (low util)                                - .                                .                              - . **                            .                             - .
                                                 ( . )                             ( .            )                  ( . )                          ( . )                           ( .       )
mandate (high util)                               . ***          . ***                       .         .              . **        . ***              . **              .      *       .               .
                                                 ( . )          ( . )             ( .             )   ( .     )      ( . )       ( . )              ( . )            ( .       )    ( .       )     ( .      )

Time FE                                              Y                                           Y                        Y                            Y                                  Y
Individual FE                                        Y                                           Y                        Y                            Y                                  Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                      .                                    .                            .                               .                               .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                     .                                    .                             .                               .                              .
N (low util)
N (high util)

Panel B: COHS Control Group                     ER Visit                      For-Pro t                            Non-Pro t                   Government                          Teaching
mandate (low util)                                 .                               . **                              - .                               .                            - .
                                                 ( . )                          ( .   )                             ( . )                           ( .     )                      ( .     )
mandate (high util)                               . ***          . ***            . ***                 .     *      . ***        . ***            - .               - .           - . ***         - . ***
                                                 ( . )          ( . )             ( . )               ( .      )    ( . )        ( . )             ( .      )        ( .      )      ( . )          ( . )

Time FE                                              Y                                           Y                        Y                            Y                                  Y
Individual FE                                        Y                                           Y                        Y                            Y                                  Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low util)                       .                                .                               .                               .                                .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high util)                      .                                .                                   .                            .                                .
N (low util)
N (high util)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in         Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in    Q -      Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by      at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with
standard errors clustered at individual level. The odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for high and low baseline utilizers separately by interacting all RHS variables with high utilizer indicator, which
is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of the di erences between high vs. low utilizer coe cients, by regressing
outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high utilizer indicator. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is
higher than or equal to the median (which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                             Table A : Heterogeneity in the use of Hospital Services by Baseline Charlson Comorbidity Index

                                                     ()             ( )       ()           ( )              ()                 ( )           ( )                ( )         ( )              ( )             ( )          ( )
Panel A:                                                                                                          Non-ER                          Non-ER                   Admitted from
                                                          ER Visit                 Discharge                                                                                                                     Scheduled
No Control Group                                                                                                  Transfer                       Non-transfer                Own ER
mandate (low Charlson)                            - .                      - .       *                - .                                   - .       *                    - .                          -    .     **
                                                  ( . )                    ( .       )                ( .           )                     ( .             )               ( .       )                  (    .       )
mandate (high Charlson)                             . ***       . ***         .            .     *      .         ***      .     ***       - .                 .             .                .        -    .             .
                                                   ( . )       ( . )        ( .      )   ( .      )   ( .            )   ( .        )       ( .       )       ( .     )   ( .       )       ( .    )   (    .       )   ( .     )

Time FE                                               Y                        Y                             Y                                    Y                             Y                             Y
Individual FE                                         Y                        Y                             Y                                    Y                             Y                             Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Charlson)                   .                        .                             .                                .                              .                                .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Charlson)                   .                         .                           .                                .                                  .                           .
N (low Charlson)
N (high Charlson)

Panel B:                                                                                                          Non-ER                          Non-ER                   Admitted from
                                                          ER Visit                 Discharge                                                                                                                     Scheduled
COHS Control Group                                                                                                Transfer                       Non-transfer                Own ER
mandate (low Charlson)                              . **                    - .                          .                                 - .                             - .                          - .
                                                  ( . )                    ( . )                      ( .   )                             ( .             )               ( .           )              ( .          )
mandate (high Charlson)                            . ***        .  **        .             .            . ***              .     **        - .                 .          - .                .            .               .
                                                  ( . )        ( . )       ( . )         ( .     )    ( .   )            ( .          )   ( .         )       ( .     )    ( .      )       ( .    )   ( .          )   ( .     )

Time FE                                              Y                         Y                              Y                                   Y                             Y                              Y
Individual FE                                        Y                         Y                              Y                                   Y                             Y                              Y
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Charlson)                   .                        .                              .                                .                             .                                .
Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Charlson)                  .                         .                            .                                .                                  .                            .
N (low Charlson)
N (high Charlson)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in        Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in   Q -     Q . Outcome variables are
multiplied by       at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs, and individual FEs,
with standard errors clustered at individual level. The odd-numbered columns show the coe cients for those with high and low Charlson comorbidity indices separately by interacting all RHS variables with
high Charlson comorbidity index indicator, which is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. The even-numbered columns test for statistical signi cance of di erences between the
coe cients for those with high vs. low Charlson comorbidity indices, by regressing outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate indicator interacted with high Charlson comorbidity index indicator.
High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose total weighted number of chronic conditions (Charlson comorbidity index) based on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and
ER visits at baseline is higher than the median (which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                              Table A : Mortality by Baseline Charlson Comorbidity Index

                 Panel A: No Control Group                                                ()                  ( )                  ()
                 mandate                                                         .             ***
                                                                                ( .             )
                 mandate (low Charlson)                                                               - .
                                                                                                      ( .                )
                 mandate (high Charlson)                                                                .             ***     .         ***
                                                                                                      ( .               )    ( .          )

                 Time FE                                                                  Y                       Y
                 County FE                                                                Y                       Y
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                                  .
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Charlson)                                                       .
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Charlson)                                                          .
                 N
                 N (low Charlson)
                 N (high Charlson)

                 Panel B: COHS Control Group
                 mandate                                                         .             ***
                                                                                ( .             )
                 mandate (low Charlson)                                                               - .
                                                                                                     ( .                 )
                 mandate (high Charlson)                                                               .              ***    .          ***
                                                                                                     ( .                 ) ( .            )

                 Time FE                                                                  Y                       Y
                 County FE                                                                Y                       Y
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y)                                                .
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y) (low Charlson)                                                       .
                 Pre-Reform Mean (y) (high Charlson)                                                          .
                 N
                 N (low Charlson)
                 N (high Charlson)
Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in       Q -        Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge
in      Q -       Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in       Q -      Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in
     Q -       Q . The coe cients are from linear regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators (shown in tables), quarter FEs,
county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level. Column shows the results from full sample. Column shows the
coe cients for those with high and low baseline Charlson comorbidity indices separately by interacting all RHS variables with high Charlson comorbidity
index indicator, which is equivalent to running the regressions separately for the two groups. Column tests for statistical signi cance of di erences between
the coe cients for those with high and low baseline Charlson comorbidity indices, by regressing outcome variables on mandate indicator and mandate
indicator interacted with high Charlson comorbidity index indicator. High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose total weighted number of chronic
conditions (Charlson comorbidity index) based on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at baseline is higher than the
median (which equals in the analysis sample).  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                         Figure A : Hospital Service Stacked Event Study
                                                                     (a) ER Visit




                                                    (b) Non ER Transfer Hospitalization




Notes: Based on stacked analysis sample in       Q -      Q , constructed by stacking together the treatment cohorts, within which the treatment group
includes all individuals of a particular birth month in Two-Plan/GMC counties, and the control group includes all individuals in the COHS counties.
Outcome variables are multiplied by       at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions of outcome variables on
mandate indicators, and quarter FEs and individual FEs both interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                            Figure A : Discharge at For-Pro t Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                              Figure A : ER Visit at For-Pro t Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                           Figure A : Discharge at Non-Pro t Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                             Figure A : ER Visit at Non-Pro t Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                          Figure A : Discharge at Government Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                           Figure A : ER Visit at Government Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                             Figure A : Discharge at Teaching Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                              Figure A : ER Visit at Teaching Hospital
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in    Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in     Q -     Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by     at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from regressions
of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at individual level.
                                             Figure A : Mortality Stacked Event Study




Notes: Based on stacked analysis sample in         Q -   Q (excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in          Q -       Q ), constructed by
stacking together the treatment cohorts, within which the treatment group includes all individuals of a particular birth month in Two-Plan/GMC counties,
and the control group includes all individuals in the COHS counties. The coe cients are from linear regression of the outcome variable ( / death indicator)
on mandate indicators, and quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator all interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with standard errors
clustered at county level.
             Figure A : Mortality Event Study ­ Average Marginal E ects from Logit Regressions
                                                              (a) Main Speci cation




                                                            (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in      Q -       Q , excluding observations of the control group and individuals without any hospital discharge
in      Q -      Q . Panel B based on all observations in the analysis sample in      Q -       Q , excluding individuals without any hospital discharge in
     Q -      Q . The gure plots average marginal e ects from logit regression of outcome variable ( / death indicator) on mandate indicators, quarter
FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator, with standard errors clustered at county level.
                         Figure A : Stacked Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Utilization
                                                                      (a) ER Visit




                                                                     (b) Mortality




Notes: Panel A based on stacked analysis sample in        Q -     Q , constructed by stacking together the treatment cohorts, within which the treatment
group includes all individuals of a particular birth month in Two-Plan/GMC counties, and the control group includes all individuals in the COHS counties.
The outcome variable is multiplied by         at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from separate regressions by baseline
utilization of outcome variable on mandate indicators, and quarter FEs and individual FEs both interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with standard
errors clustered at individual level. Panel B based on the same stacked analysis sample as Panel A, except also excluding individuals without any hospital
discharge in       Q -      Q . The coe cients are from separate linear regression by baseline utilization of the outcome variable ( / death indicator) on
mandate indicators, and quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator all interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with standard errors clustered
at county level. High utilizer is de ned as individuals whose total number of inpatient hospital discharge + ER visit is higher than or equal to the median
(which equals in the analysis sample).
                    Figure A : ER Visit Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Elixhauser Score
                                                               (a) Main Speci cation




                                                              (b) COHS Speci cation




Notes: Panel A based on analysis sample in        Q -      Q , excluding observations of the control group. Panel B based on all observations in the analysis
sample in      Q -       Q . Outcome variables are multiplied by        at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from separate
regressions by baseline Elixhauser score of outcome variables on mandate indicators, quarter FEs, and individual FEs, with standard errors clustered at indi-
vidual level. High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose total unweighted number of chronic conditions (Elixhauser score) based on principal and
co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at baseline is higher than the median (which equals in the analysis sample).
                     Figure A : Stacked Event Study by High vs. Low Baseline Elixhauser Score
                                                                      (a) ER Visit




                                                                     (b) Mortality




Notes: Panel A based on stacked analysis sample in         Q -      Q , constructed by stacking together the treatment cohorts, within which the treatment
group includes all individuals of a particular birth month in Two-Plan/GMC counties, and the control group includes all individuals in the COHS counties.
The outcome variable is multiplied by         at each person-quarter cell for presentation purpose. The coe cients are from separate regressions by baseline
Elixhauser score of outcome variable on mandate indicators, and quarter FEs and individual FEs both interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with
standard errors clustered at individual level. Panel B based on the same stacked analysis sample as Panel A, except also excluding individuals without any
hospital discharge in       Q -       Q . The coe cients are from separate linear regression by baseline Elixhauser score of the outcome variable ( / death
indicator) on mandate indicators, and quarter FEs, county FEs, age FEs, and gender indicator all interacted with treatment cohort indicators, with standard
errors clustered at county level. High severity patient is de ned as individuals whose total unweighted number of chronic conditions (Elixhauser score) based
on principal and co-diagnoses of all inpatient hospital discharges and ER visits at baseline is higher than the median (which equals in the analysis sample).
