                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A WORLD TRADING SYSTEM FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY

                                         Robert W. Staiger

                                       Working Paper 28947
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28947


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




Comments welcome. This is an excerpt from a first draft of a book of the same title to be
published by MIT Press in its Ohlin Lecture series. The complete first draft can be viewed at
https://sites.dartmouth.edu/rstaiger/files/2021/06/Ohlin_Book_RWS_06012021_CompleteFirstDraft.pdf.
I thank Kyle Bagwell, Chad Bown, Caroline Freund, Henrik Horn, Bob Keohane, Sally Kraft,
Yotam Margalit, Fernando Parro, Dani Rodrik, Alan Sykes, Veronica Terriquez and Weihuan
Zhou for many helpful comments and discussions, and the 2021 class of Fellows at Stanford's
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) for helpful feedback. I am also
grateful to CASBS for providing a productive atmosphere, despite the COVID-19 pandemic,
during the period over which this book was drafted. Winston Chen and Paul Hager provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28947.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A World Trading System for the Twenty-First Century
Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 28947
June 2021
JEL No. F02,F1,F13

                                         ABSTRACT

I explore whether the world trading system of the twentieth century can be adapted to address the
challenges of the twenty-first. I first develop an understanding of how GATT functioned during
the twentieth century, and which features of the economic environment were most important in
determining its success. I then examine a list of changes in the global economy that are
sometimes identified as warranting changes in the design of the GATT/WTO. I argue that the
"terms-of-trade" theory of trade agreements provides a compelling framework for understanding
the impact of GATT in the twentieth century, and I show that when viewed through this lens, the
rationale for GATT's design features transcend many, though not all, of the current challenges
facing the WTO.


Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction
Individuals are the ultimate drivers of globalization, but governments set the rules
of the game. And the rules can be very important to the outcome. This paper,
composed of a selection of chapters drawn from a longer monograph (Staiger,
2021), is about the rules that guided the global economy of the twentieth century,
how those rules came about, the logic of their design, their successes and failures,
and whether they are adequate for the twenty-...rst century.
    I focus on the World Trade Organization (WTO). The WTO ­ and before
it, its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) ­ is
where governments come to agree on the rules of globalization, or at least the
multilateral rules that apply to all 164 member countries and their preferential
trade agreements (PTAs). These rules are intended to solve problems that would
arise under "the law of the jungle,"and they de...ne the constitution of the global
trade order.
    The GATT/WTO is "member-driven," accepting the sovereign right of each
country to de...ne its policy preferences, and seeking mutually advantageous trade
liberalization as judged by the member governments. As an institution, the
GATT/WTO has traditionally been about "shallow integration,"with a focus on
negotiations to reduce tari¤s and other trade impediments imposed at the border
rather than on direct negotiations over behind-the-border measures. And it has
been very successful, hosting eight rounds of multilateral negotiations beginning
with the ...rst GATT (Geneva) Round of 1947 and culminating in the Uruguay
Round which created the WTO in 1995. The commitments made in these GATT
rounds helped to dismantle the web of highly restrictive trade protections that had
been erected in the 1920'   s and 30' s, and ushered in a wave of globalization over
the next 60 years that transformed the world economy. By the time the results
of the Uruguay Round had been fully implemented, average tari¤s on industrial
goods had been reduced to below 4% on an ad valorem basis and quantitative
restrictions were largely eliminated (WTO, 2007, Bown and Crowley, 2016).
    But during the last several decades the ground has shifted, and the WTO'        s
Doha Round, begun in 2001 and now suspended, has disappointed. Two changes
to the world economy over this period stand out above all others as emblematic
of this shifting landscape.
    First, the latest wave of globalization has brought the large emerging and
developing economies, led by China, from the background of the world economy to
its forefront. Figure 1.1 illustrates this reversal of relative importance by GDP. In


                                         1
1980 the emerging and developing economies accounted for 37 percent of the share
of world GDP, with advanced economies making up the remaining 63 percent. By
2007 these shares were 50=50, and today the share of the world's GDP captured
by emerging and developing countries is approaching 60 percent.




       Figure 1.1 (Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2017)
     And second, with the rise of o¤shoring and global supply chains, this latest
wave of globalization has also changed the nature of trade itself. In the early
years of GATT, international trade amounted to the international exchange of
...nished or largely ...nished goods. Today much of international trade consists of
the movement of parts and components and associated services from one country
to another and back again for assembly, as exempli...ed by the sourcing decisions
involved in the production of the Boeing Dreamliner illustrated in Figure 1.2.




             Figure 1.2 (Source: Boeing; Reuters/Business Insider)

                                        2
    Against this backdrop, multilateralism is stumbling, and with it the WTO,
whose legitimacy is being questioned as never before. Of course, the world has also
just experienced four years of Trade in the Trump era, marked by the provocative
and ubiquitous Trump Trade Tweets, of which below is but one example:




But the challenges faced by multilateralism in general and the WTO in particular
are about something much more subtle ­and far bigger ­than Trump.
    Recent decades have witnessed a clear evolution away from the shallow ap-
proach to integration pioneered by GATT, and toward a preference for "deep"
integration with a focus on the trade e¤ects of regulations and other behind-the-
border measures and increasingly with the goal of regulatory harmonization as
an end in itself, as exempli...ed by regional and mega-regional negotiations (some
ongoing, some completed, some failed) over the Transatlantic Trade and Invest-
ment Partnership, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, and the
Trans Paci...c Partnership; and to a lesser extent this evolution can be seen in the
transition from GATT to the WTO. China'       s entry into the world trading system,
formalized with its 2001 accession to the WTO, has challenged an approach to
globalization that was designed fundamentally with market economies in mind.
More recently the increasing importance of digital trade has made WTO rules,
crafted in a largely pre-digital world, look out of date. And most recently the
world has witnessed a strong backlash within many countries against globaliza-
tion itself, from those who have not shared in the gains, and from those who feel

                                         3
that the sovereignty of their governments has been eroded.
    In the face of all these challenges, is multilateralism dead? I argue that the
prognosis for multilateralism is not as dire as that, though I will suggest that the
multilateralism the world has experienced over the past 75 years may be unusual,
and that multilateralism may now be entering a period of hibernation until more
favorable conditions for its ascendancy once again return.
    Do we need a new global trade order for the twenty-...rst century? That is
di¢ cult to say. But what seems clear is this: meeting globalization'     s challenges
in the twenty-...rst century will require a nuanced response capable of addressing
multilateralism'  s current shortcomings, and to succeed we need a correct diagnosis
of those shortcomings. For such a diagnosis, it is imperative to understand why
GATT worked, the economic environment it is best suited for, and whether the
changes in the economic environment in recent decades imply the need for changes
in the design of the GATT/WTO, or possibly a new approach to trade agreements
altogether, or rather simply better use of the agreements already in place. It is
such an understanding that I attempt to provide.
    What'  s at stake? The future path of globalization is at stake. Which interna-
tional institutions will set the rules of globalization is at stake. What trade-o¤s
we will face in our globalized world is at stake. In short, the stakes of getting this
right are very high.
    In this introductory chapter I sketch in broad and intuitive terms the main
themes that I develop in greater detail in later chapters here and more fully in
Staiger (2021). While those chapters provide the technical detail necessary for
the formal arguments that underpin many of the statements that I make here, my
intent in this chapter is to provide an overview of these themes at a level that would
be accessible to anyone with an undergraduate Econ 1 background.1 As such, there
are no equations in this chapter, and there is nothing beyond the bare minimum
in terms of formal notation. Nor have I included in this chapter the quali...cations
that a careful treatment would demand or citations to the relevant literature
(beyond citations for a reproduced ...gure or quotation): those also appear in later
chapters here and in Staiger (2021). Instead, in this chapter there are only words,
graphs and a few plots of data to convey the main ideas.

The purpose of a trade agreement I start with a key point: from the per-
spective of economics, the legitimacy of the WTO as an international institution
   1
    Indeed, the material in this chapter comes from a pair of public lectures I gave in Calgary
(the 2018 Dr. Frank Anton Distinguished Lecture) and Turin (the 2018 Luca d'  Agliano Lecture).


                                              4
is not built on the case for free trade; rather, it is built on the case for inter-
nalizing negative international policy externalities. This is an important point,
because the case for free trade, while one of the most powerful insights in all
of economics, relies on a set of very special assumptions which are unlikely to
hold in the real world across the WTO'      s diverse membership; and the case for
internalizing negative externalities is far more general by comparison.
    To understand this point, it is useful to begin from the basics of industry-level
supply and demand analysis in a closed economy. This is reproduced in Figure
1.3, which with the quantity of good a measured on the horizontal axis and its
price measured on the vertical axis, depicts a downward-sloping demand curve
labeled Da and an upward sloping supply curve labeled Sa whose intersection
determines the market-clearing price of good a in the closed economy, labeled p0   a.
Also depicted in Figure 1.3 is the standard measure of economic welfare generated
by this industry: the sum of consumer surplus (the shaded area below the demand
curve and above the market-clearing price) and producer surplus (the shaded area
above the supply curve and below the market-clearing price).




                                     Figure 1.3

    Suppose now that this country opens up to trade, and in particular that it is
a small open economy trading freely with the world at a world price for good a
that is below the closed-economy price p0 a depicted in Figure 1.3. This situation
is depicted in the two panels of Figure 1.4.


                                         5
                                     Figure 1.4

     The left panel of Figure 1.4 displays the same information as Figure 1.3 ­that
is, the country' s demand and supply curves for good a ­but now with the lower
price for good a that prevails in the country under free trade, pF     T
                                                                      a . As the left
panel depicts, at this lower free-trade price the economy'   s quantity demanded for
good a increases (we move down the downward-sloping demand curve) and its
quantity supplied of good a decreases (we move down the upward-sloping supply
curve), and the economy makes up its shortfall of supply relative to demand at
the free-trade price by importing the di¤erence, Ma , from the rest of the world.
And at this lower free-trade price, the economy'     s consumer surplus has increased
and its producer surplus has decreased relative to the closed-economy magnitudes
depicted in Figure 1.3, resulting in the net increase in consumer-plus-producer
surplus depicted by the shaded triangle in the left panel of Figure 1.4 and labeled
"gains from trade."This is the classic welfare gain from free trade that is taught
in every introductory economics course.
     The right panel of Figure 1.4 packages this information in a more compact
form. This panel depicts the country'      s downward sloping import demand curve
(its quantity demanded minus its quantity supplied), labeled as Ma ; and it depicts
the foreign export supply curve that this small country faces, labeled as Ea , which
is horizontal (in...nitely elastic) at the world price pa earned by foreign exporters.
The gains from free trade are given in this panel by the shaded area under the
country' s import demand curve and above the world price. Finally, notice that
the country'  s price of good a depicted in the left panel of Figure 1.4, pF  T
                                                                            a , is the
same as the world price depicted in the right panel of Figure 1.4, pa , re  ecting the
fact that in Figure 1.4 the country trades freely in good a with the world.

                                          6
     Now suppose that this country places a tari¤ a on its imports of good a.
This will not alter the world price of good a, pa , owing to the small size of the
country under consideration and the fact that it is therefore a price taker on world
markets. But the tari¤ will raise the domestic price of good a to a price above
pF T      1
 a , say pa , the implications of which are depicted in the three panels of Figure
1.5.




                                     Figure 1.5
    The top left panel of Figure 1.5 depicts the changes in welfare that are brought
about by the imposition of the tari¤. Because the tari¤ has increased the domestic
price of a, consumer surplus in the economy is reduced, from the area below
the demand curve and above the free-trade price pF    a
                                                        T
                                                          to the smaller area below
the demand curve and above the higher, tari¤-distorted, price p1    a . By itself this
reduction in consumer surplus is unambiguously bad for the country. But there
are two o¤setting e¤ects that also need to be considered.
    First, producer surplus rises with the higher domestic price of a, from the area
above the supply curve and below the free-trade price pF   a
                                                             T
                                                               to the area above the

                                          7
supply curve and below the tari¤-distorted price p1     a : the implied redistribution of
surplus from domestic consumers to domestic producers in industry a is given by
the shaded trapezoid in the top left panel of Figure 1.5. Depending on how the
country feels about this redistribution (e.g., is it worth it to have consumers pay
higher prices for good a and give up some consumer surplus so that producers of
good a can earn higher incomes, assuming that a better way to help producers
of good a cannot be found?), it could be either a good thing for the country or
a bad thing. And second, some of the lost consumer surplus is converted into
tari¤ revenue: the implied conversion of consumer surplus into tari¤ revenue is
given by the shaded rectangle (with dimensions a Ma ) in the top left panel of
Figure 1.5. Depending on how the country feels about the conversion of consumer
surplus into tari¤ revenue (e.g., is it worth it to have consumers pay higher prices
for good a so that tari¤ revenue can be collected to fund the provision of public
goods, assuming that a better way to fund government services cannot be found?),
this could also be either a good thing for the country or a bad thing.
    Finally, there is a portion of the lost consumer surplus that simply disappears,
as measured by the two triangles of shaded area in Figure 1.5: this is the "dead-
weight" e¢ ciency loss associated with the tari¤, and it forms the crux of the
economist'  s case for free trade. If the redistributions of surplus caused by the tari¤
that I have described above are not valued by the country ­that is, if consumer
surplus, producer surplus and tari¤ revenue are all valued by the country in the
same way, so that their distribution across these three components is irrelevant
to the country'  s overall welfare ­then all that the country has accomplished with
a tari¤ is to create dead-weight e¢ ciency loss and thereby hurt itself by reducing
its gains from free trade. This case can be seen directly from the top right-
hand panel of Figure 1.5, where the shaded triangle represents the lost gains from
trade associated with the imposition of the tari¤, with the shaded trapezoid then
representing the (smaller) gains from trade that remain. In this case, it is clear
that free trade would be the best (welfare maximizing) policy for the country.
    On the other hand, if the country does value the redistribution of surplus it
has orchestrated with its tari¤, then the size of the shaded trapezoid depicted in
the top right panel of Figure 1.5 understates the value of the country'     s gains from
trade under the tari¤, because it overstates the value to the country of the lost
consumer surplus and understates the value to the country of the gains in producer
surplus and/or tari¤ revenue. In this case, as a result of this redistribution the
welfare that the country experiences with the tari¤ could then be larger than the
welfare that it experiences under free trade.


                                           8
      The upshot is that the country may gain from a tari¤ via the redistributive
impacts of the tari¤ that I have described above, but there is also an e¢ ciency
cost that has to be weighed against any such gain. This trade-o¤ is depicted in
the bottom panel of Figure 1.5, which displays the domestic price of good a on
the horizontal axis and the marginal bene...t and marginal cost to the country of a
higher tari¤ ­and therefore of a higher domestic price of good a ­on the vertical
axis. As depicted, the marginal cost of the tari¤ is increasing as the tari¤ rises
above free trade (zero) and the domestic price pa rises above the free-trade price
pFa
    T
       = pa , reecting the increasing size of the dead-weight loss triangles depicted in
the top panels of Figure 1.5 that would occur as the tari¤ (and hence the domestic
price of good a) is increased. And in this bottom panel I have illustrated the case
where the country does indeed value the redistribution of surplus triggered by
its tari¤ but does so at a decreasing rate, which then implies that the marginal
bene...t of the tari¤ starts out at a strictly positive level and declines as the tari¤
is raised to higher levels. The optimal tari¤ choice for this country is determined
where the marginal bene...t curve crosses the marginal cost curve in the bottom
panel of Figure 1.5, and I have labeled this tari¤ choice small a     to re  ect the fact
that I am considering here a country that is small in world markets.
      I now come to a crucial observation: if it is accepted that each country has
the sovereign right to de...ne its own preferences over its policy choices, and if the
country under consideration chooses the tari¤ small a    unilaterally as I have depicted
this choice in the bottom panel of Figure 1.5, and if all other countries of the
world are also small in world markets and make analogous unilateral tari¤ choices
given their policy preferences, then these tari¤ choices will be internationally
e¢ cient relative to the policy preferences of each country, and there is nothing
for a trade agreement to do! This is because, as Figure 1.5 re      ects for the country
under consideration, each country will have then set its tari¤ at a level where
the marginal bene...t to the country of a slightly higher tari¤ would be just o¤set
by the marginal cost to the country of a slightly higher tari¤. And owing to the
fact that the country is small on world markets so that its tari¤ choice does not
impact the world price pa , the tari¤ revenue associated with small
                                                                  a     will be collected
entirely from the country'    s own consumers who face higher domestic prices, not
from foreign exporters. As a consequence, there are no bene...ts or costs of the
country'  s slightly higher tari¤ that would be borne by the rest of the world ­and
hence no international externalities associated with its tari¤ choice ­ensuring that
each country'   s unilaterally optimal tari¤ choice will then also be optimal from the
point of view of the world as a whole.


                                           9
    Evidently, the world I have just described could be riddled with tari¤s, and yet
there is nothing that a trade agreement could ­or should ­do about this. What,
then, is the purpose of the trade agreements that we observe? One possibility is
that, while countries have the sovereign right to de...ne their own policy preferences,
they may have di¢ culty committing to policies that re      ect these preferences, and
they might then seek trade agreements as external commitment devices to help
them avoid the temptation to choose trade protection.
    But there is another possibility that I emphasize here, and that becomes ap-
parent once an assumption that I have thus far maintained is relaxed; namely, the
assumption that the country under consideration is small in world markets. To
illustrate, I now revisit this country's unilateral tari¤ choice, but under the as-
sumption that the country is large in world markets. This is illustrated in Figure
1.6.




                                      Figure 1.6
   The key di¤erence between the large-country tari¤ choice depicted in Figure

                                          10
1.6 and the small-country tari¤ choice in Figure 1.5 can be seen by comparing the
top right panels of each ...gure: the foreign export supply curve Ea is horizontal
in Figure 1.5 but it is upward sloping in Figure 1.6, re   ecting the fact that when
the country under consideration is large it is not a price-taker on world markets,
and its tari¤ can therefore impact the world price pa . Put di¤erently, when the
country under consideration is large, foreign exporters will accept a lower price pa
in the face of the country'  s tari¤ a in order to continue to sell into the country'
                                                                                    s
market. And this means that a portion of the tari¤ revenue collected by the
country is collected not from its own consumers, but from foreign exporters.2
    The top right panel of Figure 1.6 depicts the drop in the world price to pa1
that accompanies the increase in the country'   s domestic price to p1a when the (now
large) country imposes a tari¤ ta on imports of good a. The tari¤ revenue collected
from foreign exporters corresponds to the shaded rectangle between the free-trade
world price pa and the lower world price pa1 that prevails after the tari¤ has been
imposed: the di¤erence between pa and pa1 is the amount of the tari¤ that foreign
exporters "absorb"via a price drop on each unit of good a that they export to this
country. This tari¤ revenue was not present in the small-country case depicted
in Figure 1.5 ­because in the small-country case foreign exporters are unwilling
to lower their price in order to maintain sales in the small-country market, hence
the in...nitely elastic foreign export supply curve that the small country faces ­
and the presence of this new source of tari¤ revenue has a key implication: as
the bottom panel of Figure 1.6 depicts, the tari¤ revenue collected from foreign
exporters o¤sets to some degree the deadweight e¢ ciency costs to the country
associated with its tari¤, shifting down the marginal cost curve for the tari¤ of a
large country relative to the marginal cost curve for a small country, and leading
to the higher tari¤ choice large
                               a   .
    As a result, and independent of the underlying policy preferences of countries,
the tari¤s chosen unilaterally by large countries are ine¢ ciently high, and they
are ine¢ ciently high due to the negative international externality that is created
when a large country suppresses foreign exporter prices with its tari¤ increases,
thereby shifting some of the costs of its tari¤ onto foreign exporters. The purpose
of a trade agreement is then to internalize these negative policy externalities, and
thereby to reduce tari¤s and expand trading opportunities. By addressing these
   2
     While the Trump Administration made a point of emphasizing the tari¤ revenue it collected
from foreigners with its trade actions, a number of recent studies have cast doubt on this claim,
at least if the tari¤s are in place for only a short period of time. I discuss the ...ndings of these
studies in the context of the material presented in chapter 5 of Staiger (2021a).


                                                 11
ine¢ ciencies, it is possible for all countries to gain as judged by their own policy
preferences from the mutually bene...cial expansion of trade.
    Clearly, the purpose of a trade agreement that I have outlined here ­and the
expectation that trade agreements expand trade volumes that derives from this
purpose ­has nothing to do with the case for free trade, since for my arguments
to hold it is neither necessary nor su¢ cient that countries accept that the case
for free trade applies to them. But to be relevant, these arguments do require
that countries have market power (in the form of monopsony power to depress
foreign exporter prices) and use it when making trade policy choices outside the
con...nes of a trade agreement. Figure 1.7, reproduced from Broda, Limao and
Weinstein (2008), provides striking support for this position (in Staiger, 2021, I
discuss empirical evidence on this and related issues more thoroughly).




        Figure 1.7 (Reproduced from Broda, Limao and Weinstein, 2008)

    For 15 countries that were not at the time GATT/WTO members, Figure
1.7 plots the country' s median Harmonized System (HS) four-digit industry ad
valorem tari¤ level (vertical axis) against the median of a measure of the country's
market power across these four-digit industries (horizontal axis). The measure of
a country's market power in an industry is taken to be the inverse of the estimated
foreign export supply elasticity faced by the country in that industry, with a truly
small country who faces an in...nitely elastic foreign export supply curve in an
industry corresponding to a market power measure of one-over-in...nity or zero.
The fact that the 15 country data points are spread out along the horizontal axis
in Figure 1.7 over a range from 0:75 to 2:75 indicates that most countries, even

                                         12
seemingly "small" countries, possess signi...cant market power in at least some
industries. And the fact that Figure 1.7 displays a strong positive relationship
between market power and the tari¤ levels of the countries that wield it indicates
that countries do indeed use their market power when setting tari¤s outside of
the con...nes of a trade agreement.

The architecture of the GATT/WTO If the purpose of a trade agreement
is to allow countries to internalize the negative international externalities of their
trade policy choices, then the fundamental legitimacy of the GATT/WTO can be
assessed with the answer to a single question: Is the GATT/WTO well-designed
to serve this purpose?
    Generally, designing an e¤ective institution to address an international exter-
nality is exceedingly di¢ cult (think climate change). But there is a particular
structure to the international externality embodied in the arguments I have re-
viewed above that makes this task more manageable in the case of a trade agree-
ment, at least along some dimensions. The structure that I am referring to is
this: the international externality that is created when a large country suppresses
foreign exporter prices with its tari¤ increases is a pecuniary externality, traveling
through international prices and therefore markets. A pecuniary externality nor-
mally does not create an ine¢ ciency, but it does when it is combined with market
power, which the large-country condition assures. And as this externality travels
through markets, it can to some degree be shaped ­ and in principle mitigated
­ by speci...c features of institutional design that serve to alter the transmission
mechanism of the externality, a feat that would be far more di¢ cult if not im-
possible for international non-pecuniary externalities, such as those caused by an
increase in the global carbon stock that are transmitted through the atmosphere.
    What are the key features of GATT/WTO design? And can these features be
seen to mitigate the international policy externality at the core of the problem for
a trade agreement to solve? The two pillars of the GATT/WTO architecture are
non-discrimination and reciprocity. Non-discrimination requires that tari¤s abide
by the most-favored-nation (MFN) principle, according to which imports of the
same product from di¤erent countries face the same tari¤ in a given market. Reci-
procity refers to an ideal of balanced changes in tari¤s across countries whereby,
as a result of these tari¤ changes, each country experiences a change in foreign
access to its markets and implied import volume which is equivalent in value to
the change in its access to foreign markets and implied export volume.
    In a multi-country world, the MFN principle helps to keep the structure of the

                                         13
international trade policy externality as simple as in a two-country world. To see
why, consider the discussion above regarding the purpose of a trade agreement.
One way to interpret this discussion is from the perspective of a two-country
world, where the importing country under consideration imports good a from a
single foreign exporting country and imposes the tari¤ a on imports of good
a from that country. But the discussion is equally valid when there are many
foreign exporting countries, provided that the country under consideration abides
by MFN and imposes a single tari¤ a on imports of good a independent of which
foreign exporting country those imports come from, because in that case there is
still just a single world price through which the international externality associated
with the choice of a will travel. This simplicity would be destroyed in a multi-
country world if the MFN principle did not apply, because with the importing
country imposing discriminatory tari¤s there would then be multiple world prices
for good a ­one for each foreign exporting country facing a distinct level of the
tari¤ on its exports of good a to the importing country ­and therefore multiple,
distinct paths through which the international policy externality could travel.
     With MFN preserving the simple structure of the international trade policy
externality described above, can reciprocity then be seen as a way to mitigate
these externalities? I now argue that at a basic level the answer is "Yes." This
is because, in e¤ect, reciprocity de...nes a measured, proportionate response to a
country'  s trade policy changes by its trading partners that keeps each country
facing the trade-o¤s of a small country, and thereby converts the logic of a large
country'  s unilateral tari¤ choices depicted in Figure 1.6 into that of a small country
as depicted in Figure 1.5. And for a member-driven institution, where what is
important is not so much what policies are chosen by its members but rather how
those policies are chosen, this feature goes a long way to explaining the appeal of
the design of the GATT/WTO for addressing the international policy externalities
of its member countries.
     To see this, I return to the large-country tari¤ choice depicted in Figure 1.6,
but suppose now that the importing country under consideration understands that
the foreign exporting country (or countries) will respond reciprocally to any tari¤
change that it initiates. Figure 1.8 illustrates the implications of this anticipated
reciprocal tari¤ response from the foreign country.
     The new element in the top panels of Figure 1.8 relative to the top panels of
Figure 1.6 is contained in the top right-most panel of Figure 1.8, which depicts a
reciprocal tari¤ response by the foreign country on a good b that it imports from
the country under consideration. This tari¤ response is labeled in the ...gure as


                                          14
 b. The response is reciprocal, in that it corresponds to a measured, proportionate
response to the tari¤ a imposed by the importing country under consideration:
and if calibrated to do so, the tari¤ b can, for the foreign country, collect exactly
the same amount of tari¤ revenue from its trading partner'      s exporters that its
trading partner is collecting from its exporters with the tari¤ a .3 In Figure 1.8,
this equivalence is re ected by the fact that the area of the shaded rectangle in
the top middle panel of Figure 1.8, which represents the tari¤ revenue that the
country under consideration collects from foreign exporters with its tari¤ a , is
equal to the area of the shaded rectangle in the top right-most panel of Figure
1.8, which represents the tari¤ revenue that the foreign country collects from the
exporters of the country under consideration with its reciprocal tari¤ response b .




                                             Figure 1.8

    The implications of this tari¤ response for the tari¤ choice of the large im-
porting country under consideration are depicted in the bottom panel of Figure
1.8. As shown there, the ability of this country to collect (net) tari¤ revenue from
   3
    In chapter 4 (see note 40), I con...rm that this feature is implied by the de...nition of reciprocity
that I introduced just above.


                                                   15
foreign exporters ­which caused the downward shift in the marginal cost curve of
the large country' s tari¤ relative to that of a small importing country, and which
led to the ine¢ cient unilateral tari¤ choices of the large country ­is neutralized
by the reciprocal tari¤ response of the foreign exporting country and the tari¤ rev-
enue it collects from the exporters of this country, with the result that the large
importing country under consideration faces the trade-o¤s of a small country and,
like the small country, makes internationally e¢ cient tari¤ choices.
    In short, the legitimacy of the GATT/WTO as the multilateral institution
that sets the rules of the global trade order can be defended on the grounds that
its foundational principles of non-discrimination and reciprocity are designed to
induce large countries to make the tari¤ choices that they would make if they were
small countries, and thereby to induce all countries to eliminate market power
considerations from their tari¤ choices. By serving this function, it can be argued
that the GATT/WTO helps its member governments solve the fundamental trade
agreement problem and achieve the international e¢ ciency frontier.




             Figure 1.9 (Reproduced from Bagwell and Staiger, 2011)

    If this argument is correct, and if the GATT/WTO really does serve this
function, then the tari¤ cuts that countries agree to when they join the WTO
should re  ect these market power considerations, with smaller tari¤ cuts occurring
where market power is low and larger tari¤ cuts occurring where market power is
high. Figure 1.9, reproduced from Bagwell and Staiger (2011), provides support
for this position, focussing on ...ve countries that joined the WTO subsequent to
its creation in 1995 (I discuss the ...ndings of this paper in greater detail in chapter

                                          16
3). In this ...gure, a measure of the market power wielded by these countries at the
six-digit HS industry level (denoted as BR in the ...gure) is used to distribute the
products into 10 bins by decile of market power along the horizontal axis, with the
lowest decile of market power on the left and the highest decile of market power on
the right; and the tari¤ cuts (expressed as percent deviations from the mean tari¤
cut) that these countries agreed to when they joined the WTO are measured on
the vertical axis. The fact that Figure 1.9 displays a strong positive relationship
between market power and the tari¤ cuts that countries agree to when they become
WTO members is consistent with the position that the GATT/WTO is indeed
helping to induce large countries to make the tari¤ choices that they would make
if they were small countries.
    The implications of the GATT/WTO reciprocity principle can also be seen in
the responses elicited by the recent tari¤ actions of the Trump Administration on
imported steel and aluminum. For example, in a March 2 2018 article, the New
York Times described the European Union (EU) countermeasures in these terms:




The reciprocal ("proportionate"  ) tari¤ response of the EU is in line with the
response envisioned under GATT/WTO rules to a unilateral increase in tari¤s
such as that initiated by the Trump Administration. As Figure 1.8 suggests, such
a response serves to prevent the United States from using these tari¤ actions to
increase the tari¤ revenue that (on net) it collects from foreign exporters; and


                                        17
facing the trade-o¤s of a small country, if the United States still wants to raise its
tari¤s in the face of this reciprocal response, then according to the logic I have
described above it is internationally e¢ cient for the United States to be allowed
to take these tari¤ actions.
    Notice too that, contrary to how it might appear, the US tari¤ action and
the EU response described by the March 2 New York Times article do not, as far
as they go, constitute the outbreak of a trade war. Rather, in limiting the EU'      s
response to be in line with the reciprocity principle, this is how the GATT/WTO
system works to avoid a trade war. The US Council of the International Chamber
of Commerce stated as much with regard to the novel role played by a          edgling
GATT in 1955 when, in the context of US actions restricting trade in dairy prod-
ucts and European responses to those actions, it observed that:

          The Organization' s control over countermeasures of this kind enables it
      to keep such measures within reasonable limits: to allow countermeasures
      commensurate with the action which occasions them; and to hold in check
      emotional reactions which might result in punitive measures by countries
      injured against the country responsible for the injury. The control over
      countermeasures is a check on the development of trade wars. (US Council
      of the ICC, 1955)

   From this perspective, what does look like the beginnings of a trade war was
reported in the New York Times on March 3:




In the end, the EU did carry through on its threat to retaliate against the new
US steel and aluminum tari¤s with reciprocal tari¤ hikes of its own, and the


                                          18
threatened further US tari¤s on imported cars from the EU were never imposed.
So in this case, at least, where there was an initial unilateral trade action by the
United States and a reciprocal response from its injured trading partner, and there
it ended, one could say that a trade war was averted; or, perhaps more accurately,
especially when viewed along other trade actions of the Trump Administration
that I will return to later, that it was a "one-sided"trade war.
    But this raises an interesting question of its own: What keeps countries operat-
ing within this rules-based system? Since the GATT/WTO, like all international
trade agreements, has no external enforcement mechanism, it can only be the
"o¤-equilibrium" (i.e., never has to be implemented) threat of the all-out trade
war that would transpire under the complete breakdown of the system itself that
sustains compliance with the rules. The "self-enforcing" nature of these rules is
another reason that their perceived legitimacy is critical for their success.
    What about the shallow approach to integration that is the hallmark of the
GATT/WTO? Can this feature of GATT/WTO design be seen as compatible
with an institution whose purpose is to internalize the negative international ex-
ternalities of the trade policy choices of its member countries? Could a shallow
approach to integration ever hope to mitigate these externalities? Or should this
approach be seen rather as a failing of the GATT/WTO, as a sign of institutional
weakness, an inability to proceed su¢ ciently far in pursuit of globalization?
    These are important questions, and their answers are complex. But there is
one sense in which a clear foundation for GATT'     s shallow approach to integration
can be seen in the arguments I have reviewed above: according to those arguments,
at the dawn of the GATT only trade policies, not domestic policies, would have
been set ine¢ ciently. This is because it is the tari¤ that most directly imposes
the international externality that is responsible for the international ine¢ ciency
of unilateral policy choices, and it is therefore the tari¤ that bears the imprint
of these motives. For this reason, an approach to integration that focuses on
liberalizing tari¤s and other border impediments to trade, with rules that prevent
countries from introducing protective domestic measures as substitutes for tari¤s
once tari¤s and other border measures have been constrained by the agreement,
can in principle accomplish everything that a trade agreement needs to accomplish
in order to implement internationally e¢ cient policy outcomes. As I will describe
in later chapters, this is essentially the approach that the GATT/WTO has taken.
From this perspective, the underlying approach of the GATT/WTO can be seen
as avoiding the sharpest con     icts between globalization and national sovereignty,
and indeed making domestic policy choices more e¤ective, not less.


                                         19
    Finally, above I described the trade actions of the Trump Administration with
regard to imports of steel and aluminum, and I noted that these actions, in combi-
nation with the reciprocal tari¤ response from the EU, did not constitute a trade
war but were instead in line with the kinds of reciprocal tari¤ adjustments envi-
sioned under the GATT/WTO design. To be clear, I was using this episode only
to illustrate a speci...c point, not to make a blanket statement about the WTO-
consistency of the Trump Administration'     s world view of the ideal global trading
system. In fact, while US dissatisfaction with the GATT/WTO has been building
for some time and certainly did not start with the Trump Administration, the
Trump administration took US distaste for the WTO to a new level. For this
reason, it is instructive at this point to compare the rules-based trading system of
the GATT/WTO as I have described that system above against the alternative
global trade order envisioned by the Trump Administration.
    What was the Trump Administration'         s vision for the global trade order?
Wilbur Ross, US Secretary of Commerce put it this way:
          "An ideal global trading system would facilitate adoption of the lowest
      possible level of tari¤s. In this ideal system, countries with the lowest
      tari¤s would apply reciprocal tari¤s to those with the highest and then
      automatically lower that reciprocal tari¤ as the other country lowers theirs.
      This leveling technique could be applied product by product or across the
      board on an aggregated basis. Such a modi...cation would motivate high-
      tari¤ countries to reduce their tari¤s on imports." (Wall Street Journal,
      May 25 2017)
And the vision articulated by Commerce Secretary Ross was echoed in various
Trump tweets, such as this one:




                                           20
    Evidently, according to this vision, the purpose of trade agreements would be
to achieve reciprocal free trade or, barring that, then at least a "level playing ...eld"
across countries. And as for the means of achieving this purpose, the ideal global
trading system according to the Trump Administration would dispense with MFN
and seek reciprocity in tari¤ levels, not in tari¤ changes as in the role of reciprocity
in the GATT/WTO which I have illustrated in the ...gures above.
    In short, the Trump Administration'    s vision for the global trade order amounts
to a "Repeal and Replace"strategy, as it poses an existential challenge to the pil-
lars of the GATT/WTO architecture. It would abandon MFN. It would empha-
size a form of reciprocity that is not found in the GATT/WTO. And in seeking
global free trade as the ultimate goal, it would strike at the heart of what the
GATT/WTO means when it says it is a "member driven" organization. At a
minimum, this vision, expressed by a US Administration in the early decades of
the twenty-...rst century, illustrates the depth of the challenges that now confront
the rules-based world trading system of the twentieth century.

The role of rules in a rules-based global trading system I have argued
above that the key design features of the GATT/WTO are consistent with an
institution whose purpose is to internalize the negative international externalities
of the trade policy choices of its member countries. But what di¤erence do these
rules make anyway? While it seems clear enough that in the presence of these
externalities countries can gain from negotiations over their trade policy choices,
what would be lost if countries engaged in "power-based" tari¤ bargaining to
address these issues without reference to any previously agreed-upon rules?
    Broadly speaking, the rules-based system of the GATT/WTO has two main
potential advantages over a power-based approach to tari¤ bargaining. First, the
rules of the GATT/WTO can simplify the tari¤ bargaining problem and make it
manageable, and this can help countries negotiate to e¢ cient policies. And second,
these rules can mitigate the power of the most powerful countries, and in so doing
can encourage the participation of weaker countries in the global trading system
who might otherwise be vulnerable to exploitation by the stronger countries.
    Regarding its simplifying role, I have noted that MFN simpli...es the structure
of the international policy externality that would otherwise arise in a multi-country
world, ensuring that this externality continues to take the simple form that it
would take in a two-country world. As for reciprocity, it can be seen to shape
GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations in two ways: it is a norm of negotiation when a
tari¤ is to be reduced and bound at a lower level; and it is a rule that de...nes the

                                          21
threat point for re negotiation when a previously bound tari¤ is to be raised.
    If countries abide rigidly by these norms and rules, reciprocity in combination
with MFN a¤ords a dramatic simpli...cation of the tari¤ bargaining problem. This
is because as a norm of negotiation, reciprocity ...xes the terms of exchange of
market access: if it has been previously agreed that the negotiations will abide by
reciprocity, then the terms of the deal are ...xed, with countries exchanging market
access concessions and implied trade volumes one for one. And by de...ning the
threat point for renegotiation, reciprocity indirectly determines the extent of mar-
ket access that is exchanged, through the implied requirement that this exchange
is "voluntary"  ; that is, the size of the deal is determined by the negotiating party
that wants the smallest deal at these terms, because if that party were pushed in
the bargain to accept a bigger deal/lower tari¤s than it wanted, it could always
renegotiate subsequently to raise tari¤s and ­with reciprocity de...ning its threat
point ­in the end get the size of the deal it wanted anyway while preserving the
reciprocal terms. And with the terms of the deal ...xed and its size determined,
there is then nothing left for countries to bargain over! In this way, MFN and
reciprocity can in principle turn a potential haggling situation into a "retail store
for market access."Indeed, it has been remarked by legal scholars and trade prac-
titioners that the implied elimination of strategic behavior was a hallmark of tari¤
bargaining in the early GATT rounds that distinguished the GATT experience
from the episodes of tari¤ bargaining that came before.
    Regarding the role of GATT/WTO rules in mitigating the power of the most
powerful countries, this role is obviously ful...lled if, as I have described above,
countries rigidly abide by MFN and reciprocity in their tari¤ bargaining, since if
under these rules and norms there is nothing left to bargain over, then there is
clearly no room for the exercise of power in tari¤ negotiations. But even absent
rigid adherence to these rules and norms, the ability of countries to exert their
power in GATT/WTO tari¤ bargains is likely to be constrained.
    For example, even if not joined by reciprocity, the MFN requirement alone still
dilutes the ability of a powerful country to enjoy the bene...ts of its power. This
is because in exerting its power to secure more-than-reciprocal tari¤ concessions
from its bargaining partner, the non-discriminatory nature of those tari¤ cuts will
ensure that other exporting countries siphon o¤ part of the gain. Moreover, while
reciprocity in GATT/WTO negotiations is just a norm and may therefore not hold
rigidly, reciprocity in the context of GATT/WTO renegotiations enters as a rule
and can therefore be counted on to hold reasonably well in that context; and this
provides another mitigating force against the ability of powerful countries to get


                                         22
their way in GATT/WTO tari¤ bargains. This is because if a powerful country
pushes for better-than-reciprocal terms in an e¢ cient bargain, its trading partner
can subsequently renegotiate subject to reciprocity, either explicitly or in e¤ect,
and bene...t by at least achieving the diminished size of the deal it desires at these
unfavorable terms (voluntary exchange). And while this introduces ine¢ ciencies
in the bargaining outcome, the brunt of these ine¢ ciencies will be are borne by
the powerful country ­ because its trading partner has bene...ted as a result of
the renegotiation that introduced the ine¢ ciencies ­and this serves as a further
penalty on the powerful country for exercising its power in the bargain.
    The upshot is that the rules of the GATT/WTO tend to blunt the exercise of
bargaining power. But why, then, would powerful countries accept these rules?
One reason is that the gains from simplifying the bargaining may be su¢ ciently
great that powerful countries can gain directly from the rules even as their ability
to exert bargaining power is constrained. But there is also a further reason that
powerful countries may see it in their interest to support a rules-based multilat-
eral trading system: by making a commitment to adhere to these rules, powerful
countries can help secure the participation of weaker countries who might oth-
erwise fear exploitation, and all countries can gain as a result. This possibility
is illustrated for a two-country world in Figure 1.10, which builds on McLaren
(1997) and is adapted from Figure 5B of Bagwell and Staiger (1999).
    In Figure 1.10, the welfare of the domestic country, W , is plotted on the ver-
tical axis and the welfare of the foreign country, W , is plotted on the horizontal
axis. The dashed frontier depicted in Figure 1.10 represents the combinations of
domestic and foreign welfare levels achievable under e¢ cient tari¤ bargaining. The
welfare levels at the origin of the ...gure, labeled Nex-post , represent the "disagree-
ment point" for the two countries: these are the welfare levels that the domestic
and foreign countries would achieve if their tari¤ bargaining broke down. And
the point on the frontier labeled P B is the outcome of the power-based bargain,
assuming that both the domestic and the foreign country participate in the bar-
gain and that this bargain can be represented as a Nash bargain that reaches the
highest iso-Nash-Product contour (the dashed iso-Nash-Product contour labeled
in the ...gure as Iso N P ) consistent with the dashed frontier. As depicted, at the
point P B both countries achieve higher welfare than their disagreement welfare
levels at Nex-post , indicating that each country does better under the agreement
summarized by the point P B than it would do by walking away from the deal.




                                          23
                                    Figure 1.10

    But these disagreement welfare levels may not be the relevant welfare levels
for assessing whether the decision to participate in the bargain is worthwhile.
This is because the act of showing up at the bargaining table to participate in the
bargain may itself imply incurring some sunk costs which cannot then be recouped
should the bargaining break down, and which therefore are not re        ected in the
welfare levels at Nex-post . Under the assumption that the foreign country is the
weaker, smaller, country of the two and that it experiences such sunk costs when
it agrees to participate in a tari¤ bargain with the larger more powerful domestic
country (perhaps because its exporters will sink investments into serving the large
domestic-country market once it is known that the two countries have agreed to
bargain), the disagreement point relevant for the participation decision ­ which
excludes the sunk costs that would be incurred by showing up ­is labeled in Figure
1.10 as Nex-ante . The ...gure depicts the case where, under power-based bargaining,
the foreign country does worse than if it had not shown up to the bargaining table;
hence, anticipating this, it will choose not to participate in such a bargain and
the two countries will be stuck at their (ex-ante) disagreement welfare levels.
    This is where the commitment to a rules-based system could bene...t all coun-
tries, including the most powerful countries. Here I illustrate the impact of
committing to the reciprocity rule as it arises in the context of renegotiation.

                                        24
Recall from the discussion above that if a powerful country pushes for better-
than-reciprocal terms in an e¢ cient bargain, its trading partner can subsequently
renegotiate subject to reciprocity, introducing ine¢ ciencies in the bargaining out-
come that are borne by the powerful country and serve to penalize it for exercising
its power in the bargain. The implications of this are illustrated in Figure 1.10 by
the solid welfare frontier, which lies everywhere inside the dashed frontier except
at the point marked S , where each country has set its tari¤s at the levels it would
have chosen if it were a small country along the lines depicted in Figure 1.5, and
therefore where no country is exerting bargaining power to push the deal in its
favor. The Nash bargain in the presence of this reciprocity-constrained frontier
would then deliver the rules-based bargaining outcome labeled RB in Figure 1.10,
which marks the highest iso-Nash-Product contour (the solid iso-Nash-Product
contour labeled in the ...gure as Iso N P ) consistent with the solid frontier. As
illustrated in Figure 1.10, the rules-based bargaining outcome RB penalizes the
powerful domestic country and favors the weaker foreign country relative to the
power-based bargaining outcome P B ; but for the powerful domestic country this
is no loss, since it could not get the foreign country to participate in power-based
bargaining in any event. And relative to their ex-ante disagreement welfare levels,
both countries now do better under the rules-based bargaining outcome RB .

The declining hegemon The discussion above suggests that the most powerful
countries may bene...t from a rules-based multilateral trading system precisely
because they are so powerful. This may help explain why the United States was,
along with the United Kingdom, the champion of the rules-based system at its
creation in 1947 with the birth of GATT. But it is not hard to imagine from Figure
1.10 that, if the domestic country were the more powerful of the two but not so
dominantly more powerful as I have illustrated in the ...gure, the foreign country
could well choose to participate in trade bargaining even under a power-based
system. And in that case, the more powerful domestic country would prefer to
escape from the rules and pursue power-based trade bargaining with the foreign
country (assuming that the e¢ ciency consequences of rules-based bargaining noted
above did not carry the day).
   This suggests the possibility that, with the rise of the large emerging and
developing economies and the decline in hegemonic status that the United States
has experienced in recent decades, its enthusiasm for the rules-based system it
helped to create could also wane: being far less dominant in the global economy
than it was in 1947, the United States is no longer in need of a set of international

                                         25
rules to help it commit not to exploit other countries in trade bargaining in order
to convince those countries to engage in the global economy. And if the declining
hegemonic position of the United States is indeed a primary cause of the challenges
now faced by the rules-based multilateral trading system, to repair that system the
world may have to wait for the rise of another hegemon. Along these lines and in
the broader context of security and trade, historian/commentator Robert Kagan
sees the rules-based international order as "a historical anomaly" made possible
by U.S. leadership, which is now collapsing, "returning the world to its natural
state ­a dark jungle of competing interests, clashing nationalism, tribalism and
self-interest."(Kagan, 2018).
    If this is the correct diagnosis, it is full of irony. According to this diagnosis,
the design of the rules-based multilateral trading system has proven e¤ective in
solving an important and still-relevant problem, yet the system will inevitably
collapse. While there may be nothing fundamentally wrong with the existing
rules-based system, there are certainly important improvements in the design of
the rules that could be made, yet such improvements will likely do nothing to save
the system. And while China is seen by many as a source of some of the greatest
challenges for the rules-based trading system of the twenty-...rst century, if this
diagnosis is correct it may be that the rise of China is the world'      s best hope for
the return of a viable rules-based multilateral trading system.
    In any case, to the extent that this diagnosis does capture the main cause of
the rules-based trading system'   s ills, there is great value in attempting to support,
preserve and improve the existing global trade order until such time as it can again
thrive on its own. As noted above, the fundamental design of the rules-based
multilateral trading system has proven e¤ective in solving an important and, by
this diagnosis, still-relevant problem, and it should not be allowed to wither away.
By this diagnosis the shallow-integration approach of the GATT/WTO is well-
designed to solve the fundamental trade agreement problem: as such, a stark
trade-o¤ between sovereignty and globalization may be avoidable, but only if
the WTO is supported and its approach strengthened. Could China be the next
hegemon that the WTO is looking for? Currently to many this may seem unlikely,
but as its dominance grows, China may see it in its interest to more fully commit
to these rules; and until that time, according to this diagnosis the WTO deserves
broad support as the legitimate constitution of the global trade order.

The implications of o¤shoring The rise of o¤shoring could provide an alter-
native diagnosis for the current challenges faced by the rules-based trading system

                                          26
to that implied by a declining hegemon, and one that is in some sense more dire.
This is because in altering the nature of trade, o¤shoring may also have changed
the nature of international price determination and the international policy exter-
nalities that are the source of the problem that the rules of the GATT/WTO are
well-designed to solve. And if this is the case, then in a world economy dominated
by o¤shoring and global value chains, new and di¤erent rules may be needed to
help countries address the novel international policy externalities that arise.
    This can be seen most clearly with regard to the potential implications of
o¤shoring for the e¢ cacy of shallow integration. Recall that according to the
arguments I have reviewed above, at the dawn of the GATT only trade policies,
not domestic policies, would have been set ine¢ ciently, because it is the tari¤
that most directly imposes the international externality that is responsible for the
international ine¢ ciency of unilateral policy choices. This statement holds for the
nature of trade that dominated most of the twentieth century, that is, the inter-
national exchange of ...nished or largely ...nished goods, where international prices
are determined by the kinds of supply-equals-demand market clearing conditions
that are featured in the ...gures described above. But when trade is dominated
by specialized components, such as is the case with the production and assembly
of the Boeing Dreamliner illustrated in Figure 1.2, exchanged between sellers and
buyers that have limited outside market options at the time that the exchanges
occur, the prices at which these trades occur may be determined by bargaining
and novel impacts of trade and domestic policies on international prices can then
arise. And as a result, even when they are not yet constrained by a trade agree-
ment, all policies, both trade and domestic, may be set ine¢ ciently. When this
is the case, the foundation for the GATT/WTO shallow approach to integration
that I described above no longer holds, and a deeper approach to integration may
be needed to address the policy ine¢ ciencies of the global economy.
    It is therefore possible that the rise of o¤shoring has changed the nature of
international policy externalities, and in doing so has made the shallow-integration
approach of the GATT/WTO no longer well-designed to solve the fundamental
trade agreement problem. If this is so, then deeper forms of integration will be
required to achieve internationally e¢ cient policies, and a stark trade-o¤ between
sovereignty and globalization may now be unavoidable (and as I will discuss,
something similar may be behind the recent push toward regulatory harmonization
as an end in itself). But it is also possible that the rise of o¤shoring has not
fundamentally changed the nature of international policy externalities, or has
changed the nature of the policy externalities only temporarily, as o¤shoring itself


                                         27
may be a transitory phenomenon. Either way, it is di¢ cult to see how "Repeal
and Replace"could be the right strategy for arriving at an e¤ective world trading
system for the twenty-...rst century, as that strategy risks throwing the baby out
with the bath water and, by undercutting the WTO, undermining the best hope
for a balance between globalization and national sovereignty. Instead, building
on the GATT/WTO foundation to address these twenty-...rst century problems
where they exist seems like a sensible approach, even if the world trading system
of the twentieth century is in need of a fundamental overhaul.

The stakes of getting it right There would also be other implications of the
demise of the WTO that are more di¢ cult to assess but could be important. These
would include the loss of an international institution that has built-in procedures
for rethinking levels of market access commitments in an orderly, rules-based fash-
ion: through its reciprocity principle, GATT/WTO market access commitments
are structured as "liability rules"that permit legal buy outs of previously agreed
market access commitments whenever a country believes that its previous com-
mitments to levels of market access are no longer serving its interests. And they
would include the loss of an international institution that places multilateral re-
straints on the structure and negotiation of PTAs: one need look no further than
Trump Trade Tweets to imagine what it would be like to renegotiate the terms of
NAFTA with the US if the US did not feel constrained by its WTO commitments:




More broadly, there would be collateral damage from the demise of the WTO,
such as the loss of the possibility of linkage between the WTO and international
environmental agreements at a time when the world is facing the increasingly
urgent need to address climate change.
   In short, it appears that the world trading system of the twentieth century can
be adapted to address the challenges of the twenty-...rst century, and that rather

                                        28
than adopting an approach to the creation of an e¤ective world trading system for
the twenty-...rst century that follows that mantra "Move fast and break things,"
it may be possible to simply Keep Calm and Carry On.
    In the next ...ve chapters I provide a foundation for this position. I begin in
chapter 2 with an overview of the GATT/WTO, and I introduce the basic features
of a modeling framework that has been used to interpret its design. In chapters 3
and 4 I discuss research that evaluates GATT'      s design as the constitution of the
world trading system for the twentieth century. I focus here on tari¤ bargaining,
the foundational activity of the GATT/WTO, and I refer the interested reader
to Staiger (2021) where a more complete evaluation of GATT'          s design features
may be found. I then turn to the set of twenty-...rst century challenges faced by
the WTO, and I ask whether the current design features of the GATT/WTO
are up to the task of meeting these challenges. In Staiger (2021) I argue that
these design features are appropriate for meeting many, though not all, of these
challenges. Here I focus on just two of those challenges: a set of interrelated
challenges for the WTO associated with the rise of the large emerging economies,
including China; and the challenges faced by the WTO in accommodating e¤orts
to address global climate change and the positive role that the WTO might play
in addressing this issue. I again refer the interested reader to Staiger (2021) where
a treatment of the larger set of twenty-...rst century challenges surveyed in this
introductory chapter may be found.


2. The GATT/WTO
In this chapter I provide a broad overview of the GATT as well as its successor the
WTO, and of the basic modeling framework that will provide my foundation for an
economic interpretation of GATT'    s design features, its successes, and ultimately
its shortcomings. I begin by describing GATT'    s design and a brief history of how
it came to be, and I then present the modeling framework that will guide the
investigation to follow.

2.1. The design of the GATT/WTO4
Origins The direct historical antecedents of what would eventually serve as the
de facto constitution of the world trading system of the twentieth century arose at
   4
    The material in this section builds from chapter 3 of Bagwell and Staiger (2002) and section
4 of Bagwell and Staiger (2010a).


                                              29
a time of crisis. Trade barriers had become increasingly restrictive in the decade
following World War I, and reached a climax when the United States enacted
the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤ Act of 1930, increasing average U.S. tari¤s from 38 to
52%. U.S. trading partners were quick to respond, and soon tari¤ rates among
all the major powers were generally on the order of 50%. As Hudec (1990, p. 5)
explains, "the postwar design for international trade policy was animated by a
single-minded concern to avoid repeating the disastrous errors of the 1920'    s and
1930' s."
    In 1934, the U.S. Congress passed the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act
(RTAA). Under the RTAA, the United States for the ...rst time engaged in bi-
lateral reciprocal tari¤ bargaining with a sequence of trading partners, and it
combined this bilateral bargaining approach with unconditional MFN, according
to which exports from each country with whom the United States had an agree-
ment under the RTAA would automatically receive the lowest ("most favored
nation" ) tari¤ rate that the United States o¤ered to any exporting country. It is
widely acknowledged that much of the GATT architecture was inspired by prior
U.S. experience with the RTAA.
    What is less-well appreciated is the way in which the RTAA was itself in-
  uenced by the successes and failures of the many international attempts that
came before it to address the problem of high and rising trade barriers. During
the decade following World War I, the United States took part in a number of
multilateral bargaining e¤orts to address this issue, each largely unsuccessful. In
describing the evolution away from multilateral bargaining and toward the bilat-
eral bargaining approach that would eventually be embodied in the RTAA, Tasca
(1938, p. 7) attributes the lack of success of these earlier multilateral attempts to
the complexity of multi-country bargaining:
           "The adoption of a policy of bilateral actions does not preclude the use
      of multilateral conventions to liquidate trade barriers. During the post-
      war period various attempts to proceed upon this basis have met with
      little success. It is the method itself which possesses weaknesses in certain
      respects.
           "The complexities involved in such a program of concerted action arise
      in part out of the fundamental variations in national tari¤ systems. This
      means that practically only horizontal reductions in tari¤s can be consid-
      ered feasible. But the di¤erences in the economies concerned and their
      varying positions in the world economy demand reductions in trade barri-
      ers according to the circumstances in each case. Moreover, the di¤usion of

                                           30
       responsibility grows with the number of prospective contractants. Nations
       became less concerned with the failure of a projected plurilateral pact and
       more with the possibility of yielding more in the way of concessions than
       other nations."

As Tasca observes, these repeated failures of multilateral bargaining led to a con-
scious decision on the part of the United States to experiment with bilateral
bargaining under the RTAA.
    The RTAA was remarkable not only because it adopted a bilateral bargaining
approach to the problem, but because it marked the ...rst time that the United
States combined bilateral tari¤ bargaining with unconditional MFN.5 Yet while
the approach embodied in the RTAA was novel from the U.S. perspective, from
the perspective of Europeans it was not new at all. As Tasca (1938, p. 135)
observes,

           "It is to be noted at the outset that tari¤ bargaining combined with
       most-favored-nation treatment is by no means a novel policy. For decades
       it has formed the essential basis of the commercial policies of numerous
       European countries."

In fact, it appears that the design and implementation of the RTAA built on
lessons learned from the European experience in at least two important ways.
    First, the European experience with bilateral tari¤ bargaining established the
practical necessity of combining this approach with unconditional MFN. As Wal-
lace (1933, p. 629) writes:

            "...After the World War, France experimented with the idea of aban-
       doning the most-favored-nation clause...By 1927 France was again driven
       back to the granting of most-favored-nation treatment, either de jure or
       de facto. The reason is not far to seek. When a country, by exclusive
       tari¤ bargains, institutes discriminations against third countries, then the
       greater these discriminations the greater will be the pressure against that
       country for their removal. In each successive negotiation it ...nds that the
       ...rmest demand of the other country is for equality of treatment, present
       and future, guarded by a most-favored-nation clause or its equivalent."
   5
    The United States had, since 1922, adopted an unconditional MFN approach, but it main-
tained an "autonomous"(i.e., unilateral) tari¤ up until the RTAA (see Tasca, 1938, pp. 116-121).


                                              31
In e¤ect, the European experience with bilateral tari¤ bargaining taught the im-
portant lesson that a country' s current bargaining partners would require assur-
ance that any future bilateral deals that it struck with other countries would not
substantially erode the value of the concessions being granted, and that the most
practical way to provide assurance against such "concession erosion" was with a
promise of unconditional MFN. The promise of unconditional MFN was included
in the RTAA in part to address the concession erosion issue.6
    Second, the European experience provided an object lesson in the power of
the perverse incentive to raise tari¤s ­ and thereby adopt so-called "bargaining
tari¤s"­to better position oneself for future negotiations. According to Wallace
(1938, p. 630),

           "...[t]his padding of tari¤ rates in anticipation of negotiations is a chief
       reason why half a century of bargaining has meant on the whole higher and
       higher tari¤ rates in Europe instead of lower and lower rates."

This experience also informed the design of the RTAA. As Tasca (1938, p. 179,
note 34) observes,

           "The United States Tari¤ Commission in submitting recommendations
       on tari¤ bargaining declared, ` The Congress should formulate restrictions
       designed to prevent the inclusion in reciprocity agreements of illusory con-
       cessions; that is, the removal of trade barriers or the reduction of tari¤
       rates when such barriers and rates had been raised in anticipation of tar-
       i¤ bargaining, the amount of the concessions being smaller than or not
       greater than the previous increases in barriers and rates. Speci...cally, it is
       suggested that the Congress prescribe that all concessions included in the
       reciprocity agreements, on both sides, be made from the rates and relating
       to the barriers in e¤ect at a date which shall be ...xed by the Congress' ..."

   The lessons learned from the European experience with bilateral tari¤ bar-
gaining may therefore have contributed to the success of bilateral tari¤ bargaining
under the RTAA by helping the United States avoid the twin problems associated
with concession erosion and bargaining tari¤s that plagued the European e¤orts
before it. But as it happened, the adoption of unconditional MFN would itself
   6
    Other arguments articulated at the time for adopting a policy of unconditional MFN in-
cluded the perceived "multilateralization"bene...ts that this inclusion was expected to engender,
and a reduction in the risk of war (see, for example, Culbert, 1987 and Rhodes, 1993).

                                               32
introduce a di¤erent potential issue for the RTAA, one that was related to the
earlier problem of bargaining tari¤s that the Europeans had experienced but took
a slightly di¤erent form: while in the European experience this issue had taken
the form of the unilateral positioning of pre-negotiation tari¤s, under the RTAA
the analogous issue became how to design bilateral agreements with early negoti-
ating partners to best preserve bargaining power for later agreements with other
negotiating partners.7 This task was made di¢ cult by the unconditional MFN
requirement, which automatically granted "for free"to other potential bargaining
partners any tari¤ concessions granted to early negotiating partners.
    The preservation of bargaining power for later negotiations became a major
preoccupation of the United States under the RTAA. Summarizing his discussion
of the tactics used by the United States under the RTAA in this regard, Tasca
(1938, pp. 146-147) concludes:

           "There are, then, ...ve methods being utilized by the United States to
       assure the compatibility of the unconditional most-favored-nation clause
       with a conventional tari¤ bargaining program. By far the most basic is
       the chief supplier formula. This is reenforced by the reclassi...cation of
       commodities in the tari¤ schedules of the Act of 1930. The use of partial
       reductions in successive agreements, the simultaneous negotiations with
       groups of countries and the withdrawal clause are subsidiary to the ...rst
       two. They play the part of supporting beams in those instances in which
       the chief supplier is not entirely applicable to existing conditions."

In e¤ect, by granting tari¤ concessions to a negotiating partner only on those
products for which the partner was the principal ("chief"   ) supplier, possibly com-
bined with product reclassi...cation for tari¤ purposes to heighten the dominance
of the partner in these products, it was thought that much of the free-rider po-
tential created by unconditional MFN could be eliminated. And where free-riding
remained a substantial possibility, three additional tactics were available: splitting
the concession into a sequence of partial tari¤ reductions negotiated with di¤er-
ent countries in successive agreements; attempting to engage groups of countries
in simultaneous negotiations; and threatening to withdraw or modify the earlier
agreement if free-riding continued.
   7
    Evidently, the issue of unilaterally selected bargaining tari¤s experienced by the Europeans
was so destructive to meaningful agreements that it prevented the sorts of related issues con-
fronted by the United States under the RTAA from even arising.


                                              33
    Beckett (1941) reviews the U.S. experience under the RTAA, and emphasizes
the di¢ culties involved in preserving bargaining power in the presence of uncon-
ditional MFN, even when the chief supplier rule is applied. As she describes, split
concessions often became the preferred method to prevent undue loss of bargaining
power in an early negotiation:
          "It is important to notice that the use of the chief supplier rule involves
     certain special di¢ culties. A problem arises, for instance, when, during the
     process of negotiation with small countries, it is impossible to isolate any
     commodities in which the other country is our chief supplier...A further dif-
     ...culty appears when two or more countries supply almost exactly the same
     quantity of a given commodity or when two countries are the chief suppliers
     of the commodity in alternative years. If a substantial reduction in duty
     is granted in the trade agreement with one country, bargaining power with
     the other country is lost. To avoid such embarrassment, simultaneous nego-
     tiations of two agreements can be attempted. More often a split concession
     is granted: that is, a small reduction in duty is made in the agreement
     with the ...rst country and an additional reduction in the agreement with
     the second country. By this procedure bargaining power with the second
     country is preserved..." (Beckett, 1941, p. 23).

Tasca (1938, p. 146) also emphasizes the importance in this regard of the various
withdrawal clauses that were included in the RTAA:
         "If the major bene...ts of a duty concession fall to a third country and `
                                                                                  in
     consequence thereof an unduly large increase in importation' takes place,
     the contractants may withdraw the concession or impose a quantitative
     restriction upon imports of that item. Concessions are granted by the
     United States only after careful study in order to gauge the e¤ects upon the
     whole economy; if these calculations should fail, then there exists a remedy
     in resort to this clause. But what is more signi...cant, this withdrawal clause
     forestalls any third country from reaping any considerable bene...t from a
     concession which might in any manner lessen its incentive to promulgate a
     pact with the United States..."

The practice of granting split concessions became the most frequently observed
manifestation of bargaining tari¤s under the RTAA, while the threat to withdraw
or modify a concession was typically kept in the background but seen as providing
an important means of maintaining bargaining leverage for later negotiations.

                                           34
    In short, tari¤ bargaining under the RTAA exhibited a number of central fea-
tures. The approach was decidedly bilateral, chosen only after the United States
had considered, attempted, and ultimately rejected multilateral tari¤ bargain-
ing. Prior European experience with concession erosion and bargaining tari¤s
in  uenced the design and implementation of the RTAA along important dimen-
sions. And unconditional MFN, the chief supplier rule, split concessions and
withdrawal/modi...cation clauses were understood to be central to the operation
of reciprocal tari¤ bargaining under the RTAA.
    Between 1934 and 1947, the United States successfully concluded separate bi-
lateral agreements with 29 countries. Encouraged by its success in the bilateral
arena with the RTAA, the United States sought to build upon the key compo-
nents and establish a multilateral institution. In 1946, negotiations began for the
creation of an International Trade Organization (ITO). As with the RTAA, under
the ITO it was expected that negotiations between governments would result in
reciprocal and mutually advantageous reductions in tari¤s, and the principle of
non-discrimination would then ensure that the reduced tari¤s would be extended
to all member countries. In 1947, GATT was negotiated and was intended to serve
as an interim agreement, but the ITO was never rati...ed by the U.S. Congress.

Stated Purpose What is the stated purpose of GATT? According to its Pream-
ble, the objectives of the contracting parties include

     "raising standards of living, ensuring full employment and a large and
     steadily growing volume of real income and e¤ective demand, developing
     the full use of the resources of the world and expanding the production and
     exchange of goods."

As for the means to achieve this purpose, the Preamble of GATT states the
contracting parties'belief that

     "reciprocal and mutually advantageous arrangements directed to the sub-
     stantial reduction in tari¤s and other barriers to trade and to the elimination
     of discriminatory treatment in international commerce"

would contribute toward these goals. The objectives stated in the Preamble to
the WTO are broadened to include the exchange of not only goods but also of
services, and to acknowledge the additional objectives of sustainable development,
the protection and preservation of the environment, and the greater inclusion of

                                           35
developing countries to share in the gains from the growth of trade. But the means
to achieve this purpose as stated in the WTO Preamble are identical to those
stated in the GATT Preamble (with the phrase "international trade relations"
in the WTO Preamble replacing the phrase "international commerce" from the
GATT Preamble).
    Perhaps surprisingly to economists, free trade is not a stated objective of
GATT or of the WTO. This re        ects the fact that, as a "member-driven" organi-
zation that serves as a trade policy negotiating forum for member governments
with diverse interests, priorities and needs, the GATT/WTO is designed with the
aim of securing mutually bene...cial agreements among these governments, and free
trade is not necessarily something to which all member governments will aspire.
    In total, there were eight rounds of GATT negotiations that together spanned
almost 50 years. The primary focus of the earlier rounds was the reduction of
import tari¤s on goods. In the ...nal GATT round, known as the Uruguay Round,
governments ventured into a number of new issue areas (e.g., investment, services
and intellectual property) and formed the WTO. The WTO has sponsored a ninth
round, the Doha Round, launched in 2001 and as yet uncompleted. The WTO
embraces the rules and agreements made in GATT negotiations, but it is also
a full- edged international organization, with an explicit organizational charter
and a uni...ed dispute-settlement system. In e¤ect, with the creation of the WTO,
participating governments ful...lled their original quest with the ITO for an o¢ cial
international organization that would set and administer the rules of the world
trading system.

Architecture GATT/WTO member governments are obliged to abide by a set
of rules. In GATT, these rules were laid out in a series of 39 articles. The WTO
has incorporated these GATT articles and extended the principles embodied in
them to a number of new issue areas. Below I provide a brief overview of the
GATT/WTO legal structure by focussing on the principles embodied in these
articles.
    To organize the discussion, it helps to distinguish between three broad ele-
ments: substantive obligations, exceptions to those obligations, and dispute set-
tlement procedures. The substantive obligations of a GATT/WTO member relate
to tari¤ commitments, MFN treatment and a general "code of conduct" in the
international-trade arena. Broadly speaking, these provisions oblige the member-
governments to concentrate national protective measures into the form of tari¤s,
to apply them on a non-discriminatory basis to other members, and to honor any

                                         36
tari¤ "bindings" made in a GATT/WTO negotiation, where the tari¤ binding
refers to a legal maximum level above which a country agrees not to raise its
tari¤.
    As mentioned, the GATT/WTO also provides for certain exceptions to these
obligations. One class of exceptions is for "original" actions, such as when a
member seeks to suspend an obligation temporarily, or to permanently withdraw
a previous concession through renegotiation. The rationale for including excep-
tions of this nature is that a government is more likely to make a substantial
tari¤ commitment if it knows that the legal system has "safeguards" allowing
its concessions to be modi...ed or withdrawn under appropriate conditions. Of
course, a tari¤ commitment would lose its meaning if exceptions for original ac-
tions were not subject to some disciplining structure. In part for this reason, and
in part to maintain a balance between the rights and obligations of the members,
GATT/WTO rules permit as well a second class of exceptions for "retaliatory"
actions. Speci...cally, if a government modi...es or withdraws a previous concession,
then GATT/WTO rules recognize that a cost may be borne by a trading partner.
This partner may then seek "compensation" from the government for the harm
done (e.g., a tari¤ reduction from the government on some other good), and if
this fails the partner is allowed to achieve "self-help" compensation through re-
taliation. The meaning of retaliation is that the trading partner can reciprocate
by withdrawing a concession of a "substantially equivalent"nature.
    The third element mentioned above is the GATT/WTO dispute settlement
procedures. Here a central issue is the determination whether the actions by one
country serve to "nullify or impair" the bene...ts expected under the agreement
by another country. Nulli...cation or impairment includes actions taken by one
country "which harmed the trade of another, and which `        could not reasonably
have been anticipated' by the other at the time it negotiated for a concession"
(Jackson, 1997, p. 115). In the typical "violation complaint,"a country is alleged
to have failed to comply with one or more of its GATT/WTO obligations, leading
to a prima facie case of nulli...cation or impairment.
    An important distinction arises between the procedures associated with safe-
guard exceptions and those that are associated with nulli...cation or impairment.
The safeguard procedures provide explicitly for the lawful suspension of obliga-
tions or withdrawal of negotiated concessions, and these procedures specify as well
the permissible retaliatory responses of trading partners. By contrast, the dispute
settlement procedures govern retaliation against a country that takes a harmful
action which its trading partners could not have anticipated under GATT/WTO


                                         37
rules. In the typical complaint, at issue is whether the o¤ending country has
violated GATT/WTO rules, and retaliation here may then be more directly con-
cerned with the enforcement of rules.
    The procedure for settling disputes progresses through three stages: ...rst, there
is a consultation phase among the involved parties; second, a GATT/WTO panel
(and, after appeal, the Appellate Body) conducts an investigation and issues a
ruling and recommendation; and as a last resort, authorization of retaliation oc-
curs. Resolution may be (and often is) achieved in the ...rst stage, or it may follow
the panel ruling. If the panel ...nds that nulli...cation or impairment has occurred,
then it recommends that the o¤ending country correct any illegal measures. The
o¤ending country may be unwilling to do so, however. In this case, it may seek a
negotiated resolution by o¤ering the harmed country compensation via MFN tari¤
reductions on some other goods. If compensation is not o¤ered, or if it is o¤ered
but rejected, then the harmed country may follow through with the last-resort
response: an authorized and discriminatory suspension of tari¤ concessions. In
practice, the number of authorized retaliations has been small, though this num-
ber has grown in the WTO era. As Rhodes (1993, p. 109) observes, however, the
threat of authorized retaliation is often the catalyst for a resolution of the dispute
in the earlier stages.
    It is notable that, while authorized retaliation in the context of dispute resolu-
tion is allowed to be discriminatory, with some possible exceptions that I describe
in Staiger (2021) it is nevertheless limited to the suspension or withdrawal of con-
cessions of a substantially equivalent nature. One might have thought that in the
context of an erupting trade war the GATT/WTO would authorize and coordi-
nate maximal retaliation against a member government found to be in violation
of the rules by the GATT/WTO'       s own dispute settlement body. But in fact, as
the early report of the United States International Chamber of Commerce from
which I quoted in chapter 1 observed, the GATT dispute settlement procedures
keep a lid on permissible retaliation levels, and this is how the GATT/WTO dis-
pute settlement system works to avoid a trade war. This point was re          ected in
a statement made by one of the drafters of the original GATT Articles governing
retaliation in the context of dispute settlement, as found in Petersmann (1997,
pp. 82-83):
          "The drafting history of Article XXIII:2 con...rms that it was designed
      to limit the customary law right of unilateral reprisals, whose exercise had
      contributed so much to the `  law of the jungle' in international economic
      a¤airs during the 1930's, and to introduce, as stated by one of the drafters,

                                           38
      `a new principle in international economic relations. We have asked the
      nations of the world to confer upon an international organization the right
      to limit their power to retaliate. We have sought to tame retaliation, to
      discipline it, to keep it within bounds. By subjecting it to the restraints of
      international control, we have endeavored to check its spread and growth,
      to convert it from a weapon of economic warfare to an instrument of inter-
      national order.' "

Indeed, Schwartz and Sykes (2002) argue that the major innovation in the dispute
settlement procedures of the WTO relative to GATT was the addition of a mech-
anism for arbitrating the magnitude of authorized retaliation so that an e¤ective
lid on retaliation could be maintained.
    Finally, it is often observed that, along with MFN, reciprocity is a pillar of the
GATT/WTO architecture. In the GATT/WTO, the principle of reciprocity refers
to the ideal of mutual changes in trade policy which bring about changes in the
volume of each country'    s imports that are of equal value to changes in the volume
of its exports. The preceding discussion contains two instances in which the
notion of reciprocity arises. First, as I have observed, when governments negotiate
in GATT/WTO rounds, they do so with the stated goal of obtaining mutually
advantageous arrangements through reciprocal reductions in tari¤ bindings: in
this context, it is often observed that governments approach negotiations seeking
a "balance of concessions,"whereby the market access value of the tari¤ cut o¤ered
by one government is balanced against an "equivalent"concession from its trading
partner. This ...rst instance of reciprocity therefore refers to changes in tari¤s
in a liberalizing direction. Second, when a government seeks to renegotiate its
tari¤ commitments and modi...es or withdraws a previous concession as an original
action, and more generally whenever a government takes an action which nulli...es
or impairs the bene...ts expected under the agreement by another government,
GATT/WTO rules permit substantially a¤ected trading partners to retaliate in
a reciprocal manner, by withdrawing "substantially equivalent concessions."This
second instance of reciprocity refers to changes in tari¤s in an upward direction.
    The balance achieved through reciprocity in tari¤ negotiations and the role
of retaliation in preserving this balance is nicely summarized in a remark by a
second drafter of the GATT Articles governing retaliation as quoted in Jackson
(1969, pp. 170-71):

      "What we have really provided, in the last analysis, is not that retaliation
      shall be invited or sanctions invoked, but that a balance of interests once

                                           39
      established, shall be maintained."

And the unique role of retaliation in the GATT legal system as a means of pre-
serving reciprocity is pointed out by Dam (1970, pp. 80-81):

          "The best guarantee that a commitment of any kind will be kept (par-
      ticularly in an international setting where courts are of limited importance
      and, even more important, marshals and jails are nonexistent) is that the
      parties continue to view adherence to their agreement as in their mutual
      interest...
          "Thus, the GATT system, unlike most legal systems,..., is not designed
      to exclude self-help in the form of retaliation. Rather, retaliation, subjected
      to established procedures and kept within prescribed bounds, is made the
      heart of the GATT system."

2.2. The purpose of trade agreements8
I now present the outlines of a basic modeling framework that will provide my
foundation for an economic interpretation of GATT'   s design features, its successes,
and ultimately its shortcomings. In this section I develop the model to answer
one simple but fundamental question: What problems would governments want
a trade agreement to help them solve? The answer to this question clari...es the
purpose of a trade agreement, and can help guide its design to serve that purpose.
    To provide an answer, I will abstract from possible domestic commitment
problems that a government might face and which could lead to domestic ine¢ -
ciencies in its unilaterally chosen policies, and which it might seek to solve with
help from a trade agreement as an external commitment device.9 I will focus
instead on characterizing the possible international ine¢ ciencies that might arise
under unilaterally chosen policies and that a trade agreement could address. A
useful starting point for this purpose is the standard 2-country 2-good general
equilibrium model of trade familiar from any undergraduate international trade
course.
  8
    The material in this section builds from Chapter 2 of Bagwell and Staiger (2002).
  9
    On the possibility that trade agreements might help solve the domestic commitment prob-
lems of its member governments, see the literature reviewed in Bagwell and Staiger (2002, pp
32-34).




                                            40
The general equilibrium trade model The standard general equilibrium
model of trade has two countries, home (no *) and foreign (*), who trade two
goods which are normal goods in consumption and produced in perfectly compet-
itive markets under conditions of increasing opportunity costs. I denote by x the
natural import good of the home country, and by y the natural import good of
the foreign country, and de...ne p px =py and p         px =py to be respectively the
local relative price in the home and foreign market. With the home-country
import tari¤ and        the foreign-country import tari¤ each expressed in ad val-
orem terms and assumed to be set at non-prohibitive levels, it then follows that
p = (1 + )pw p( ; pw ) and p = pw =(1 + ) p ( ; pw ), where pw px =py is
the "world"(i.e., untaxed) relative price. The foreign terms of trade is then given
by pw while the home terms of trade is given by (1=pw ). I am assuming for now
that governments possess tari¤s as their only tax/subsidy instrument. This en-
sures that both producers and consumers face the same local relative price in the
market within which they reside. In later chapters I will introduce into the model
a richer array of government policies which include the possibility of regulatory
standards as well as production and/or consumption taxes/subsidies, and in the
presence of the additional tax/subsidy policies consumers and producers residing
in the same market may face di¤erent local prices.
     Production possibilities in each country are de...ned by a production possibili-
ties frontier, which with Q denoting production I represent by the decreasing and
concave function Qy (Qx ) in the home country and Qy (Qx ) in the foreign country
de...ned over the feasible values of production of x in each country. Production
in a country occurs at the point on the production possibilities frontier where
the marginal rate of transformation between x and y is equal to the local rela-
tive price, allowing home and foreign production functions to be represented as
Qi = Qi (p) and Qi = Qi (p ) for i = fx; y g. Consumption depends on both the
local relative price ­ which de...nes the trade-o¤ faced by consumers and, in de-
termining the point on the production possibilities frontier at which the economy
operates, also implies the level and distribution of factor income in the economy
measured at local prices ­ and on tari¤ revenue, which is distributed lump-sum
back to consumers in the country where it is collected. I denote by R the tari¤
revenue collected in the home country, and by R the tari¤ revenue collected in
the foreign country, each measured in units of the country'    s export good at local
prices. National consumption in the home and foreign country can then be writ-
ten as Di = Di (p; R) and Di = Di (p ; R ) for i = fx; y g, where tari¤ revenue
is de...ned implicitly by R = [Dx (p; R) Qx (p)][p pw ] or R = R(p; pw ) for the


                                         41
home country and by R = [Dy (p ; R ) Qy (p )][1=p           1=pw ] or R = R (p ; pw )
for the foreign country, and where each country'    s tari¤ revenue is an increasing
function of its terms of trade under the normal-goods assumption. This allows
national consumption in each country to be written as Ci (p; pw ) Di (p; R(p; pw ))
and Ci (p ; pw ) Di (p ; R (p ; pw )) for i = fx; y g, with Ci decreasing in pw and
Ci increasing in pw .
    To express the trade balance and equilibrium conditions of the model, I de...ne
home-country imports of x and exports of y by Mx (p; pw ) Cx (p; pw ) Qx (p) and
Ey (p; pw ) Qy (p) Cy (p; pw ), respectively. Similarly, foreign-country imports of y
and exports of x are de...ned by My (p ; pw ) Cy (p ; pw ) Qy (p ) and Ex (p ; pw )
Qx (p ) Cx (p ; pw ), respectively. For any world price, home and foreign national
budget constraints imply the balanced trade conditions

                     pw Mx (p( ; pw ); pw ) = Ey (p( ; pw ); pw ); and                       (2.1)

                      My (p ( ; pw ); pw ) = pw Ex (p ( ; pw ); pw );                        (2.2)
where I now make explicit the dependence of the local price on the tari¤ and the
world price. The equilibrium world price, p ew ( ; ), is then determined by the
requirement of market-clearing for good y :

                                 ew ); p
                        Ey (p( ; p     ew ) = My (p ( ; p
                                                        ew ); p
                                                              ew );                          (2.3)
with market clearing for good x implied by (2.1), (2.2) and (2.3).
    Thus, given any pair of tari¤s, the equilibrium world price is determined by
(2.3), and the equilibrium world price and the given tari¤s then determine in turn
the local prices and thereby the production, consumption, import, export and
tari¤ revenue levels. I focus on the standard case and therefore assume that the
Lerner and Metzler paradoxes are ruled out, so that10

  ew ( ;
 @p        )          ew ( ;
                     @p         )               ew ( ;
                                          dp( ; p        ))                ew ( ;
                                                                    dp ( ; p        ))
               <0<                  and                       >0>                        :
    @                   @                        d                        d
                                                                                    (2.4)
For future reference, I note that the ...rst set of inequalities in (2.4) implies that, if
the home tari¤ were reduced by a small amount, there exists a small reduction
in the foreign tari¤ that would hold the equilibrium world price p         ew constant.
  10
    Bagwell and Staiger (2016, pp 499-501) consider the implications for the purpose of trade
agreements when the Metzler and/or Lerner paradoxical cases arise.


                                               42
Government objectives I now turn to the speci...cation of government objec-
tives. The trade policy objectives of real-world governments are diverse, and it
is important to allow for this diversity when considering the purpose of a trade
agreement, lest the purpose ascribed to the agreement is unduly limited by the
trade policy objectives ascribed to governments. Even in the simple model of a
world economy presented here, there are many possible motives for government
trade policy intervention that could be entertained.
    For example, a government might care only about the level of national con-
sumption and hence the level of real national income when choosing its tari¤s,
either because it is unconcerned about the distribution of income and consump-
tion among its citizens, or because it has lump-sum redistributive instruments to
handle these concerns. The preferences of such a government in the home country
could be represented in the model with the objective function G(Cx ; Cy ), with G
increasing in both arguments. Notice that, as Ci (p; pw ) is decreasing in pw for
i 2 fx; y g as indicated above, I can also write this objective function as

                           G(Cx (p; pw ); Cy (p; pw ))   W (p; pw )                      (2.5)

where W is decreasing in pw ; and similarly for the foreign government I can write

                        G (Cx (p ; pw ); Cy (p ; pw ))    W (p ; pw )                    (2.6)

where W is increasing in pw given that Ci (p ; pw ) is increasing in pw .
    But real-world governments often view tari¤s as a tool to address distributional
concerns.11 Why would these governments use tari¤s for this purpose, when it
is well-known that there are other policy interventions that are in principle bet-
ter suited for this task? One reason could be that in practice these governments
lack not only the policy ideal of lump-sum taxes, but also any of the other pol-
icy instruments that, if available, would typically dominate tari¤s as tools for
in  uencing the distribution of income and preserve the economist'   s case for free
trade; and in the context of this limited set of policy options, tari¤s might then
be the best available policy response to address these concerns.12 Or it could be
that, even though some of these policy instruments are technically available to
  11
     These concerns likely re ect a combination of a desire of governments to serve some notion
of social welfare, as in Corden' s (1974) "Conservative Social Welfare Function," and political
economy motives to redistribute to politically favored groups (as in for example Grossman and
Helpman, 1994).
  12
     There are a variety of reasons why as a practical matter such non-tari¤ instruments may
not be available to governments, including administrative costs and funding requirements that

                                              43
governments, the welfare of their citizens is determined by more than simply the
material standard of living that can be attained with a given level of consumption,
and depends as well on the manner in which the income to support this level of
consumption is attained, with the receipt of lump-sum transfers or direct subsidy
payments diminishing personal dignity in a way that earning income at market
prices ­even if not the prices that would prevail under free trade ­would not.
    In any event, the fact is that many governments use tari¤s to address distri-
butional concerns and more broadly as tools of industrial policy, and therefore
choose tari¤s to impact the sectoral pattern of production in their economies for
reasons that go beyond how that production translates into real national income
and thereby national consumption levels. In terms of the model, these govern-
ments would appear to have preferences over where on the production possibilities
frontier their economy operates, independently of the national consumption levels
that are attained. Such government preferences for the home country could be
represented in the model by the objective function G(Cx ; Cy ; Qx ; Qy (Qx )). The
distribution and level of factor income measured in local prices would be pinned
down for a given choice of Qx and therefore Qy (Qx ) on the production possibilities
frontier, and conditional on the aggregate level of national consumption Cx and Cy
the home government would then have its own preference ranking over the choice
of Qx and Qy (Qx ) as re   ected in the function G; and for given Qx and Qy (Qx )
and the factor incomes that are implied, it is again natural that G is increasing in
Cx and Cy , because when factor incomes are ...xed, increasing Cx and Cy amounts
to increases in tari¤ revenue according to the national budget constraint. Notice
again that I can write this objective function as

                G(Cx (p; pw ); Cy (p; pw ); Qx (p); Qy (Qx (p)))    W (p; pw )           (2.7)

where W is decreasing in pw . And similarly for the foreign government I can write

            G (Cx (p ; pw ); Cy (p ; pw ); Qx (p ); Qy (Qx (p )))    W (p ; pw )         (2.8)

where W is increasing in pw .
   More generally, a government' s preferences over the sectoral pattern of pro-
duction in its economy could arise for reasons of national security, or from the
when taken into account could make these instruments impractical or at least less attractive
than tari¤s. See also Rodrik (1987), Drazen and Limao (2008) and Limao and Tovar (2011) on
additional reasons why governments may choose to use tari¤s for purposes of redistribution. I
discuss the possible role of tari¤s as a tool of industrial policy more generally in chapter 5.


                                              44
societal bene...ts of maintaining a robust middle class with access to stable good-
paying jobs that are more prevalent in one sector than they are in another, or
from the desire to preserve employment in a region that is dependent on a par-
ticular sector, or from the avoidance of sector-speci...c negative externalities of
an "eyesore" variety. Any of these non-pecuniary features could be embedded in
the model without changing the formal structure I have outlined above, as long
as they do not invalidate the competitive equilibrium conditions that the model
assumes or lead to transborder non-pecuniary externalities. And for each of these
cases I can once again write the associated home-government objective function
as in (2.7) with W decreasing in pw , and similarly I can again write the associated
foreign-government objective function as in (2.8) with W increasing in pw .
    Evidently, in all of the cases I have described, government preferences can be
represented in the model with the home-country and foreign-country objective
functions expressed in the form W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw ) respectively, where W is
decreasing in pw and W is increasing in pw , and where the di¤erence across these
various government objectives translates into di¤erences in how W varies with p
and how W varies with p .13 To capture all of these possibilities in a uni...ed
framework, I will therefore follow Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) and represent
the trade policy objectives of the home and foreign government with the general
functions W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw ), with the only structure placed on W and W
that, holding its local price ...xed, each government is assumed to achieve higher
welfare when its terms of trade improve:14

                                 ew )
                          @W (p; p                    ew )
                                              @W (p ; p
                                      < 0 and              > 0:                              (2.9)
                            @pew                  ew
                                                 @p

The purpose of a trade agreement I now turn to the central question of this
chapter: What problems would governments want a trade agreement to help them
solve? In the absence of a trade agreement, I assume that each government would
set its trade policy to maximize its objective function taking as given the tari¤
choice of its trading partner, yielding the home and foreign reaction functions
  13
     See also Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002 pp. 18-21) for an inventory of the formal approaches
to modeling trade policy determination in the economics literature that are captured by this
structure.
  14
     See Bagwell and Staiger (2002, pp 19-20) for a description of the change in the home
and foreign tari¤ that would increase p     ew while maintaining ...xed an economy'  s local price.
Throughout, I also impose standard regularity conditions, so that all second-order conditions
are globally satis...ed and all partial derivatives of W and W are ...nite.


                                                45
de...ned implicitly by the respective ...rst-order conditions

                                                  dp        ew
                                                           @p
                 Home Reaction F uncion : Wp         + Wpw     =0               (2.10)
                                                  d        @
                                                dp          @p ew
              F oreign Reaction F uncion : Wp        + Wpw        = 0;        (2.11)
                                                d            @
where subscripts denote partial derivatives. The joint solution to (2.10) and (2.11)
de...nes the noncooperative (Nash) tari¤ pair ( N ; N ). Notice that under (2.4)
and (2.9), the home-country reaction function (2.10) implies Wp < 0 while the
foreign-country reaction function (2.11) implies Wp > 0. I will return to this
feature of noncooperative tari¤s below.
     Under a trade agreement, by contrast, I assume that the two governments
negotiate to a position on the e¢ ciency frontier, where the e¢ ciency frontier is
de...ned by

                                            ew ); p
                                max W (p( ; p     ew )                          (2.12)
                                  ;

                                         ew ); p
                           s:t: W (p ( ; p     ew )      W ;

with W denoting any feasible level of foreign welfare. The e¢ ciency frontier is
characterized by solving (2.12) for each value of W , and it traces out the locus
of Pareto e¢ cient tari¤ pairs ( E ; E ). The associated ...rst-order conditions are
given by
                  dp          ew
                             @p             @p               ew
                                                            @p
               Wp     + Wp w     +       Wp      + Wpw            =0          (2.13)
                  d          @              @pw             @
                     @p         @pew             dp       @pew
                Wp       + Wp w      +      Wp      + Wpw      = 0;             (2.14)
                     @pw        @                d        @
where is the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint in (2.12). Solving (2.13) for
  and substituting the result into (2.14), together with the price de...nitions, yields
the condition that de...nes the locus of e¢ cient tari¤s:
                        2h                   i h                       i3
                               dp         ew
                                         @p           dp            ew
                                                                   @p
                @pew       W  pd  + W  w
                                      p @         W p d      + W w
                                                                p @
   [ Wp + Wpw ]         4                                  w
                                                                        5 = 0: (2.15)
                @                      1               @ e
                                                         p
                                         Wp + Wpw @

   A familiar special case of the e¢ ciency locus de...ned by (2.15) arises when
governments care only about the level of national consumption and hence the

                                          46
level of real national income when choosing their tari¤s. In this case, as I have
noted above, we then have that the home and foreign welfare functions W (p; pw )
and W (p ; pw ) can be written in the particular form given in (2.5) and (2.6),
respectively, and it is direct to show that (2.15) then simpli...es to the Mayer
(1981) locus of e¢ cient tari¤s de...ned by (1 + ) = 1=(1 + ). The Mayer locus
includes the point of reciprocal free trade = 0 = , but it also includes a
locus of other e¢ cient pairs of tari¤s in which an import tari¤ in one country is
exactly o¤set by an import subsidy of the same magnitude in the other country.
To understand the conditions for e¢ ciency along the Mayer locus, notice that at
any point on the locus we have
                                              1
                            ew ( ;
                  p = (1 + )p         )=              ew ( ;
                                                      p        )=p :
                                           (1 +   )

Hence, along the Mayer locus, tari¤s are adjusted so as to maintain equality in
relative local prices between the home and foreign countries, with di¤erent tari¤
pairs simply resulting in di¤erent world prices and therefore di¤erent distributions
of income across the trading partners through shifts in the (positive or negative)
tari¤ revenue collected by each country. When W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw ) are not
assumed to conform to the particular structure in (2.5) and (2.6), (2.15) still
determines the e¢ cient relationship between home and foreign tari¤s, but it need
not be the case that this relationship equates relative local prices across trading
partners, and it need not be the case that this relationship is satis...ed by reciprocal
free trade.
    Continuing now with the general government preferences W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw )
described above, a ...rst question is whether the noncooperative tari¤ choices are
e¢ cient. If they are, then assuming that the two governments have entered into
negotiations voluntarily, there is nothing for a trade agreement to do since it can'   t
o¤er a Pareto improvement over the noncooperative outcome. Using (2.10) and
(2.11) together with (2.4) and (2.9) and the fact that the noncooperative tari¤s
imply Wp < 0 and Wp > 0, it is direct to con...rm by inspection that the ...rst-order
condition for e¢ ciency given in (2.15) is violated when evaluated at the noncoop-
erative tari¤ pair ( N ; N ) de...ned by (2.10) and (2.11), and more speci...cally the
left-hand side of (2.15) is strictly negative. This implies that, regardless of which
of the underlying motives for tari¤ intervention included in the general govern-
ment objective functions W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw ) is operative, noncooperative
tari¤s are too high relative to the e¢ ciency locus, and governments can look to a


                                         47
trade agreement to help them lower tari¤s to e¢ cient levels.15 Clearly this case
for tari¤ liberalization in a trade agreement has nothing to do with the econo-
mist'  s case for free trade, since it arises regardless of the underlying motives for
trade protection captured in the general government objective functions W (p; pw )
and W (p ; pw ), and as discussed above many of those motives would violate the
assumptions that underlie the case for free trade as an e¢ cient outcome.
     We may now ask: Why are noncooperative tari¤s ine¢ ciently high? If we can
identify the reason, then we can say that addressing this reason is the problem
that governments want a trade agreement to help them solve. We can say this
because by solving this problem, a trade agreement would bring countries to the
e¢ ciency frontier, and at that point there is no possibility of further Pareto gains
for the governments.
     To proceed formally, we need to characterize the di¤erence between the Nash
...rst-order conditions in (2.10) and (2.11) and the ...rst-order conditions for e¢ -
ciency given in (2.15). To aid in this characterization, it is useful to pick a speci...c
point on the e¢ ciency locus, and compare the conditions that de...ne that pair of
e¢ cient tari¤s to the conditions that de...ne the pair of Nash tari¤s.
     A point on the e¢ ciency locus that is particularly illuminating for this purpose
is the point that Bagwell and Staiger (1999) call the "political optimum,"de...ned
as the tari¤ pair ( P O ; P O ) that satis...es
                                                        dp
                  Home P olitical Optimum : Wp             = 0 , Wp = 0                  (2.16)
                                                        d

                                                 dp
               F oreign P olitical Optimum : Wp      = 0 , Wp = 0;          (2.17)
                                                 d
where the second equality in (2.16) and in (2.17) follows from the second set of
inequalities in (2.4). In the special case where governments care only about the
level of national consumption and hence the level of real national income when
choosing their tari¤s, and where the government objectives therefore take the
particular form in (2.5) and (2.6), the politically optimal tari¤s correspond to
reciprocal free trade, a point on the Mayer locus. That politically optimal tari¤s
are e¢ cient as well under the general government objective functions W (p; pw )
  15
    In particular, the fact that the left-hand side of (2.15) is strictly negative when evaluated
at the noncooperative tari¤ pair ( N ; N ) means that N is too high relative to the level of
that would be e¢ cient in combination with N , and analogously N is too high relative to the
level of that would be e¢ cient in combination with N . It is in this sense that noncooperative
tari¤s ( N ; N ) are too high relative to the e¢ ciency locus.

                                               48
and W (p ; pw ) described above can be immediately con...rmed using (2.16) and
(2.17) by noting that, when evaluated at the tari¤ pair ( P O ; P O ), the condition
for e¢ ciency (2.15) is satis...ed:

                    2h                            i        h                          i3
                            dp             @pew                  dp              ew
               @pew 4    Wp d    +W   pw                    Wp         +   Wpw @ p
                                                                                                w
                                                                                                e            ew
[ Wp + Wpw ]
                                            @                    d             @
                                                                                      5 = Wpw @ p   Wp w
                                                                                                           @p
                                                                                                                = 0:
               @                       1                          ew
                                                                 @p                           @            @
                                           Wp + Wpw               @


    But comparing (2.16) and (2.17) to (2.10) and (2.11), it is now also apparent
that the noncooperative tari¤s fail to reach the political optimum due to the
                                    ew
presence of a single term, Wpw @@p     , in the home-country reaction curve and a single
              ew
             @p
term, Wpw @ , in the foreign country reaction curve. These terms represent the
incentive each country has when choosing its tari¤ noncooperatively to manipulate
the terms of trade in its favor, and thereby to shift a portion of the costs of its
tari¤ intervention onto its trading partner.
    For the home government, this term is the product of two negative terms:
             ew
the term @@p    , which is strictly negative as long as the home country is large and
therefore has market power on world markets; and the term Wpw , which is also
negative and re     ects the negative income e¤ect of a terms-of-trade deterioration
holding local prices in the home economy ...xed. And as this product is itself
positive, its presence in (2.10) drives the home noncooperative tari¤ choice higher
than the tari¤ that would imply Wp = 0, ensuring that at the noncooperative
tari¤ we in fact have Wp < 0 as I have observed.
    For the foreign government, this term is the product of two positive terms:
             ew
the term @ @
            p
                , which is strictly positive as long as the foreign country is large and
therefore has market power on world markets; and the term Wpw , which is also
positive and re    ects the positive income e¤ect of a terms-of-trade improvement
holding local prices in the foreign economy ...xed. And as this product is itself also
positive, its presence in (2.11) drives the foreign noncooperative tari¤ choice higher
than the tari¤ that would imply Wp = 0, ensuring that at the noncooperative
tari¤ we in fact have Wp > 0 as I have observed.
    The fact that these terms lead the home and foreign government to choose
tari¤s in the noncooperative equilibrium that imply Wp < 0 and Wp > 0 is also
revealing. If each government were o¤ered the opportunity to alter its tari¤ from
the noncooperative level without impacting its terms of trade, each government
would choose to cut its tari¤ from the noncooperative level, as the home tari¤
cut would decrease the local relative price p in the home economy according to

                                                      49
the second inequality in (2.4), leading to a rise in home welfare in the amount
                 @p
   W = Wp [ @       ] > 0; and the foreign tari¤ cut would increase the local relative
price p in the foreign economy according to the second inequality in (2.4), leading
                                                             @p
to a rise in foreign welfare in the amount W = Wp [ @           ] > 0. Viewed in this
light, it is then clear that it is the ability of each government to shift some of
the costs of its tari¤ onto its trading partner through terms-of-trade movements
that drives each government to choose the overly high tari¤s that obtain in the
noncooperative equilibrium.16
     The upshot is that, regardless of which of the underlying motives for tari¤
intervention included in the general government objective functions W (p; pw ) and
W (p ; pw ) is operative, the purpose of a trade agreement is the same: to elim-
inate the unilateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their terms
of trade, and thereby help governments escape from a terms-of-trade driven pris-
oner' s dilemma.
     Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) make this same point, but from the other di-
rection. They observe that the Nash ...rst-order conditions (2.10) and (2.11) would
be converted to the conditions (2.16) and (2.17) if the terms-of-trade manipulation
              ew              ew
terms Wpw @@p     and Wpw @ @
                             p
                                 were dropped from (2.10) and (2.11) respectively; and
they demonstrate that the conditions (2.16) and (2.17) de...ne a point on the e¢ -
ciency frontier, which they refer to as the political optimum. They then observe
that the politically optimal tari¤s can be interpreted as the tari¤s that would
arise under unilateral choices in a hypothetical world in which governments are
not motivated by the terms-of-trade implications of their trade policy choices, in
the sense that the home government acted as if Wpw 0 and the foreign govern-
ment acted as if Wpw 0. And by showing that the tari¤s selected unilaterally by
governments with these hypothetical preferences would satisfy (2.16) and (2.17)
and thus be e¢ cient, where the evaluation of e¢ ciency is undertaken with respect
to the actual government preferences, they conclude that when governments have
objectives that can be represented by the general form W (p; pw ) and W (p ; pw )
subject to (2.9), the only rationale for a trade agreement is to eliminate the uni-
lateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their terms of trade.
     Whether the politically optimal tari¤s are seen as a particular point on the
e¢ ciency frontier that can be usefully compared to the ...rst-order conditions that
de...ne the noncooperative tari¤s as I have emphasized here, or rather are seen
as a useful hypothetical thought experiment for noncooperative tari¤ choices as
  16
    See Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002 chapter 4) for a development of this point from the
perspective of GATT's reciprocity rule.


                                            50
in the original Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) presentation, is immaterial. As
long as politically optimal tari¤s as de...ned by (2.16) and (2.17) are e¢ cient
in a given environment, we can conclude from the Nash ...rst-order conditions
(2.10) and (2.11) that the purpose of a trade agreement in that environment is
to eliminate the unilateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their
terms of trade.17

Positive, but also normative? Now is a good time to pause and consider a
question that has been lurking behind the approach that I have adopted above for
identifying the purpose of a trade agreement. I have taken as given the sovereign
right of each national government to de...ne its own policy preferences. I have
then sought to characterize the task that a trade agreement must accomplish if
it is to eliminate the international ine¢ ciencies associated with unilateral policy
choices as judged by the preferences of the member governments. I have called this
task the purpose of a trade agreement. As the GATT/WTO is a member-driven
organization, and as the members are national governments, this seems to be a
reasonable approach from which to draw positive conclusions about the purpose
of a trade agreement. But can this approach also be seen as having normative
implications? Is it enough for the world trading system to serve the interests of its
member governments ? Can a case for the legitimacy of the GATT/WTO be built
around a demonstration that it is well-designed to serve these interests, where by
legitimacy I have in mind a "right to rule"concept along the lines articulated by
Buchanan and Keohane (2006)?18
    If national governments were always and everywhere the faithful servants of
their citizens, where the desires of their citizens were aggregated into policy di-
rectives for the governments through political processes that their citizens saw as
legitimate, then the answers to these questions would clearly be "Yes."But most
real-world governments operate far from this ideal. And so, in the real world, the
answers are not so clear.
  17
     Notice that I have said nothing about whether a trade agreement would actually implement
the political optimum, or rather some other e¢ cient pair of tari¤s. For my purposes here, the
point is simply that the politically optimal tari¤s are useful as a comparator to noncooperative
tari¤s when evaluating the purpose of a trade agreement.
  18
     Buchanan and Keohane (2006, p. 411) de...ne legitimacy in the case of global governance
institutions as "the right to rule, understood to mean both that institutional agents are morally
justi...ed in making rules and attempting to secure compliance with them and that people subject
to those rules have moral, content-independent reasons to follow them and/or to not interfere
with others'compliance with them." See also Franck (1990).


                                               51
    Looking to the international political economy literature for guidance on these
questions provides a mixed view. On the speci...c question of what determines the
legitimacy of an international institution, Peter (2017) notes that there are two
approaches in the literature, a "state-centered"approach and a "people-centered"
approach. Beitz (1979, p. 408) describes the state-centered approach as one in
which "international society is understood as domestic society writ large, with
states playing the roles occupied by persons in domestic society." In the people-
centered approach, it is instead the welfare of individuals that is taken as the basis
for the determination of an international institution'   s legitimacy (see Buchanan,
2003). If the purpose of a trade agreement that I have identi...ed above can be
interpreted as having normative relevance, then establishing a claim of legitimacy
for the GATT/WTO based on a demonstration that it is well-designed to serve this
purpose falls squarely on the state-centered approach: under this interpretation,
like consumers in a domestic context the preferences of national governments are
taken as sovereign in the international context, and the legitimacy of a trade
agreement is judged on its ability to deliver e¢ cient outcomes where e¢ ciency is
assessed using the preferences of the member governments.19 This interpretation
seems tenuous, but what are the viable alternatives?
    One possibility would be to dispense completely with the nation-state as the
unit of observation for normative purposes, and to evaluate the legitimacy of the
GATT/WTO based on how close the agreement comes to maximizing a global
social welfare function de...ned over the welfare of individuals. This would amount
to a people-centered approach. For example, the GATT/WTO'             s design might
be judged with a criterion based on a utilitarian ideal, where global welfare is
measured by the sum of the utilities across all individuals in the world and where
each individual' s utility enters that sum with an equal weight.20 Or a Rawl-
sian criterion, under which global social welfare is only as high as the utility of
the least-well-o¤ individual on the planet, might be used to judge the design of
the agreement. As a general matter it is of course important to know how an
agreement performs according to these normative benchmarks. But as a means
to evaluate the legitimacy of the GATT/WTO these benchmarks seem unwork-
  19
     To be clear, while this approach can be described as state-centered, it is otherwise quite
distinct from the approaches to evaluating legitimacy featured in the international political
economy literature and reviewed in Peter (2017), as it uses a di¤erent set of (state-centered)
criteria.
  20
     See Maggi and Ossa (2020) for an approach to evaluating the normative properties of a
trade agreement along these lines.



                                              52
able, because to proceed with such an evaluation would require that a consensus
emerge regarding the correct normative benchmark, and it seems unlikely that
such a consensus could ever exist.21
    Another possibility for assessing legitimacy would be a hybrid approach some-
where in between the state-centered and people-centered approaches, maintain-
ing the nation-state as the unit of observation but including more interests from
each nation in the global social welfare function than simply the interests of each
member government. Such an approach might, for example, mirror the "tripar-
tite"structure of national representation in the International Labor Organization
(ILO), where each member country is represented by three national interests:
its government, its workers, and its employers. The analog for assessing the le-
gitimacy of the GATT/WTO might be to include in the global social welfare
function used in that assessment representatives of government, exporter and im-
porter interests in each member country. But again a consensus on the appropriate
representation would be needed to make this approach workable.22
    In light of these consideration, it is useful to think of the question of the
legitimacy of the world trading system as applying at two levels. First, at the
international level there is the question whether the GATT/WTO can be seen
as legitimate from the perspective of the member governments. And second, at
the national level there is the question whether the member governments can be
seen as legitimate from the perspective of their own citizens. If both questions
can be answered in the a¢ rmative, then the GATT/WTO can be said to be
legitimate from both the state-centered and the people-centered perspective. But
as trade agreements are fundamentally government-to-government contracts, the
key question of legitimacy for the GATT/WTO as an international institution ­
and the only question whose answer it has any meaningful control over ­relates
  21
      Partly the di¢ culty in reaching a consensus on this matter rests with the simple fact that
it involves value judgements over which there will always be disagreements. And partly the
di¢ culty can be traced to disagreements over factual matters, such as the importance of market
failures and the array of policy instruments that real-world governments have at their disposal
to pursue their objectives.
   22
      There is also another issue raised by moving away from a state-centered approach to evalu-
ating the legitimacy of a trade agreement: if interests beyond those of the member governments
are to be represented in a trade agreement, how are commitments that serve those interests but
not also the interests of the member governments to be enforced? This issue seems germane for
the GATT/WTO, where enforcement ultimately comes down to tari¤ retaliation and govern-
ments hold the levers of this enforcement mechanism, and it may explain why under the ILO'      s
tripartite representation (unique among United Nations agencies) no member state is under any
obligation to ratify any ILO convention or recommendation (see Johnston, 1970, p. 90).


                                               53
to the ...rst question, not the second.
     My approach is to therefore focus on the answer to the ...rst question ­Does
the GATT/WTO have the moral authority to make rules and attempt to secure
compliance with those rules from its member governments, or not? ­and to ac-
knowledge that an answer to this question can provide only part of the answer
to the larger question of the legitimacy of the world trading system. But it is an
important part of the answer. If this ...rst question cannot be answered in the af-
...rmative, then it is hard to see how the GATT/WTO could remain viable, since it
would presumably lack support from the governments who are its members. And
if this question can be answered in the a¢ rmative, then the central international
task in designing a constitution for the world trading system has been accom-
plished with the design of the GATT/WTO. And with this state-centered task
accomplished, attention could then be focused on the task of establishing that
each national government satis...es agreed criteria for legitimacy, thereby ensuring
that the world trading system so designed could be said to be legitimate from a
people-centered perspective as well.

Generality Thus far I have emphasized the wide array of government objectives
that are consistent with the conclusion that the purpose of a trade agreement is
to eliminate the unilateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their
terms of trade. But I have maintained a very particular and simple economic en-
vironment within which to derive these results. How dependent is this conclusion
on the economic environment within which governments operate? An immediate
implication of the discussion above is that this conclusion does depend on gov-
ernments having a complete set of trade taxes at their disposal. This can be seen
from the de...nition of politically optimal tari¤s, which in general requires the use
of both and        to satisfy the two conditions in (2.16) and (2.17).23 As has been
emphasized by Ossa (2011) and Bagwell and Staiger (2012a, 2015, 2016), when
limitations are placed on the trade taxes that governments possess, di¤erent roles
  23
      An exception to this is when the government objective functions take the particular form in
(2.5) and (2.6) and the politically optimal tari¤s correspond to reciprocal free trade, a point on
the Mayer locus. In this case, if only one of the two governments had access to a tari¤, it could
still be concluded that the purpose of a trade agreement is to eliminate the unilateral incentive
that this government has to manipulate its terms of trade, because at the political optimum
neither government imposes a tari¤ so it is immaterial that one of them does not have access
to a tari¤. Also, to be clear, notice that for the arguments in the text to remain valid there is
no requirement that governments have a complete set of tax instruments, only that they have a
complete set of trade taxes.


                                               54
for a trade agreement can arise. That said, some of the most salient restrictions
on trade tax/subsidy instruments are associated with commitments made as a
result of trade agreements (e.g., to restrict the use of export subsidies), and it
is not clear that such restrictions should be taken as given when attempting to
identify the underlying purpose of trade agreements as is my intent here.
    Beyond the assumption that governments have a complete set of trade taxes,
however, the conclusion that the purpose of a trade agreement is to eliminate the
unilateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their terms of trade is
surprisingly robust to alternative economic environments. It holds in a many-
country version of the model I have outlined above provided that tari¤s are im-
posed on a nondiscriminatory (MFN) basis (see Bagwell and Staiger, 1999, 2002),
and it holds in partial equilibrium versions of these models (see Bagwell and
Staiger, 2001a). It holds in competitive environments for trade in goods or trade
in services when governments have access to regulatory standards and/or addi-
tional domestic tax/subsidy policies (see Bagwell and Staiger, 2001b, and Staiger
and Sykes, 2011, for trade in goods, and Staiger and Sykes, 2021, for trade in
services). And it holds in models of Cournot or monopolistic competition with
homogeneous ...rms (see Bagwell and Staiger, 2002 chapter 9, 2012a,b, 2015) and
in models of monopolistic competition with heterogeneous ...rms (see Bagwell and
Lee, 2020, Campolmi, Fadinger and Forlati, 2020, and Costinot, Rodriguez-Clare
and Werning, 2016, forthcoming). For this reason, it is useful to adopt a common
shorthand for referring to models that share this prediction about the purpose of
a trade agreement, and I will follow Bagwell and Staiger' s (2002) terminology and
sometimes make use of the phrase "terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements"as
a catchall for models of this kind.24
    This is not to say that preventing terms-of-trade manipulation is the only
possible purpose for a trade agreement. Indeed, as I noted at the outset of this
chapter, I am intentionally abstracting from the possibility that a trade agreement
could serve as a policy commitment device for its member governments when those
governments struggle to make policy commitments to their private sectors on their
own. And as I review in Staiger (2021), the arguments I have made here do not
extend to all economic environments; and as I alluded to in chapter 1, some of
the environments where these arguments do not extend may be more important
in the twenty-...rst century than they were in the twentieth century, raising the
possibility of an evolution of the purpose of trade agreements over time. But as
I have illustrated here, these arguments do apply in a remarkably broad set of
 24
      But see Grossman (2016) for a di¤erent perspective on this terminology.


                                               55
circumstances, suggesting that a trade agreement that is designed well to solve
the terms-of-trade manipulation problem will be a very useful trade agreement
to its member governments. From this perspective, it is therefore meaningful
when assessing the reasons for GATT'      s success and determining the basis for its
legitimacy to evaluate the degree to which its design features are well-equipped
to serve this function. It is to this evaluation that I now turn.


3. What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About?
In chapter 2 I presented formal arguments that point to the elimination of terms-
of-trade manipulation as the central purpose of a trade agreement, and I suggested
that this provides a natural dimension on which to evaluate the design features
of GATT: How well-designed is GATT to help its member governments solve the
terms-of-trade manipulation problem and thereby escape from a terms-of-trade
driven prisoner'  s dilemma? In this and the next chapter I evaluate GATT' s design
as it relates to tari¤ bargaining, the foundational activity in the GATT/WTO.25
After some preliminaries, I begin this evaluation by asking what negotiators ne-
gotiate about in the GATT/WTO. If there is no evidence that these negotiations
serve to remove the imprint of market power from unilateral tari¤ choices, then
there is little point in asking whether the design features of the GATT/WTO can
be interpreted as helping to serve this purpose.

3.1. Preliminaries
Three of the most basic features of GATT tari¤ negotiations raise questions about
the wisdom of GATT'    s design and the negotiating behavior it induces, and pose
an immediate challenge to the terms-of-trade theory if these features are to be
interpreted through the lens of that theory. Why do governments adopt a mer-
cantilist approach in GATT/WTO negotiations, viewing their own tari¤ cuts as
"concessions"to be granted only in return for foreign tari¤ cuts from their trading
partners? What accounts for the emphasis on market access that permeates the
language of GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations? And how can governments hope to
achieve meaningful bene...ts from GATT/WTO negotiations anyway, if their ne-
gotiations are focused narrowly on tari¤s to the exclusion of the myriad other gov-
  25
     In Staiger (2021, chapter 5) I review research that sheds further light on GATT's design as
it relates to tari¤ bargaining by evaluating the performance of tari¤ bargaining in the absence
of GATT rules.


                                              56
ernment interventions that can also have trade e¤ects? Since any model of trade
agreements that purports to capture the underlying logic of the GATT/WTO
must be able to account for these basic features of GATT tari¤ negotiations, I be-
gin this chapter by considering how these three questions can be answered within
the modeling framework of chapter 2.
    If we assume that tari¤ negotiations begin from the noncooperative tari¤
choices characterized by (2.10) and (2.11), the ...rst question has an immediate
answer: beginning from their tari¤ reaction curves, governments should view any
change in their own tari¤s as a concession, to be granted only in return for some-
thing that they would value from their negotiating partner; and as I have described
in chapter 2, from this starting point each government would indeed gain from at
least a small cut in its own tari¤, if its trading partner agreed to reciprocate with
a tari¤ cut of its own that was calibrated to preserve the terms of trade between
them (and recall from the ...rst inequality in (2.4) that it is indeed a downward
movement in the trading partner'    s tari¤ that would achieve this). Hence, while
the government behavior singled out by this ...rst question might seem surprising
and somehow mercantilist if one took the view that the logic of trade negotiations
should be based on the economist'     s case for free trade, from the perspective of
the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements embodied in the modeling frame-
work of chapter 2 this behavior is not surprising at all: there is no other way that
governments could behave.26
    The answers to the second and third questions are related to each other, and
more nuanced. A ...rst observation is that GATT tari¤ negotiations are indeed
considered negotiations over market access, with tari¤ commitments treated as
commitments to conditions of competition in the domestic market between domes-
tic producers and foreign suppliers.27 I have developed the modeling framework of
chapter 2 without reference to the phrase "market access restrictions,"making use
instead of the phrase "terms-of-trade improvement." But as Bagwell and Staiger
(2002, pp 28-30) have shown, a direct link between these two phrases is easily
forged: when the home government raises its import tari¤ and thereby shifts in
its import demand curve, the consequent "price e¤ect" (i.e., the home country'      s
  26
     Bagwell and Staiger (2002, pp 191-192) provide the proof in this setting that a trade agree-
ment must entail tari¤ cuts by each country if it is to improve upon the noncooperative welfare
levels for each country.
  27
     As a GATT/WTO legal matter, market access is de...ned by the competitive relationship
between imported and domestically produced products, and a negotiated tari¤ commitment is
treated as a commitment to a particular competitive relationship between imported and domestic
products and hence a market access commitment.


                                               57
terms-of-trade improvement) has a corresponding "volume e¤ect"(i.e., the foreign
country'  s reduction in access to the home market). Viewed from this perspective,
the terms-of-trade theory has no di¢ culty accounting for the fact that real-world
negotiators emphasize the market-access implications of trade policy.28
    To illustrate the point more formally, I follow Bagwell and Staiger (2002, pp
28-30) and, for a given world price pw and home tari¤ , de...ne the market ac-
cess that the home country a¤ords to the foreign country by the home-country
import demand function evaluated at that world price and home tari¤ level,
Mx (p( ; pw ); pw ); and similarly, given a world price pw and a foreign tari¤ ,
I de...ne the market access that the foreign country a¤ords to the home country
by My (p ( ; pw ); pw ). Let us now say that a government secures additional mar-
ket access from its trading partner through negotiations if the trading partner'   s
negotiated policy changes shift out its import demand curve for at least some
world price. According to this de...nition, if the home government were to fail
to secure additional market access as a result of the foreign government'  s agreed
policy changes, then the foreign import demand curve would shift in (weakly) at
                                                                             ew and
all world price levels and lead to a (weakly) higher equilibrium world price p
therefore a terms-of-trade loss (weakly) for the home country, assuming that the
Marshall-Lerner stability conditions are met. With the link between changes in
market access and changes in the terms of trade established, the ...ndings of the
terms-of-trade theory can be translated into the language of market access. For
instance, it may be con...rmed (see Bagwell and Staiger, 2001b) that the essential
ine¢ ciency arising in the noncooperative tari¤ choices characterized by (2.10) and
(2.11) can be described as one of insu¢ cient market access. Hence, the modeling
framework of chapter 2 provides a rationale for why governments would emphasize
the market-access implications of trade policy and seek to expand market access
in their tari¤ negotiations. This answers the second question posed above.
    In answer to the third question, a starting point is to observe that, while gov-
ernments do focus narrowly on tari¤s in their market access negotiations, it is not
true that this focus is to the exclusion of the myriad other government interven-
tions that can also have trade e¤ects through their impacts on the conditions of
competition. Indeed, it is the purpose of many of the GATT Articles which lay
down the code of conduct that I described in chapter 2 to ensure that non-tari¤
  28
     This emphasis can be seen, for example, in the following excerpt from a GATT dispute panel
report (as quoted in Petersmann, 1997, p. 168): "...the main value of a tari¤ concession is that
it provides assurance of better market access through improved price competition. Contracting
parties negotiate tari¤ concessions primarily to obtain that advantage."


                                              58
policy interventions do not unilaterally alter the market access implications of
a negotiated tari¤ commitment, and thereby to secure the property rights over
negotiated market access that a tari¤ commitment implies.29
    The real issue raised by this third question, then, is whether governments can
negotiate to the e¢ ciency frontier under the shallow approach to liberalization
that GATT embodies, whereby governments negotiate only over tari¤s and where
the tari¤ commitments they make translate into market access commitments as a
result of the accompanying GATT Articles. Is it possible to reach the e¢ ciency
frontier with respect to all government policies when governments negotiate di-
rectly only over tari¤s in this way? As I next demonstrate, the answer according
to the terms-of-trade theory is, at least in principle, "Yes."
    To this end, I now extend the modeling framework sketched out in chapter 2
to allow governments to also choose regulatory standards. To keep things simple,
I will focus on a production standard, such as a minimum legal working age or a
maximum legal emissions level per unit of output, which might be applied to a
particular sector or on an economy-wide basis, and which could potentially alter
the shape of the country'   s production possibilities frontier and hence, for given
local prices, its production choices. Below I sketch arguments that can be found
in more detail in Bagwell and Staiger (2001b).30
    Letting denote the standard in the home country and               the standard in
the foreign country, it is direct to show that introducing these standards into
the modeling framework of chapter 2 will result in two changes to the model.
First, the equilibrium world price determined by the market clearing condition
will now take the form p  ew = p ew ( ; ; ; ): that is, in addition to its tari¤, a
country' s standard will also impact the equilibrium world price through its impact
on the shape of the country'  s production possibilities frontier. And second, as each
government may have its own reasons to set its own standard, the home and foreign
government objectives are now represented respectively by W ( ; p( ; p    ew ); p
                                                                                ew ) and
  29
     For example, Petersmann (1997, p. 136) observes that "...the function of most GATT rules
(such as Articles I-III and XI) is to establish conditions of competition and to protect trading
opportunities...".
  30
     These arguments have been extended to the case of domestic production subsidies and to
the case of competition policy by Bagwell and Staiger (2006) and Bagwell and Staiger (2002,
chapter 9), respectively, and to the case of product standards and domestic production and
consumption taxes/subsidies by Staiger and Sykes (2011) for trade in goods and by Staiger and
Sykes (2021) for trade in services. I discuss environments where these arguments do not hold,
as pointed out by Antras and Staiger (2012a, 2012b) and Grossman, McCalman and Staiger
(2021), in chapters 11 and 12 respectively of Staiger (2021).


                                              59
          ew ); p
W ( ;p ( ;p     ew ) satisfying

                              ew )
                    @W ( ; p; p                       ew )
                                           @W ( ; p ; p
                                   < 0 and                 >0
                         ew
                        @p                      ew
                                               @p
but otherwise left unrestricted as before. Importantly, as the government objec-
tives re   ect, I am assuming the absence of cross-border non-pecuniary externali-
ties associated with standards choices, so that neither government cares directly
about the standard chosen by the other government, but only indirectly through
the possible trade e¤ects of that choice. I am therefore excluding the possibility
that the government of one country might care about how weak labor standards in
its trading partner would impact the welfare of the trading partner'   s work force,
but I am including the possibility that this government might care about the trade
e¤ects of the trading partner' s weak labor standards and be concerned that these
trade e¤ects could fuel "race-to-the-bottom"pressures which led to the adoption
of weak labor standards also in its own country.
    It is straightforward to show that (2.15) continues to provide the condition for
e¢ cient tari¤s in this extended setting. And when combined with this condition,
the ...rst-order conditions that the e¢ cient standards must satisfy can be written
in the following form:
                                       dp d
                              W + Wp          jdp
                                                ew =0 = 0                      (3.1)
                                       d d
                                       dp d
                           W    + Wp             jdp
                                                   ew =0 = 0:                     (3.2)
                                       d d
The e¢ ciency frontier is therefore attained when tari¤s satisfy (2.15) and stan-
dards satisfy (3.1) and (3.2). The interpretation of (3.1) and (3.2) is central to
understanding why a shallow approach to integration can work in this setting.
    Consider the ...rst-order condition for the e¢ cient choice of the home-country
standard . According to (3.1), should be chosen to maximize the welfare of
the home government when the home government also adjusts its tari¤ so as
to ensure that the equilibrium world price p    ew does not change. The reason this
standards choice is e¢ cient is that, provided that p    ew is not altered, the foreign
government is indi¤erent to both the level of and the level of that the home
government chooses, as can be con...rmed by inspection of the foreign govern-
ment' s welfare function W ( ; p ( ; p  ew ); p
                                              ew ); and so e¢ ciency demands that the
home government should also be indi¤erent to small changes in that, with the
accompanying changes in de...ned in (3.1), preserve p       ew . But recalling now the

                                          60
de...nition of market access introduced above, it is clear that the changes in and
   that preserve p  ew are simply those changes that hold ...xed the position of the
home import demand curve evaluated at the initial equilibrium world price p      ew ,
and hence amount to changes in and that preserve the market access evaluated
at the initial equilibrium world price p ew that the home government has granted
to the foreign government through their tari¤ negotiations.
     In this light, it can now be seen that a focus on tari¤ negotiations to achieve
e¢ cient levels of market access, in combination with a code of conduct spelled out
in a set of GATT Articles that ensure that non-tari¤ policy interventions cannot
unilaterally alter the market access implied of a tari¤ commitment, contains all
the ingredients to allow governments, at least in principle, to reach the e¢ ciency
frontier in their settings of both tari¤s and standards. In particular, as Bagwell
and Staiger (2001b) demonstrate, if governments were to negotiate over tari¤s
alone, and if they were then permitted to make unilateral standards choices while
also compelled by GATT'      s "market access preservation rules"to accompany these
standards choices with tari¤ adjustments that preserve the market access implied
by their negotiated tari¤ selections, then they would negotiate tari¤s that satisfy
(2.15) and make standards choices that satisfy (3.1) and (3.2). Evidently, with
these "shallow" negotiations the governments would reach the e¢ ciency frontier,
and the terms-of-trade theory thereby provides a strong foundation for a shallow
approach to negotiated trade liberalization. What is not provided by the argu-
ments I have reviewed here is a formal explanation for why governments would
prefer this method of liberalization to the alternative of deep integration where
the governments negotiate directly over all policies, both tari¤s and non-tari¤
instruments.31
     Notice also that the terms-of-trade theory provides an interpretation, with
a twist, of the common observation that GATT began with the "low hanging
fruit" of tari¤ liberalization and only later had to confront the more di¢ cult
task of dealing with behind-the-border measures. The twist is that, according
to the terms-of-trade theory, the fundamental problem for a trade agreement to
address has not changed; it is simply that as tari¤s were negotiated downward,
the pressure to distort behind-the-border policies for ine¢ cient terms-of-trade
  31
     In Staiger (2021, chapter 13) I consider the question of why governments might prefer shallow
over deep integration and suggest one possible answer. Also, while there is a basic a¢ nity
between the theoretical arguments I have presented here and the shallow approach to trade
liberalization embodied in GATT/WTO rules, see Bagwell and Staiger (2001b) for modi...cations
to GATT/WTO rules that would more closely align those rules with these theoretical arguments.



                                               61
manipulation reasons grew, and the initial GATT rules that were supposed to
ensure a code of conduct in the international-trade arena to prevent such behavior
proved inadequate for the task. The result has been a growing focus over time
on addressing the trade distorting aspects of non-tari¤ barriers. Importantly,
what is revealed under this interpretation is that there are two plausible ways to
respond to this challenge. One response is to give up on GATT'   s shallow approach
to integration and the rules applying to behind-the-border measures that were
meant to facilitate that approach, and to pursue instead deep integration. But
an alternative response, and one which as a matter of principle the terms-of-trade
theory puts on equal footing, is to maintain GATT'    s basic approach and work to
strengthen the rules that could facilitate shallow integration.
    Finally, it should be acknowledged that in the discussion above I have ab-
stracted from a number of challenges that a shallow approach to integration must
overcome in practice; and in reality the line between shallow and deep integration
is not as stark as the model above makes it out to be. At a more practical level,
therefore, the message of the terms-of-trade theory is not so much that no degree
of deep integration is necessary to reach the e¢ ciency frontier, but rather that
the market access orientation of the GATT/WTO can provide a potentially use-
ful guardrail to delineate the "depth"of integration that trade agreements should
be willing to contemplate in order to reach the e¢ ciency frontier: according to
the terms-of-trade theory, there is no reason for a trade agreement to go deeper
than what is required to ensure that property rights over negotiated market access
are reasonably secure. Such a guardrail can help governments avoid con      icts be-
tween globalization and national sovereignty that, according to the terms-of-trade
theory, would be unnecessary.
    This answers the third question posed above. With these most basic questions
addressed, I now turn to the central question of this chapter: What do trade
negotiators negotiate about?

3.2. Evidence from WTO accession negotiations
If the GATT/WTO is well-designed to help its member governments escape from
a terms-of-trade driven prisoner's dilemma, there should be evidence of this in the
pattern of tari¤ cuts that the member governments agree to in a GATT/WTO ne-
gotiation. Looking for such evidence would be simple if all governments sought to
maximize the real national income of their citizens with their tari¤ choices and ne-
gotiations were assumed to take governments to the political optimum: one might


                                        62
simply look to see how close governments got to reciprocal free trade as a result
of their negotiations. But when governments have diverse preferences over trade
policy, such as is re  ected in the objective functions that I have adopted in the
modeling framework of chapter 2, things are not as straightforward. According to
the terms-of-trade theory, if governments are able to negotiate to the political op-
timum, what should remain after the GATT/WTO negotiations are completed is
the portion of each government'   s noncooperative tari¤ choices that are not driven
by the international cost shifting that is associated with terms-of-trade manipu-
lation. The challenge in evaluating the performance of GATT/WTO negotiations
is then to disentangle these two components of noncooperative tari¤s, so that the
magnitude of the cost-shifting component re      ected in the noncooperative tari¤
levels can be compared to the magnitude of the negotiated tari¤ cuts.
    Of course, this all presupposes that governments would be caught in a terms-
of-trade driven prisoner' s dilemma in the absence of tari¤ negotiations, which in
turn requires that countries possess signi...cant and widespread market power in
world markets, and that the unilateral tari¤ choices of governments re       ect the
market power that they possess. Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) provided
the ...rst systematic evidence on these prior questions, and as I noted in chapter
1 they ...nd strong evidence that countries routinely have market power in their
import markets and use it in setting noncooperative trade policy.32 Here I focus
on the pattern of tari¤ liberalization in GATT/WTO negotiations. I describe
the ...ndings of Bagwell and Staiger (2011), who explore the degree to which the
observed tari¤ cuts in WTO accession negotiations conform with the tari¤ cuts
that, according to the terms-of-trade theory, would deliver governments to the
political optimum.33
    To identify the portion of a government'  s noncooperatively chosen tari¤ level
that is driven by international cost shifting, I now return to the expressions for
the noncooperative tari¤s and the politically optimal tari¤s presented in chapter
  32
     For a review of the broader empirical literature on these questions, see Bagwell, Bown and
Staiger (2016). Recently a number of papers have exploited the aggressive use of tari¤s by
the Trump Administration and the tari¤ responses of its trading partners to investigate how
local and world prices respond to the imposition of tari¤s (see, for example, Amiti, Redding
and Weinstein, 2019, Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy and Khandelwal, 2020, and Cavallo,
Gopinath, Neiman and Tang, forthcoming). I discuss the ...ndings of these papers in the context
of material presented in chapter 5 of Staiger (2021).
  33
     See Bagwell and Staiger (2016, pp 488-492) for a discussion of why the political optimum,
among all possible points on the e¢ ciency frontier, might be viewed as a natural focal outcome
of GATT/WTO negotiations.


                                              63
2. Focusing on the home government, the expression for the noncooperative tari¤
in (2.10) can be rewritten as

                                                           @pew =@
               Home Reaction F uncion : Wp =        Wp w             ;
                                                            dp=d

while recall that the politically optimal tari¤ for the home government is de...ned
in (2.16) by the condition

                       Home P olitical Optimum : Wp = 0:

I impose the assumption that Wpp < 0 holds globally over nonprohibitive tari¤s.
This condition must hold as long as W is globally concave over nonprohibitive
tari¤s even if the home country is small on world markets, so that there exists
a unique solution to the home government'     s unilateral welfare-maximizing tari¤
choice. And I assume for the moment that if the home government were to cut
its tari¤ from its reaction-curve level to its politically optimal level, the foreign
government would respond with a tari¤ cut that was calibrated to hold the equi-
librium world price pew constant. With these assumptions, I can then write the
di¤erence between the home government'    s noncooperative tari¤ and its politically
optimal tari¤ as
                        BR     PO                 @pew =@
                                  =H       Wp w               ;                 (3.3)
                                                   dp=d
where I now denote by BR the home government'         s "best­ response" tari¤ that
solves (2.10) for any foreign tari¤, where H (0) = 0 and H is a decreasing func-
tion, and where all the magnitudes on the right-hand side of (3.3) are evaluated
at the noncooperative tari¤ level BR . Finally, rearranging (3.3) delivers an ex-
pression for the home government'   s politically optimal tari¤, expressed in terms
of magnitudes evaluated at its noncooperative tari¤ level:

                       PO       BR               @pew =@
                            =        H     Wp w               :                (3.4)
                                                  dp=d
                                            h w i
                                               e =@
   In e¤ect, (3.4) points to the term Wpw @dp=dp
                                                       , evaluated at the home gov-
ernment's noncooperative tari¤ choice, as the determinant of the component of
the home government'  s noncooperative tari¤ that is attributable to terms-of-trade
manipulation and the international cost-shifting that it represents, and therefore
as the determinant of the magnitude of the tari¤ cut which according to (3.3)

                                         64
is required to move the home government from its noncooperative tari¤ choice
to its politically optimal level. This term, which is weakly negative under (2.4)
and (2.9), is composed of three sub-terms, each with a ready interpretation. The
home country'      s market power on world import markets is re         ected in @ p ew =@ ,
with (3.4) implying that P O = BR when the home country is small on world
markets and @ p    ew =@ = 0, and with P O falling further below BR as the market
power of the home country rises and @ p        ew =@ becomes increasingly negative. This
market power e¤ect is tempered by the magnitude of dp=d , which re                 ects the
                                                                                  PO
size of the domestic distortion introduced by the home tari¤ and keeps                closer
      BR
to        when this distortion, and hence dp=d , is higher. Finally, Wpw re             ects
the value that the home government places on a small improvement in its terms
of trade; with its local prices held ...xed when evaluating Wpw , this amounts to
the degree to which the home government values the extra tari¤ revenue that
is generated by the fall in pw and the implied rise in = pp          w     1, all evaluated
      BR                         BR
at       . Notice that, as            approaches the prohibitive level and home imports
shrink toward zero, Wpw approaches zero (because the import volume on which
tari¤ revenue is earned approaches zero) and P O approaches BR from below.
     In order to take relationships like (3.3) and (3.4) to the data, Bagwell and
Staiger work with a partial equilibrium many-good many-country version of the
model of chapter 2 where income e¤ects are absent. Under MFN tari¤s, there
                                                   w
continues to be a common world price p          eg faced by all countries for each good g .
For simplicity, I continue for now to couch the discussion in terms of a two-country
home-and-foreign world, and only introduce notation for the many-country version
of the model when that notation is needed.
     In the partial equilibrium version of the model where all tari¤ revenue is spent
on the numeraire good, the relationships in (3.3) and (3.4) hold for each non-
numeraire good g , imports of good g depend only on the local price of good g ,
and Wpw   g
            = Mg (pg ( g ; p   ew
                                g )), re ecting the fact that the magnitude of the (nega-
tive) income e¤ect of a small deterioration in the home country'          s terms of trade
for good g , holding its local price of good g ...xed, is given by the volume of its
imports of good h     g . Bagwell
                               i      and Staiger then show that for home import good
                       @pew =@
g , the term Wpw dp=d            that enters (3.3) and (3.4) can be written equivalently
      BR
          h      i
    Mg      ! BR
              g                BR
as pBR        BR , where ! g       is the elasticity of home import demand (de...ned pos-
    g      g

itively) for good g and gBR is the elasticity of foreign export supply of good g ,
and where the superscript BR indicates that the variable is evaluated at the best-
response home tari¤ BR g for import good g . A particularly simple form of these

                                            65
relationships arises in the special case of the model where demand and supply
curves are linear. In this case, and focusing on (3.3), the di¤erence BR
                                                                      g
                                                                         PO
                                                                         g  is
                 M BRg
proportional to p ewBR
                       : that is, according to the terms-of-trade theory, if govern-
                   g
ments use their GATT/WTO negotiations to move from noncooperative tari¤s to
the point on the e¢ ciency frontier at which they each adopt politically optimal
tari¤s, then when demands and supplies are linear their negotiated tari¤ cuts
should rise proportionately with the ratio of pre-negotiation (noncooperative) im-
port volume to world price.
    A challenge in taking these predictions to the data is that they are developed in
a static model where tari¤ negotiations are conceived as a one-o¤ event that carries
countries from their noncooperative tari¤ choices to the politically optimal tari¤s.
In fact, as I have described in chapter 2, there have been eight completed rounds
of GATT negotiations spanning many decades and culminating in 1995 with the
completion of the Uruguay Round and the creation of the WTO. This gradual
liberalization process complicates the possibility of a straightforward application
of the predictions embodied in (3.3) and (3.4) to the observed negotiated tari¤
cuts of the GATT/WTO membership.
    To overcome this challenge, Bagwell and Staiger focus on a set of non-GATT-
member countries who joined the WTO in separate accession negotiations occur-
ring after the Uruguay Round was completed. These accession negotiations come
close to the one-o¤ negotiating events that the model envisions. The maintained
hypothesis is that, at the time of these negotiations, existing GATT/WTO mem-
bers had largely completed the process of negotiating their tari¤s to politically
optimal levels, and new members were therefore asked to agree to once-for-all tar-
i¤ cuts from best-response to politically optimal levels in exchange for the rights
of WTO membership. A limitation of this focus is that it excludes from the
evaluation of GATT/WTO tari¤ liberalization the major industrialized countries,
who were all original or early GATT members and who historically have been the
dominant actors in GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations. I will return to this point
below. Figures 3.1 and 3.2 (reproduced from Bagwell and Staiger, 2011) con...rm
that the patterns of tari¤ liberalization predicted by (3.3) are present in the data.
    For a sample of 16 countries that negotiated membership in the WTO sub-
sequent to its creation in 1995, Figure 3.1 plots on the vertical axis the percent
deviation from mean negotiated tari¤ cut, and on the horizontal axis the decile
                                                    MgcBR
of pre-negotiation import volume to world price, p   wBR
                                                    eg
                                                          , where the subscript c now
indexes these acceding countries and the subscript g refers to an HS six-digit


                                         66
product. Evidently, negotiated tari¤ cuts rise in a roughly proportional way with
                                             MgcBR
normalized pre-negotiation import volume p    wBR
                                             eg
                                                   , as is predicted by the version of
(3.3) that applies to a partial equilibrium model where demands and supplies are
linear. And for a sample of 5 of these countries where the estimates of ! BR   gc and
   BR
      from Broda, Limao and Weinstein (2008) are available, Figure 3.2 plots the
  gc
                                                                            BR
                                                                               h BR i
                                                                          Mgc    ! gc
percent deviation from mean negotiated tari¤ cut by decile of BR           BR
                                                                          pgc      BR ,
                                                                                  gc
revealing a strong positive relationship as the terms-of-trade theory predicts.




             Figure 3.1 (Reproduced from Bagwell and Staiger, 2011)




             Figure 3.2 (Reproduced from Bagwell and Staiger, 2011)

    Bagwell and Staiger also present regression results based on the relationship in
(3.4), both for their partial equilibrium model with general demands and supplies
and for the special case of that model in which demands and supplies are linear.

                                          67
Recall that in deriving (3.3) and (3.4) I assumed that if the home government were
to cut its tari¤ from its reaction-curve level to its politically optimal level the for-
eign government would respond with a tari¤ cut that was calibrated to hold the
equilibrium world price p ew constant. To derive relationships that form the basis of
their estimated regressions, Bagwell and Staiger relax this assumption and allow
for more general tari¤ responses from trading partners (or no response at all).
As they demonstrate, this in      uences the interpretation of some of the estimated
coe¢ cients in their regressions, but does not change the essential predictions of
the terms-of-trade theory with regard to the pattern of tari¤ liberalization that
should be observed: if WTO negotiations implement the e¢ cient political opti-
mum, then controlling for the level of the pre-negotiation tari¤ BR      gc , the tari¤
level on imports of good g to which the government of country c agrees in a WTO
negotiation should be lower the larger is the magnitude of the pre-negotiation
                              MgcBR
normalized import volume p     wBR
                              eg
                                    (in the case of linear demands and supplies) or
                                                                             BR
                                                                                h BR i
                                                                           Mgc    ! gc
more generally the larger is the pre-negotiation cost-shifting term pBR             BR .
                                                                            gc     gc
Estimating regressions of the form
                                                            BR
                          WTO                  BR
                                                         Mgc
                          gc    =       0+   1 gc   +   2 wBR +         gc          (3.5)
                                                         egc
                                                         p

and                                                      "          #
                                                    BR
                    WTO                     BR
                                                  Mgc        ! BR
                                                               gc
                    gc    =     0   +   1   gc + 2 BR         BR
                                                                        +    gc ;   (3.6)
                                                  pgc        gc

where W  gc
            TO
               is the ad valorem tari¤ level bound by acceding country c on HS six-
digit product g in its GATT/WTO negotiation and gc and gc are error terms,
Bagwell and Staiger ...nd robust evidence that ^ 1 > 0 and ^ 2 < 0 and that ^ 1 > 0
and ^ 2 < 0, as the terms-of-trade theory predicts.
    I noted earlier that a limitation of the Bagwell and Staiger (2011) paper is that,
in focusing on non-GATT-member countries who joined the WTO in accession
negotiations after the Uruguay Round was completed, the paper excludes from the
evaluation of GATT/WTO tari¤ liberalization the major industrialized countries,
who were all original or early GATT members and who historically have been the
dominant actors in GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations. This limitation is addressed
by Ludema and Mayda (2013), who extend the search for tari¤ bargaining evidence
consistent with the terms-of-trade theory to a broader and more representative
cross section of the GATT/WTO membership.

                                               68
    To develop the prediction that they take to the data, Ludema and Mayda
(2013) work within a partial equilibrium perfectly competitive many-good many-
country model along the lines employed by Bagwell and Staiger (2011). In this
model, as I have observed above, the purpose of a trade agreement is to eliminate
the implications of market power from the unilateral tari¤ choices that govern-
ments would otherwise make. But while Bagwell and Staiger assess the extent
to which the observed tari¤ cuts in WTO accession negotiations conform to the
tari¤ cuts that would implement the political optimum and hence can be under-
stood from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory as allowing governments
to reach the e¢ ciency frontier, Ludema and Mayda assess the extent to which
free-riding by non-participants in the negotiations and the consequent failure of
GATT/WTO tari¤ bargaining to reach the e¢ ciency frontier can be understood
from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory.
    In particular, to capture key features of the GATT/WTO tari¤ bargaining
process, Ludema and Mayda (2013) posit an extensive form tari¤ negotiation
game in which countries negotiate bilaterally over MFN tari¤s and participation is
endogenous.34 They exploit the fact that, when importing country c cuts an MFN
tari¤ on product g , all exporting countries facing that tari¤ enjoy the same terms-
                             w
of-trade improvement, @ p  eg =@ gc , the magnitude of which depends on country c'         s
market power. But recall that in this partial equilibrium setting the magnitude of
the (negative) income e¤ect of a small deterioration in country c'         s terms of trade
for good g , holding ...xed its local price of good g , is given simply by the volume
                                c
of its imports of good g , Wp    w =
                                 g
                                                       ew
                                       Mgc (pgc ( gc ; p g )); and the  ip side is that the
(positive) income e¤ect of the implied terms-of-trade improvement that is enjoyed
by each exporting country c varies in proportion to its share of country c'          s total
                             c       c                      w            c
imports of product g : Wpw    g
                                  = gc Mgc (pgc ( gc ; p   eg )), where gc is the share of
country c' s imports of good g that is supplied by exporting country c .
    Ludema and Mayda (2013) show that in the model of MFN tari¤ bargaining
with endogenous participation that they propose, if ine¢ ciency occurs in equilib-
rium in the negotiation over gc , it occurs because exporters of good g to country
c below a critical export-share threshold ­ who by the above logic have less to
gain from a reduction in gc ­ choose not to participate in the negotiation with
country c over gc , and choose instead to free ride on the MFN tari¤ cut that
  34
    I discuss the tari¤ negotiation game posited by Ludema and Mayda (2013) again at various
points in chapter 4 and also in chapter 5 of Staiger (2021), when I compare their approach
to modeling GATT tari¤ negotiations with the approaches adopted by Bagwell, Staiger and
Yurukoglu (2020a, 2020b, forthcoming).


                                            69
country c agrees to in its negotiation over gc with the exporters of good g to
country c above the critical export-share threshold who, having the most to gain
from a reduction in gc , choose to participate in the negotiations. And Ludema
and Mayda show that an implication of this ...nding is that where exporters of a
good g into country c are less concentrated as measured by the Her...ndahl index,
free-riding in GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations will be more of a problem, and the
negotiated level of gc will continue to bear more of the imprint of country c'      s
market power than in the case where exporters are highly concentrated.
    It is this relationship between exporter concentration and the degree to which
negotiated tari¤ levels continue to re     ect importer market power, derived by
Ludema and Mayda (2013) in a setting that appends a particular model of tar-
i¤ bargaining to an underlying model conforming to the terms-of-trade theory of
trade agreements, that Ludema and Mayda take to the data. Focusing on 36
GATT members that include all of the major industrialized countries as well as
a number of developing and emerging economies, they ...nd that as a result of the
free-rider e¤ects created by MFN, between one tenth and one quarter of the tari¤
liberalization that would have been required in the Uruguay Round to completely
eliminate the imprint of market power from these tari¤ schedules and bring these
countries all the way to the e¢ ciency frontier did not occur. As I noted above,
Ludema and Mayda therefore provide an important quanti...cation of the failure
of GATT/WTO tari¤ bargaining to reach the e¢ ciency frontier as a result of the
MFN free-rider e¤ect in the Uruguay Round. But along the way they also pro-
vide strong con...rmation of the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory itself for
a wide cross-section of the GATT/WTO membership, concluding that the terms-
of-trade-manipulation motive drives unilateral tari¤ choices and that GATT tari¤
negotiating rounds were intended to neutralize this motive.
    Like Ludema and Mayda (2013), other recent papers have also found evidence
consistent with the predictions of the terms-of-trade theory in the negotiated tari¤
outcomes of a wide cross-section of the GATT/WTO membership. For example,
Nicita, Olarreaga and Silva (2014) focus on the nature of the tari¤ commitments
made by WTO member countries ­ commitments that as I have noted take the
form of bindings de...ning the maximum allowable level for the tari¤ ­and exploit
the fact that countries di¤er in the degree to which their negotiated WTO tari¤
commitments constrain their applied tari¤s (i.e., the tari¤ levels that they actually
set). Developing a prediction of the terms-of-trade theory that relates both the
tari¤s that are applied at the level of the binding and those that are applied below
the binding to measures of a country'    s market power, and examining the tari¤s


                                         70
of 101 WTO member countries, Nicita, Olarreaga and Silva ...nd evidence broadly
consistent with this prediction.35 Beshkar and Bond (2017) similarly use the
terms-of-trade theory to develop a relationship between the market power that a
country wields on the one hand, and on the other hand the levels at which it binds
its tari¤s in GATT/WTO negotiations and the tari¤s that it actually applies ­in
this case exploiting the fact that, as described in chapter 2, a country can under
certain conditions escape from its tari¤ bindings and set applied tari¤s above the
binding ­ and ...nd support for the relationship predicted by the terms-of-trade
theory in this regard in the tari¤s of 109 WTO members.36
    Together these papers provide reinforcing evidence that the observed pattern of
negotiated tari¤ cuts in the GATT/WTO correlates with the pattern of observed
market power in the way that the terms-of-trade theory suggests that it should.


4. Tari¤ Bargaining in the GATT/WTO
In chapter 3 I presented evidence that countries use GATT negotiations to help
them remove the imprint of market power from their unilateral tari¤ choices. In
this chapter I move on to the next logical question: How well-designed is GATT
to help its member governments achieve this purpose? A unique feature of the
GATT/WTO is that detailed bargaining records for many of its negotiation rounds
are available to researchers and can be used to help answer this question.37 With
access to these bargaining records, it is possible to probe beyond the outcomes of
GATT/WTO negotiations and examine the features of the bargaining behavior
that led to those outcomes. In this chapter I describe recent research that makes
use of these records.
    Each GATT/WTO round proceeds under a speci...c tari¤ bargaining protocol.
The ...rst ...ve GATT rounds involved selective product-by-product MFN tari¤
  35
     See also Beshkar, Bond and Rho (2015) for related ...ndings that focus on the relationship
predicted by the terms-of-trade theory between market power and the di¤ erence between the
bound and applied level of the tari¤ ("tari¤ overhang"    ) and ...nd empirical support for this
relationship in tari¤ data for 108 WTO member countries.
  36
     See also Bown and Crowley (2013) who, using data on the time-varying protective measures
(anti-dumping and safeguard actions) of the US over the period 1997-2006, ...nd empirical support
for predictions of the terms-of-trade theory when that theory is developed in a repeated-tari¤-
game setting subject to stochastic trade volume shocks and where self-enforcement constraints
are binding.
  37
     The GATT bargaining records for the ...rst seven of the eight GATT rounds are available in
PDF form at https://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/gattbilaterals_e/indexbyround_e.htm.


                                               71
negotiations on a bilateral "request-o¤er"basis ­each government requests tari¤
cuts from its bargaining partner in the bilateral and o¤ers the tari¤ cuts that
it is prepared to make in the bilateral if its requests are granted ­ and this was
also true to varying degrees of the eighth (Uruguay) round and the currently
suspended WTO (Doha) round.38 Principal supplier status shapes the bargaining
pairs that form in a round, and a double coincidence of wants must exist between
any viable pair of bargaining partners: each country in the bargaining pair must
be a principal supplier of at least one good to the other country in the pair, so that
each has something of value to o¤er the other. In essence, GATT'        s reliance on
the principal supplier rule has the e¤ect of reducing the number of viable bilateral
bargains in the round to a manageable level while at the same time allowing
countries to focus on those bilaterals where the mutual stakes of the bargaining
parties are likely to be highest. The object of negotiation is the tari¤ binding, the
legal maximum level above which a country agrees not to raise its tari¤. As Hoda
(2001, pp. 44-45) explains, the protocols for the ...rst ...ve rounds were similar:

           Each round began with the adoption of a decision convening a tari¤
       conference on a ...xed future date. The decision required the contracting
       parties to exchange request lists and furnish the latest edition of their cus-
       toms tari¤s and their foreign trade statistics for a recent period well in
       advance of the ...rst day of the conference and the o¤ers had to be made
       on the ...rst day. The negotiations were concluded generally over a period
       of six to seven months after the o¤ers had been made...These negotiations
       were essentially bilateral between pairs of delegations.

    Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2020a) is the ...rst paper to analyze the GATT
bargaining records. They focus on the Torquay Round (1950-51) of GATT ne-
gotiations, identify a number of stylized facts from this round that emerge from
an analysis of the bargaining data, and suggest that these stylized facts re    ect
a pragmatic approach to tari¤ bargaining that was induced by the pillars of the
GATT architecture and the bargaining forum that these pillars helped to create. I
begin this chapter by describing in broad terms how, through the lens of the terms-
of-trade theory, the GATT pillars of reciprocity and MFN can be interpreted as
  38
    The sixth (Kennedy) and seventh (Tokyo) rounds of GATT negotiations took a linear-cut
and formula-cut approach to tari¤ negotiations, respectively, but even in these rounds bilateral
product-by-product negotiations played an important complementary role. As Hoda (2001, p.
47) notes, "... a linear or formula approach did not obviate the need for bilateral negotiations:
they only gave the participants an additional tool to employ in the bargaining process."

                                               72
simplifying the tari¤ bargaining problem, but at a potential cost, and thereby as
facilitating a pragmatic approach to tari¤ bargaining. I then describe the ...ndings
of Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu with regard to the bargaining records of the
Torquay Round.

4.1. Theory
As I noted in chapter 2, MFN and reciprocity are two pillars of the GATT archi-
tecture. Do these pillars create a bargaining forum that is well-designed to address
the terms-of-trade manipulation problem? To provide an answer to this question
from the perspective of the terms-of-trade theory, I ...rst return to the two-country
model presented in chapter 2 and focus on the implications of GATT'       s reciprocity
rules and norms in that setting. I then consider MFN in a multicountry exten-
sion of this model, and I describe how MFN and reciprocity work in tandem to
shape the tari¤ bargaining forum within which GATT/WTO members negotiate.
Throughout I keep technical details to a minimum, and refer interested readers
to Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2020a) for more detail and to Bagwell and
Staiger (1999, 2002, 2005, 2010b, 2018a) where these theoretical ...ndings were
originally derived and presented.
    Recall from chapter 2 that the GATT/WTO principle of reciprocity refers to
the ideal of mutual changes in trade policy which bring about changes in the
volume of each country'   s imports that are equal in magnitude to the changes in
the volume of its exports. As I noted there, there are two instances in GATT
where this principle is applied: governments seek reciprocity through a "balance
of concessions"in their GATT Article XXVIII bis negotiations to liberalize tari¤s;
and when one government reverses its negotiated tari¤ liberalization, perhaps in
a formal GATT Article XXVIII renegotiation but more generally whether it does
so de facto or de jure, its trading partners are permitted to maintain reciprocity
through retaliation by withdrawing "substantially equivalent concessions"of their
own. Hence, the ...rst instance of reciprocity applies when tari¤s are moving
in the downward direction, while the second instance applies when tari¤s are
moving in the upward direction. The ...rst instance is a negotiating norm rather
than a requirement that must be satis...ed by negotiated tari¤ movements in the
downward direction, but it is a norm that was strongly embedded in the culture
of GATT (see, for example, Curzon, 1966, p. 74). The second instance is a
rule that speci...es the maximum permissible retaliatory response and therefore is
a requirement that governs the movements of previously negotiated and bound


                                          73
tari¤s in the upward direction. In what follows I describe the implications that
arise according to the terms-of-trade theory from a strict application of reciprocity
in both directions.
    I begin by de...ning reciprocity within the model of chapter 2, following Bagwell
and Staiger (1999).39 Consider a tari¤ negotiation that, starting from an initial
pair of tari¤s, ( 0 ; 0 ), results in a new pair of tari¤s, ( 1 ; 1 ). Denoting the ini-
tial world and home-country local prices as p   ew0 p   ew ( 0 ; 0 ) and p0 p( 0 ; pew0 )
                            w1      w 1    1        1        1 w1
and the new prices as p   e       e ( ; ) and p
                                  p                      p( ; p e ), I will say that the
tari¤ changes conform to the principle of reciprocity when
            ew0 [Mx (p1 ; p
            p             ew1 )             ew0 )] = [Ey (p1 ; p
                                   Mx (p0 ; p                  ew1 )            ew0 )];
                                                                       Ey (p0 ; p            (4.1)
where changes in trade volumes are valued at the existing world price. The
key point is to notice that, by using the home-country balanced trade condition
recorded in (2.1), the reciprocity condition in (4.1) may be rewritten as
                                   ew1
                                  [p     ew0 ]Mx (p1 ; p
                                         p             ew1 ) = 0;                            (4.2)
which implies p ew1 = pew0 provided only that Mx (p1 ; p
                                                       ew1 ) > 0. A completely anal-
ogous de...nition of reciprocity holds from the perspective of the foreign country,
with an analogous implication. According to (4.2), reciprocity can therefore be
given a simple characterization in the two-country two-good model of chapter 2:
mutual changes in trade policy conform to the principle of reciprocity if and only
if they leave pew ­ the terms of trade between the home and foreign country ­
            40
unchanged. With this characterization in hand, I next consider how strict ad-
herence to reciprocity simpli...es the tari¤ bargaining problem in this two-country
setting.
  39
      The concept of reciprocity has a long history in many literatures but, when used, has
not always been unambiguously de...ned, and as Keohane (1986) notes this has often led to
confusion. The de...nition of reciprocity that I adopt here, which follows Bagwell and Staiger
(1999), formalizes the notion of "substantially equivalent concessions"that is at the heart of the
GATT/WTO concept of reciprocity.
   40
      Bagwell and Staiger (1999, note 16) extends this result to a many-good version of the model
of chapter 2, while Bagwell and Staiger (2016, Online Appendix) provides a generalization of a
number of additional features of reciprocity to the many-good general-equilibrium setting. These
properties of reciprocity are also shown to hold in a two-sector partial equilibrium setting where
the non-numeraire sector is a monopolistically competitive industry with many varieties (see
Bagwell and Staiger, 2015), and in a three-good partial equilibrium setting where each of the
two non-numeraire goods is a competitive homogeneous-good industry (see Bagwell and Staiger,
2001a). Notice too that, by ...xing relative exporter prices (the terms of trade), reciprocity also
ensures that any changes in the tari¤ revenue collected by one country from the exporters of
its trading partner must be matched by changes in the tari¤ revenue that its trading partner

                                                74
    Consider ...rst the implication when governments adhere strictly to reciprocity
in the downward direction. With reciprocity ...xing the balance of market access
concessions to be exchanged at one-for-one and therefore ...xing the terms of trade
   ew0 according to (4.2), the two governments are only bargaining over the depth
at p
of the reciprocal tari¤ cuts to which they will agree. The depth of these cuts de-
termines the home tari¤ 1 , and hence the home local price according to p( 1 ; p              ew0 )
and its import volume according to Mx (p( 1 ; p      ew0 ); p
                                                            ew0 ); and it determines the for-
              1
eign tari¤      , and hence the foreign local price according to p ( 1 ; p          ew0 ) and its
import volume according to My (p ( 1 ; p      ew0 ); p
                                                     ew0 ). This means that the preferred
depth of the reciprocal tari¤ cuts for the home government would deliver the home
tari¤ level ^1 de...ned by Wp (p(^1 ; p
                                      ew0 ); p
                                             ew0 ) = 0, and the home government would
propose to the foreign government that the foreign government reciprocate with
the tari¤ R (^1 ) de...ned by pew (^1 ; ) = p  ew0 that leaves p    ew unchanged. And like-
wise, the preferred depth of the reciprocal tari¤ cuts for the foreign government
would deliver the foreign tari¤ level ^ 1 de...ned by Wp (p (^ 1 ; p       ew0 ); p
                                                                                  ew0 ) = 0, and
the foreign government would propose to the home government that the home
government reciprocate with the tari¤ R (^ 1 ) de...ned by p           ew ( ; ^ 1 ) = p  ew0 that
leaves pew unchanged.
    If the two governments agree on the preferred depth of reciprocal tari¤ cuts in
the sense that ^1 = R (^ 1 ) and ^ 1 = R (^1 ), then their preferred proposals will
agree, and there will be no haggling: by holding themselves strictly to the GATT
norm of reciprocity in the downward direction and thereby eliminating strategic
considerations over the implications of their agreed tari¤s for the terms of trade,
governments succeed in eliminating strategic considerations completely from their
tari¤ bargaining. And in this case, the agreed tari¤s satisfy Wp (p(^1 ; p        ew0 ); p
                                                                                         ew0 ) = 0
                 1 w0     w0
and Wp (p (^ ; p   e ); p
                        e ) = 0, implying that governments implement the political
optimum point on the e¢ ciency frontier.
    On the other hand, if the two governments disagree over the preferred depth
of reciprocal tari¤ cuts in the sense that ^1 6= R (^ 1 ) and ^ 1 6= R (^1 ), with
one government wanting deeper reciprocal tari¤ cuts than the other government,
then their preferred proposals will disagree. It is in this case that the application
of reciprocity in the upward direction becomes important: in e¤ect, due to this
second application of reciprocity, strategic considerations will still be absent from
the negotiations and there will still be no haggling; and the government wanting
collects from its exporters (see Bagwell and Staiger, 1999, note 16); this con...rms the equivalence
between reciprocity and the matching of changes in tari¤ revenue collected by each country from
the exporters of its trading partner that I asserted in the introductory discussion of chapter 1.


                                                75
the less ambitious agreement will get its way. This is because if this government
were pushed in the negotiations to liberalize its tari¤ below the level that it prefers,
it could always ­subsequent to the negotiations ­unilaterally raise its tari¤ back
up to this level, and the most that the other government would be allowed to
do under this second application of reciprocity is to retaliate with a tari¤ hike
of its own that keeps the terms of trade at the level p    ew0 , thereby allowing the
...rst government to achieve its preferred tari¤ after all; and knowing this, the
two governments are aware when they make their initial tari¤ proposals that the
government wanting the less ambitious agreement will ultimately get its way.41
     In a tari¤ bargaining model meant to capture the two applications of reci-
procity in GATT, Bagwell and Staiger (1999) capture this implication of reci-
procity in the upward direction in a short-hand way, by assuming that when the
two governments make tari¤ proposals that disagree, the proposal with the high-
est tari¤ pair and implying the lowest trade volume is ultimately implemented.
They show that, even in the case where the two governments disagree over the
preferred depth of reciprocal tari¤ cuts, it will still be the case that all strate-
gic considerations in tari¤ bargaining are eliminated if the governments abide by
strict reciprocity in the two instances where reciprocity arises in GATT. Intu-
itively, reciprocity in the downward direction ...xes the "price" at which market
access is to be exchanged between the two governments; and reciprocity in the
upward direction then amounts to an assurance of "voluntary exchange"whereby
no government can be forced as a result of the negotiations to accept more trade
volume than it desires at this price, determining the depth of the tari¤ cuts to
which the two governments will agree.42 At this point, there is no room left in
the negotiations for strategic behavior.
     More formally, as Bagwell and Staiger (1999) demonstrate in their model of
tari¤ bargaining, in the two-country model presented in chapter 2 it is a dom-
inant strategy for the home government to propose the tari¤ pair (^1 ; R (^1 ))
and for the foreign government to propose the tari¤ pair (^ 1 ; R (^ 1 )), and the
implemented tari¤ pair is then determined by the least ambitious tari¤ proposal
  41
      This point is related to Tasca's (1938, p. 146) discussion, from which I quote in chapter 2,
of the importance of various "withdrawal clauses" in the RTAA.
   42
      The "voluntary exchange" aspect induced by reciprocity in the upward direction and its
impact on the bargaining outcome as modeled in Bagwell and Staiger (1999) echoes the logic of
reciprocity described by Dam (1970, pp. 80-81) in the passage I quoted from in chapter 2, that
governments understood that "[t]he best guarantee that a commitment of any kind will be kept
... is that the parties continue to view adherence to their agreement as in their mutual interest
... ."


                                               76
(i.e., the proposal that implies the smallest amount of reciprocal liberalization).
Notice that, unless the proposals happen to agree and the political optimum is
implemented, only one of the two governments will achieve its preferred tari¤ and
hence preferred local price and import volume, and it is easily checked that in this
case the condition for e¢ ciency in (2.15) will be violated at the agreed tari¤s.
    Therefore, according to the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements, as a
general matter strict adherence to GATT'     s reciprocity rules will introduce a trade-
o¤. On the one hand, strict adherence to these rules can eliminate strategic
considerations from bargaining, and can in this way help governments avoid the
attendant bargaining costs (e.g., in the form of bargaining delay) that they might
otherwise incur. On the other hand, the constraints that reciprocity imposes on
the possible tari¤ bargaining outcomes may prevent the two governments from
ever reaching the e¢ ciency frontier.
    If we think of the initial tari¤ pair from which negotiations begin as corre-
sponding to the Nash tari¤s de...ned by the joint solution to (2.10) and (2.11),
then this trade-o¤ becomes less favorable the greater are the asymmetries in
market power that are wielded by the two governments. This is because such
asymmetries translate into an initial terms of trade, p      ew0    ew ( N ; N ), which
                                                                    p
                                                    w PO       PO
is then further away from the terms of trade p     e (     ;      ) necessary to imple-
ment a point on the e¢ ciency frontier in this bargaining game (i.e., the polit-
ical optimum). It is only in the special case where the distribution of market
power wielded by governments happens to be symmetric across countries so that
ew0
p       pew ( N ; N ) = p
                        ew ( P O ; P O ) that the e¢ ciency frontier is reached under
strict adherence to GATT'    s reciprocity rules and the trade-o¤ vanishes. Viewed
through the lens of the terms-of-trade theory, the applications of reciprocity found
in the GATT/WTO can thus be seen as facilitating a pragmatic approach to tar-
i¤ bargaining in an environment where bargaining frictions might otherwise be
substantial, and one that is most likely to lead to good tari¤ bargaining outcomes
when the world does not exhibit large asymmetries along the relevant dimensions.
    It is interesting to note that the absence of strategic bargaining behavior is
seen by GATT practitioners and legal scholars as a hallmark of the tari¤ bargain-
ing that occurred in the early GATT rounds and as distinguishing GATT tari¤
bargaining from the tari¤ bargaining that preceded it. Describing the bargaining
techniques in use during the ...rst ...ve GATT rounds of request-o¤er tari¤ nego-
tiations, Curzon (1966, p. 74) emphasizes the role of reciprocity in dictating the
balance that each country struck between its requests for and o¤ers of market
access, and the lack of strategic behavior that this balance induced:


                                          77
         ...Their requests cannot be higher than their o¤ers and negotiations
     start from this maximum position: if all requests are granted all the o¤ers
     will be ful...lled. Similarly all other contracting parties are likely to make
     o¤ers which match the requests they have made. As some of the requests are
     rejected, some of the o¤ers are withdrawn. This procedure has been raised
     to a Gatt principle and is not laid down by any rule. It is a convention but
     one which creates a much better negotiating climate than the opposite trend
     which was a feature of the classical bilateral negotiations. Then, everyone
     put forward very low o¤ers with the intention of increasing gradually if the
     bargaining proved pro...table. A country never knew, however, when it had
     reached the maximum its partner was willing to concede.

Curzon further clari...es this feature in his accompanying description of the be-
havior of several GATT newcomers that tried unsuccessfully to pursue classical
bargaining strategies:
         Several newcomers to GATT unaware of this new technique and starting
     with low o¤ers found that in the course of negotiations they were unable
     to reach the level of requests they aimed for. Their initially low o¤ers were
     taken as proof of their intentions and they either had to go home with a
     tari¤ higher than expected or had to increase their o¤ers in the course of
     the negotiations. (Curzon, 1966, p. 74)

Here Curzon is describing a tari¤ bargaining forum in which there is no point
in making lowball initial o¤ers, because governments are expecting non-strategic
behavior from their bargaining partners and such o¤ers would simply be taken at
face value.
    I next consider the role played by MFN in a multicountry extension of the
two-country model, and I describe how MFN and reciprocity can in principle
work together to simplify the multilateral tari¤ bargaining problem. To this end
I consider an extension of the model to three countries, where the home country
now exports good y to two foreign countries, ` 1'and ` 2,' and imports good x
from each of them (the two foreign countries do not trade with each other). Each
foreign country can impose a tari¤ i for i 2 f1; 2g on its imports of good y from
the home country, and the home country can set tari¤s on its imports of good x
from the two foreign countries.
    If the home country were to apply the discriminatory tari¤s 1 to imports
from foreign-country 1 and 2 6= 1 to imports from foreign-country 2, then sep-
arate world prices would apply to its trade with each partner, pw1 for its trade

                                          78
with foreign-country 1 and pw2 for its trade with foreign-country 2. This follows
because there must be a single local price p in the home economy, and the pricing
relationships p = (1 + 1 )pw1 and p = (1 + 2 )pw2 then imply pw1 6= pw2 whenever
   1
     6= 2 .
      The MFN rule imposes the non-discrimination requirement 1 = 2                         . A
...rst and immediate implication of the MFN rule can now be appreciated: under
MFN, a single equilibrium world price, p        ew ( ; 1 ; 2 ), must prevail, as I noted
in previous chapters. This is important, because it means that when the MFN
rule applies the representation of government preferences introduced in the two-
country model of chapter 2 extends without quali...cation to the three-country
setting, with these government preferences given by W (p; p           ew ), W 1 (p 1 ; p
                                                                                       ew ) and
W 2 (p 2 ; pew ), where p = (1 + )pw p( ; pw ) and p i = pw =(1 + i ) p i ( i ; pw ),
i = f1; 2g, and where in line with the two-country model I assume that the
function p  ew as de...ned here is decreasing in and increasing in 1 and 2 . And
with government preferences of this form, it is straightforward to show that the
political optimum de...ned by the three tari¤s that satisfy the three conditions
Wp (p; p                       ew ) = 0 and Wp 22 (p 2 ; p
        ew ) = 0, Wp 11 (p 1 ; p                         ew ) = 0 continues to be e¢ cient.
      Evidently, in a multilateral world the MFN principle ensures that the interna-
tional externality at the root of the problem to be solved by a trade agreement
is still the same terms-of-trade externality driven by movements in p         ew that arises
in the simpler two-country setting. Notice, though, that according to the equilib-
rium world price function p      ew ( ; 1 ; 2 ) each country'    s welfare will be impacted
by the tari¤ choices of the remaining two countries if these tari¤ choices impact
the world price. This implies in turn that in a multilateral world, bilateral MFN
tari¤ bargains will in general impose terms-of-trade externalities on third coun-
tries, indicating a potentially important multilateral dimension associated with
such bargains that further complicates the bargaining problem.43 This is where
reciprocity, now in combination with MFN, can again simplify things.
      To see the simpli...cation that is a¤orded when MFN is combined with reci-
procity in this setting, consider a tari¤ bargain between the home country and
foreign-country 1, and suppose for the moment that foreign-country 2 refuses to
join the negotiations and keeps its tari¤ held ...xed at the level 02 . How will
foreign-country 2 be impacted by the bilateral tari¤ bargain between the home
country and foreign-country 1? When the home country lowers its MFN tari¤
  43
    In the absence of MFN, there would also be multilateral dimensions associated with any
bilateral (discriminatory) tari¤ bargain, but the nature of the spillovers would be di¤erent (see
Bagwell and Staiger, 2005, and Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu, forthcoming).


                                               79
   on imports of x, p ew ( ; 1 ; 02 ) rises and foreign-country 2 therefore enjoys a
terms-of-trade improvement, because foreign-country 2'        s exporters enjoy a higher
price for their exports of x into the home-country market, and because foreign-
country 2 also pays a lower price for imports of y from the home country owing
to the stimulus to home-country export supply of y that is created by the home-
country'  s tari¤ cut. On the other hand, when foreign-country 1 lowers its tari¤
   1
     on imports of y , p ew ( ; 1 ; 02 ) falls and foreign-country 2 therefore su¤ers
a terms-of-trade decline, because foreign-country 2'        s exporters receive a lower
price for their exports of x into the home-country market owing to the increased
competition that they face from the stimulated export supply of x coming from
foreign-country 1 as a result of foreign-country 1'    s tari¤ cut, and because foreign-
country 2 also pays a higher price for imports of y from the home country owing
to foreign-country 1'  s increased demand for imports of y from the home country
as a result of foreign-country 1'  s tari¤ cut.
     Hence, when the home country and foreign-country 1 both lower their tari¤s as
part of a bilateral tari¤ negotiation, the sign of the impact on p     ew ( ; 1 ; 02 ) and
therefore on foreign-country 2 is in general ambiguous, and depends on the relative
size of the home and foreign-country-1 tari¤ cuts. And it is straightforward to
show that the cuts in and 1 that exactly balance these opposing forces and leave
ew ( ; 1 ; 02 ) unchanged are precisely the tari¤ cuts that conform to reciprocity
p
as I have de...ned reciprocity in (4.1) above. But now recall that foreign-country
2 has by assumption kept its tari¤ held ...xed at the level 02 . So if p    ew ( ; 1 ; 02 )
is held ...xed by the reciprocal tari¤ cuts that the home country and foreign-
country 1 negotiate, it follows that p 2 ( 02 ; pew ( ; 1 ; 02 )) is then also held ...xed,
and therefore neither the trade volumes of foreign-country 2, My 2 (p 2 ( 02 ; p  ew ); p
                                                                                        ew )
        2    2   2 w      w                       2    2   2 w       w
and Ex (p ( 0 ; p  e ); p
                        e ), nor its welfare W (p ( 0 ; p     e ); p
                                                                   e ), will be impacted
by the bilateral tari¤ negotiation between the home country and foreign-country
1: there will be no third-party spillovers to foreign-country 2 from the bargain.
Evidently, under the GATT pillars of MFN and reciprocity, if foreign-country 2
refuses to bargain it will get nothing; and the bargain between the home country
and foreign-country 1 can proceed without strategic considerations, exactly as in
the two-country setting discussed above.44
  44
    These and related points are developed in Bagwell and Staiger (2005, 2010b). I have de-
scribed this result in a simple 2-good model. See Bagwell and Staiger (2002, Appendix B) for
a discussion of this result in the many-good setting. See also Ossa (2014) and the discussion
of Ossa in Bagwell and Staiger (2016, p 512-513) for a quali...cation to this result that arises
in a monopolistic competition setting. The modeling framework considered by Ludema and



                                              80
    Now suppose that foreign-country 2 decides to join the negotiations. In this
case it is easy to see how the home country could engage in a sequence of bilateral
bargains, ...rst with foreign-country 1, and then with foreign-country 2, where each
bargain abides by MFN and reciprocity and where there are then no strategic
considerations and no third-party spillovers associated with either bilateral. If
the home-country negotiations with foreign-country 1 do not exhaust the home-
country'  s desire for reciprocal tari¤ cuts, it could then continue to engage in
further reciprocal tari¤ liberalization with foreign-country 2.
    The process I have just described looks much like the "split concessions"tech-
nique for preserving bargaining power as described by Beckett (1941, p. 23) in the
context of the RTAA and discussed in chapter 2, whereby "a small reduction in
duty is made in the agreement with the ...rst country and an additional reduction
in the agreement with the second country," all the while achieving reciprocity in
each bilateral and maintaining MFN.45 But a key di¤erence between the RTAA
and GATT is that in a GATT round these bilateral negotiations occur simulta-
neously rather than sequentially. It was thought that this would speed up the
bilateral negotiating process in GATT relative to the RTAA, and that it would
allow the properties of MFN and bilateral reciprocity described just above to be
extended to multilateral reciprocity, relaxing the need for strict bilateral balance
between concessions granted and concessions obtained and allowing countries to
focus instead on achieving the desired balance on a multilateral basis. As one
early GATT report put it (see also Curzon, 1966, pp. 75-77):
Mayda (2013) that I discussed in chapter 3 does not allow for the possibility that tari¤ cuts
in a bilateral could be balanced in such a way as to reduce or eliminate movements in world
prices and thereby reduce or eliminate third-party spillovers, because that framework is partial
equilibrium (and abstracts from export taxes; see Bagwell and Staiger, 2001a for an analysis
of reciprocity that establishes that its key properties are preserved in a partial equilibrium set-
ting where both import taxes and export taxes are available). Still, the main prediction that
Ludema and Mayda take to the data ­that where exporters of a good g into country c are less
concentrated, free-riding in GATT/WTO tari¤ negotiations will be more of a problem and the
negotiated level of gc will continue to bear more of the imprint of country c'       s market power
than in the case where exporters are highly concentrated ­could also arise here if governments
mistakenly believed that they could free ride on the MFN tari¤ bargains of others and chose not
to partake in the negotiations even while the strict adherence to reciprocity and MFN ended up
frustrated their belief in this regard. If that were the case, the reduced participation of exporters
negotiating over that tari¤ would imply less liberalization of that tari¤.
   45
      Bagwell and Staiger (2010b) investigate the properties of sequential tari¤ liberalization under
MFN and reciprocity, and relate their results to the entry of new and economically signi...cant
countries into the world trading system. I will return to this paper in chapter 5, when I discuss
the "latecomers problem" that the WTO'        s Doha Round may be grappling with.

                                                 81
          Multilateral tari¤ bargaining, as devised at the London Session of the
      Preparatory Committee in October 1946 and as worked out in practice
      at Geneva and Annecy, is one of the most remarkable developments in
      economic relations between nations that has occurred in our time. It has
      produced a technique whereby governments, in determining the concessions
      they are prepared to o¤er, are able to take into account the indirect bene...ts
      they may expect to gain as a result of simultaneous negotiations between
      other countries, and whereby world tari¤s may be scaled down within a
      remarkably short time. ... The multilateral character of the Agreement
      enabled the negotiators to o¤er more extensive concessions than they might
      have been prepared to grant if the concessions were to be incorporated in
      separate bilateral agreements. Before the Geneva negotiations a country
      would have aimed at striking a balance between the concessions granted to
      another country and the direct concessions obtained from it without taking
      into account indirect bene...ts which might accrue from other prospective
      trade agreements; it might even have been unwilling to grant an important
      concession if it had been obliged to extend that concession to third countries
      without compensation. (ICITO, 1949, p. 10)

In e¤ect, the claim made in the ICITO report is that GATT rounds made it possi-
ble for governments to exchange in a balanced way the spillovers across bilaterals
that might arise from a lack of bilateral reciprocity, and thereby still achieve over-
all, multilateral, reciprocity; and that this feature enhanced the possibilities for a
more extensive agreement.
     To see how the implications of MFN and bilateral reciprocity described above
extend also to multilateral reciprocity, it is helpful to consider a four-country
setting, where the home country now trades with three foreign countries indexed
by i 2 f1; 2; 3g, and where the equilibrium world price function is now given
by pew ( ; 1 ; 2 ; 3 ) with p  ew decreasing in and increasing in 1 , 2 and 3 .
To ...x ideas, suppose that foreign-country 3 refuses to join the negotiations and
keeps its tari¤ held ...xed at the level 03 . And suppose that the home country
negotiates bilaterally and also now simultaneously with foreign countries 1 and 2 in
a negotiating "round."And ...nally suppose for simplicity that the home country'      s
desire for reciprocal tari¤ cuts is at least as great as the sum of the desire for such
tari¤ cuts from foreign countries 1 and 2.
     Consider ...rst the possibility that the bilateral MFN negotiations proceed along
the lines of bilateral reciprocity described above. In its bilateral with foreign-
country 1, the home country could o¤er to cut its MFN tari¤ in exchange for

                                            82
a reciprocal tari¤ cut from foreign-country 1 to the level that foreign-country 1
prefers, ^ 1 , implying the home tari¤ level ~ = R (^ 1 ; 02 ; 03 ) de...ned by

                               ew (~; ^ 1 ;
                               p              0
                                               2
                                                   ;   0
                                                           3
                                                                 ew
                                                               )=p 0

and therefore implying the exchange of reciprocal tari¤ cuts           = ~      0 and
    1      1       1
      =^          0 in this bilateral. And the home country could engage in further
reciprocal tari¤ cuts with foreign-country 2, o¤ering a further tari¤ cut in exchange
for a reciprocal tari¤ cut from foreign-country 2 to the level that foreign-country
2 prefers, ^ 2 , implying the home tari¤ level = R (^ 1 ; ^ 2 ; 03 ) de...ned by

                               ew ( ; ^ 1 ; ^ 2 ;
                               p                       0
                                                        3
                                                                 ew
                                                               )=p 0              (4.3)

and the exchange of reciprocal tari¤ cuts           =      ~ and       2
                                                                         = ^2      2
                                                                                  0 in
this bilateral. Under this ...rst possibility, the home country negotiates two tari¤
bindings, one with foreign-country 1 and a second, lower one, with foreign-country
2; and when these two bilaterals occur simultaneously, it is the lower binding which
summarizes the implications of the round for the "applied" home-country tari¤
that enters the world price function in (4.3).
    With these agreed tari¤ changes satisfying reciprocity in each bilateral, the
overall changes in tari¤s negotiated in the round as a result of the two bilaterals
will of course by construction satisfy reciprocity as well, and will therefore leave
the terms of trade unaltered, as is re   ected in (4.3). Hence, as I described above in
the context of the three-country model, in the four-country setting it is also true
that when each of the bilateral MFN negotiations adheres to reciprocity, there are
no strategic considerations and no third-party spillovers from the bilaterals, and
in this case the non-participating foreign-country 3 receives nothing.
    But now consider an alternative possibility for the outcomes of each of the
bilaterals. Suppose in its bilateral with foreign-country 1 the home country of-
fers the tari¤ cut     =          0 in exchange for the tari¤ cut
                                                                         1
                                                                           = ^1      0
                                                                                       1

from foreign-country 1; and suppose in its bilateral with foreign-country 2 the
home country demands the tari¤ cut             2
                                                 =^2        2
                                                           0 while o¤ering nothing in
return. Now reciprocity is violated in each bilateral, with the home country grant-
ing greater-than-reciprocal tari¤ cuts in its bilateral with foreign-country 1 and
receiving greater-than-reciprocal tari¤ cuts in its bilateral with foreign-country 2.
And as a result, viewed in isolation each bilateral would alter the terms of trade
ew , with foreign-country 3 enjoying a terms-of-trade improvement as a result of
p
the tari¤ cuts exchanged in home'     s bilateral with foreign-country 1 and su¤ering

                                              83
a terms-of-trade deterioration as a result of the tari¤ cuts exchanged in home'         s
bilateral with foreign-country 2. Nevertheless, this alternative possibility still de-
livers the same overall outcome of the negotiating round, as embodied in the tari¤s
  , ^ 1 and ^ 2 , with 3 held ...xed at 03 . And so, as (4.3) indicates, once the
outcomes of the bilaterals are viewed in their totality, it is clear that the various
violations of bilateral reciprocity that I have just described o¤set each other, so
that multilateral reciprocity is still maintained, the terms of trade is still preserved,
and strategic considerations and third-party spillovers are still eliminated.
    It is in this general way, as the quoted passage from the ICITO report above
suggests, that the innovation introduced by GATT rounds of simultaneous bilat-
eral MFN tari¤ bargains over the earlier sequential bilateral MFN tari¤ bargains
of the RTAA may have relaxed the constraint of bilateral reciprocity and allowed
governments ­ by "exchanging" spillovers across bilaterals in a balanced way ­
to continue to enjoy the bene...ts of MFN and reciprocity under the less stringent
requirement of multilateral reciprocity.46
    Bagwell and Staiger (2018) provide the dominant-strategy arguments that for-
malize these insights in the context of the three-country model described above.
In the tari¤ bargaining game that they consider, the three countries take as given
the initial tari¤ vector and the accompanying world price, and then make simul-
taneous tari¤ proposals. Mimicking the request-o¤er structure of GATT tari¤
negotiations, a strategy for each country is a proposal for its own tari¤ and that
of its trading partner(s), where a proposal must satisfy MFN and multilateral
reciprocity. Each country'  s proposal, if accepted, would imply an import volume
for itself. Bagwell and Staiger then construct a simple mechanism that takes the
proposals made by the three countries and assigns a vector of tari¤s. If the pro-
posals agree, the tari¤ vector comprised of each country'     s own-tari¤ proposal is
assigned. If the proposals do not agree, the mechanism assigns a vector of tari¤s
that maximizes the trade volume subject to maintaining the initial world price
(reciprocity in the downward direction) and subject to a "voluntary exchange"
constraint under which no country is forced to import a volume in excess of its
implied import volume (reciprocity in the upward direction). When the proposals
do not agree, with one side wanting deeper reciprocal tari¤ cuts than the other, a
"rebalancing"of o¤ers is required, because the depth of the o¤er(s) on the "long"
  46
    What is not answered here is what exactly the countries gain from the relaxation of the
bilateral reciprocity constraint to a multilateral reciprocity constraint. But it is not hard to
imagine trading patterns (e.g., such as featured in the triangular trade model of Maggi, 1999),
where the relaxation of this constraint would make a di¤erence to the bargaining outcomes.


                                              84
side of the market must be reduced to match the depth on the "short" side.
For the constructed mechanism, Bagwell and Staiger show that if countries use
dominant strategies, each country'     s proposal must specify a tari¤ for itself that
delivers its preferred local price and trade volume, given the initial world price;
and under dominant-strategy proposals, the implemented tari¤ vector is e¢ cient
if and only if the initial world price corresponds to the world price that would also
prevail at the politically optimal tari¤s, just as I described above in the context
of reciprocity in the two-country setting.
    The upshot is that, when negotiations must satisfy MFN and multilateral reci-
procity, a strategically complex multilateral bargaining problem is converted into
a comparatively straightforward collection of bilateral bargains, because under
MFN and multilateral reciprocity it is a dominant strategy for each participat-
ing government to propose for a given import product the tari¤ that generates
its preferred local price and trade volume for the ...xed terms of trade. Hence,
when governments adhere strictly to MFN and multilateral reciprocity in their
GATT tari¤ bargains, there should be an absence of strategic behavior among
the participating governments. A further implication of Bagwell and Staiger'         s
(2018a) analysis is that, under MFN and multilateral reciprocity, a government
anticipates that any subsequent rebalancing of o¤ers necessary for multilateral
reciprocity would arise later in the round after all o¤ers had been recorded and
that this might lead to a reduction in the depth of its overall (multilateral) o¤er.
This implies that there will be an important multilateral element to the bilateral
bargains. And ...nally, at a more speci...c level these features imply that, when
tari¤ bargaining takes place under the constraints of MFN and multilateral reci-
procity, o¤ers play a central role and are not often modi...ed, lowball initial o¤ers
are absent, and linkages across bilaterals are present.47 This summarizes the bar-
gaining behavior that would be expected in a tari¤ bargaining forum shaped by
the requirements of MFN and multilateral reciprocity when viewed through the
lens of the terms-of-trade theory.

4.2. Torquay Round bargaining records
With the theoretical considerations developed above as a guide, I now describe the
...ndings of Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2020a) with regard to the bargaining
  47
    Outcomes consistent with either zero or one modi...cations to the initial o¤er can arise under
the mechanism characterized by Bagwell and Staiger (2018). If shocks (e.g., a given bilateral
randomly fails) were introduced, additional o¤er modi...cations could naturally arise.


                                               85
records of the Torquay Round, which cover negotiations that spanned a 10 month
period over 1950 51. There were 37 negotiating parties at Torquay, representing
39 countries and accounting for well over 80 percent of world trade as of 1949.48 Of
the 666 possible bargaining pairs, 298 formed, re     ecting the bargaining structure
implied by the principal supplier rule: Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu report that
on average 1:25 exporting countries bargained with an importing country over a
given tari¤, with the requirement of a double coincidence of wants then deter-
mining the list of viable bilaterals. The GATT Torquay bargaining records cover
292 of the 298 bilaterals that were formed, 148 of which were successfully com-
pleted and led to agreed tari¤ commitments on thousands of tari¤-line products.
The United States engaged in bilateral negotiations with 24 of its 36 potential
negotiating partners, and reached ...nal agreement with 15 of them.
    Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu document three stylized facts of the tari¤ bar-
gaining at Torquay that conform broadly to the predictions of the terms-of-trade
theory outlined above. First, initial o¤ers were not often modi...ed in the negotia-
tions. On products where a country made at least 1 o¤er in the bilateral, it made
an average of 1:36 o¤ers in a bilateral on that product; and on products where a
country made at least 1 request in the bilateral, modi...cation was even more rare,
with an average of 1:02 requests in a bilateral on that product. Moreover, o¤ers
played a central role in the bargaining, in that when proposals were modi...ed,
it was the o¤ers, not the requests, that were adjusted: when a counterproposal
was made in a bilateral, 82 percent of the time it involved a modi...cation of an
own-tari¤-cut o¤er, not a modi...cation of the request for a tari¤ cut from the bar-
gaining partner. In this sense, it appears that o¤ers were taken at face value ­if
my bargaining partner'    s initial o¤er did not meet my initial request, I reduced the
depth of my o¤er to match the depth of my partner'       s o¤er rather than requesting
that my partner increase her o¤er to match my initial request ­much as Curzon
(1966, p. 74) suggests in the passage quoted above and much as the terms-of-trade
theory predicts.
    Second, there was a notable absence of initial lowball o¤ers, with the initial
o¤ers cutting tari¤s on average to 82:2 percent of their existing levels and with
the ...nal o¤ers cutting tari¤s to 80:9 percent of their existing levels, corresponding
to an average downward movement in o¤ers made within a bilateral over the 10
months of negotiations that amounted to less than 2 percent (not 2 percentage
points) of the initial o¤ers. Moreover, even this amount of downward movement
  48
    Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands belonged to the Benelux customs union which
negotiated its common external tari¤s as a single entity.


                                          86
hides an interesting fact: as Curzon (1966, p. 74) observed in the passage quoted
above, the lack of lowball initial o¤ers was particularly striking for countries that
had previous negotiating experience in earlier GATT rounds. This is documented
in Tables 4.1 and 4.2.
    Table 4.1, which is reproduced from Table A3 of the Online Appendix to Bag-
well, Staiger and Yurukoglu (2020a), reports negotiating statistics for the subset
of countries at Torquay that had also been present at the previous GATT (An-
necy) round. Table 4.2, reproduced from Table A2 of the same Online Appendix,
reports the same statistics for the six countries (Austria, Germany, Korea, Peru,
Philippines and Turkey) that were negotiating their accession to GATT during
the Torquay Round, and hence were GATT newcomers.




   Table 4.1 (Reproduced from Table A3 of the Online Appendix to Bagwell,
                       Staiger and Yurukoglu, 2020a)

                                         87
   Table 4.2 (Reproduced from Table A2 of the Online Appendix to Bagwell,
                       Staiger and Yurukoglu, 2020a)
    In each table, the Sales columns refer to requests of and o¤ers on a country'     s
own tari¤s, while the Purchases columns refer to requests of and o¤ers on the
tari¤s of the country'  s bargaining partner. The top panel of each table presents
Country-Speci...c numbers that refer to a given Seller-Purchaser-HS6, while the
bottom panel of each table presents Cross-Country numbers that refer to a given
Seller-HS6 across all its bargaining partners. As the Sales columns of the top panel
Table 4.1 re   ect, when the focus is limited to experienced GATT negotiators, on
average the initial o¤ers reduced tari¤s to 80:8 percent of their existing levels and
the ...nal o¤ers reduced tari¤s to 80:6 percent of their existing levels, corresponding
to an average downward movement in o¤ers made within a bilateral for these
countries that amounted to 0:2 percent. By contrast, for the GATT newcomers,
the Sales columns of the top panel of Table 4.2 reveals that the analogous numbers

                                          88
were 85:5 percent and 81:9 percent, amounting to an average downward movement
in o¤ers made within a bilateral for the newcomer countries that amounted to
4:2 percent. And a comparison of the Purchases columns across the two tables
indicates that bargaining partners did not alter their behavior when confronted
with the bargaining behavior of newcomers: on average the downward movement
in the o¤ers made to experienced and ...rst-time GATT negotiators was 0.015
percent and 0.013 percent, respectively.
    Third, there is evidence that multilateral linkages gave rise to issues of sequenc-
ing across the bilaterals. Initial o¤ers on the table would sometimes sit dormant
for long periods of time, only to be ...nalized with a single modi...cation at the time
that other bargains were also being concluded. Speci...cally, Bagwell, Staiger and
Yurukoglu report that for bilaterals that ended in a ...nal agreement, an average
of 11:8 weeks passed between the last o¤er or modi...ed o¤er made in the bilateral
and the announcement of an agreement. And some agreements were themselves
also modi...ed at the conclusion of the round. Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu
report that, for the average agreement, modi...cations applied to 3:5 percent of the
total number of products on which initial agreement was reached.49
    Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu also provide evidence that these multilateral
linkages were driven by a desire of governments to maintain multilateral reci-
procity in their bargains. They do this by exploiting the unexpected collapse of
a number of bilaterals that occurred in the middle of the Torquay Round, where
these bilaterals involved the United States on one side and the UK and several of
its Commonwealth partners on the other side. As Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu
observe, if third parties were counting on indirect trade bene...ts from the MFN
tari¤ cuts negotiated in the US-UK/Commonwealth country bilaterals to help
them achieve multilateral reciprocity in the Torquay Round, then there should
have been an observable reaction in the bilateral bargaining records of these third
countries and their bargaining partners when the US-UK/Commonwealth coun-
try bilaterals unexpectedly collapsed, as these third countries would have sought
to rebalance their outstanding o¤ers in light of this development and re-establish
multilateral reciprocity; whereas no such reaction would be expected if strictly
bilateral reciprocity had been demanded and achieved by all countries all along.
Analyzing the bargaining records, Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu ...nd that, sub-
  49
    As Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu note, a feature of the Torquay Round bargaining data
that is not accounted for by the theoretical framework I have outlined above is the fact that,
when a country chose to reduce the depth of its o¤ers, it did so by removing products from its
o¤ers, not by reducing the magnitude of the tari¤ cut o¤ered on a given product.


                                             89
sequent to the collapse of the US-UK/Commonwealth country bilaterals, third
countries did indeed scale back their outstanding o¤ers to the United States and
its Commonwealth bargaining partners at the same time that the United States
and its Commonwealth bargaining partners reoriented their o¤ers toward these
third countries, consistent with the view that important rebalancing with third
countries occurred after the collapse of the US-UK/Commonwealth country bilat-
erals and therefore with the view that the attainment of multilateral as opposed
to bilateral reciprocity was an important feature of the Torquay Round.
    Overall, the evidence from the bargaining records of the Torquay Round sup-
ports two important claims. First, this evidence con...rms that the bargaining
behavior in the Torquay Round can be usefully interpreted through the lens of
the terms-of-trade theory, suggesting in turn that this theoretical framework cap-
tures an important component of what governments were trying to achieve when
they created GATT. And second, it con...rms that there is an economic logic to
the pillars of GATT'   s architecture when it comes to the bargaining forum that
these pillars helped to create, and that the apparently non-strategic nature of the
bargaining behavior induced by these pillars arguably contributed importantly to
the success of GATT tari¤ bargaining relative to what had come before.
    Of course, as I alluded to earlier, it is not self-evident that the terms-of-trade
driven prisoner' s dilemma that seems to lie at the heart of the problem that the
GATT was created to address 75 years ago is still the central problem that a
trade agreement should be designed to address today. And even if the goal is to
help governments escape from their terms-of-trade driven prisoner'      s dilemma, the
evidence I have reviewed here does not imply that GATT'        s architecture is perfect
or that it cannot be improved upon. But at a minimum, this evidence suggests that
the GATT architecture warrants respect ­not because it seems to produce "good
outcomes," but because it seems well-designed to address an important problem
and can therefore claim a deeper legitimacy ­and that the GATT/WTO should
not be discarded in favor of a new institutional approach without an understanding
of what would be lost. In their discussion of the meaning of legitimacy in the
context of global governance institutions more generally, Buchanan and Keohane
(2006, p. 407) put the point this way:
      Judgments about institutional legitimacy have distinctive practical impli-
      cations. Generally speaking, if an institution is legitimate, then this legit-
      imacy should shape the character of both our responses to the claims it
      makes on us and the form that our criticisms of it take. We should support
      or at least refrain from interfering with legitimate institutions. Further,

                                           90
     agents of legitimate institutions deserve a kind of impersonal respect, even
     when we voice serious criticisms of them. Judging an institution to be legit-
     imate, if  awed, focuses critical discourse by signaling that the appropriate
     objective is to reform it, rather than to reject it outright.


5. The Rise of Large Emerging Markets
The rise in economic importance of the large emerging and developing economies
has brought these countries to the forefront of the world economy, with China
playing a leading role. This has created three interrelated challenges for the
world trading system. I argue in this chapter that the WTO, with some possible
adjustments, is in principle well-designed to address these challenges.
    First, there has emerged a substantial departure from reciprocity between
China and its major industrialized trading partners. Below I suggest that the
implied need for rebalancing market access commitments can be addressed with
non-violation claims, but with a twist: to ensure their success, these claims should
be aided by China. And while such cooperation between the claimant and respon-
dent in a GATT/WTO dispute would be unprecedented, I argue that in this case
cooperation from China is warranted, as successful non-violation claims against
China are in China'    s own interests. This is because the goal of the non-violation
claims is not to pressure China into introducing market reforms to its economy;
rather the goal is to allow China to ...nd additional policy commitments, tailored
to compensate for the non-market elements of its economy, that can serve as
"market-access preservation rules,"much as the role as I noted in chapter 4 that
GATT Articles play for market-oriented economies. And it is in China'       s own in-
terests, just as it is in each WTO member'     s own interests, to be part of a world
trading system that is e¤ective in permitting the voluntary exchange of secure
negotiated market access commitments between its members.
    Second, even once reciprocity between China and its major industrialized trad-
ing partners is established, there is a possibility that the Uruguay Round tari¤
commitments made by industrialized countries now imply the grant of a greater
level of market access than these countries are comfortable with. Below I suggest
that the implied need for reconsideration of the level of market access commit-
ments, where necessary, can be addressed with Article XXVIII renegotiations.
    And third, an asymmetry in the level of market access commitments between
the developing/emerging economies and industrialized countries has emerged that
is now hindering the ability of the former to gain from WTO membership. Below

                                          91
I suggest that this "latecomers problem" can be addressed with Article XXVIII
renegotiations between industrialized countries, followed by Article XXVIII bis
negotiations between industrialized and developing/emerging countries.

5.1. Rebalancing market access commitments
Industrialized countries have grown increasingly frustrated with the inability of
WTO rules to e¤ectively discipline China' s economic policies, owing to the non-
market features of China' s economy. For example, in its 2020 Report to Congress
on China' s WTO Compliance, the United States Trade Representative stated:

          ...China's non-market approach has imposed, and continues to impose,
      substantial costs on WTO members. In our prior reports, we identi...ed and
      explained the numerous policies and practices pursued by China that harm
      and disadvantage U.S. companies and workers, often severely. It is clear
      that the costs associated with China'   s unfair and distortive policies and
      practices have been substantial. For example, China'   s non-market economic
      system and the industrial policies that      ow from it have systematically
      distorted critical sectors of the global economy such as steel, aluminum,
      solar and ...sheries, devastating markets in the United States and other
      countries. China also continues to block valuable sectors of its economy from
      foreign competition, particularly services sectors. At the same time, China' s
      industrial policies are increasingly responsible for displacing companies in
      new, emerging sectors of the global economy, as the Chinese government
      and the Chinese Communist Party powerfully intervene on behalf of China'     s
      domestic industries. Companies in economies disciplined by the market
      cannot e¤ectively compete with both Chinese companies and the Chinese
      state. (USTR 2021, p 2)

Similar frustrations about China'   s economic policies have been voiced by the EU
(see, for example, European Commission, 2016).
     Wu (2016, p 284) attributes this frustration not so much to any one speci...c
China policy or even a handful of speci...c policies, but rather to China's "complex
web of overlapping networks and relationships ­some formal and others informal
­between the state, Party, SOEs [State Owned Enterprises], private enterprises,
...nancial institutions, investment vehicles, trade associations, and so on."Adding
to this frustration is the fact that many of the distinct elements of China' s unique
economic model were put in place after its 2001 accession to the WTO. But rather

                                           92
than re  ecting frustration with a bad-faith e¤ort on the part of China to escape
from its WTO commitments, it is more accurate to say that the growing frustra-
tion among industrialized countries re  ects their unmet expectations that China
would have by now evolved further in the direction of a market-oriented economy
than it, in fact, has. Summarizing the nexus of non-market forces operating in
China with the moniker "China, Inc.,"Wu puts the point this way:

          This is not to suggest that the Chinese concealed their true intentions.
      Throughout the 1990s, Chinese leaders openly and repeatedly stated that
      they sought to forge their own unique economic system. Moreover, eco-
      nomic developments in China'   s reform era have proceeded largely through
      incremental rather than through radical, abrupt policy shifts. Thus, the
      development of China, Inc. should not be understood as a deliberate ex
      post act to circumvent WTO rules. (Wu, 2016, p. 292, footnotes omitted)

    As Wu (2016) describes it, China, Inc. poses a particularly subtle challenge
for the WTO. This is because the pursuit of complaints against China'      s policies
through the WTO dispute settlement system has not been altogether unsuccessful
in helping China'  s trading partners address these concerns. As Wu documents,
when it comes to certain kinds of issues, such as state-coordinated economic ac-
tions, local content requirements and state trading enterprises, the GATT/WTO
legal framework has proven to be e¤ective against those countries that have used
such policies in the past, and it continues to be e¤ective against China'    s use of
these policies. The real challenge is to be found in other issues raised by China'  s
policies ­such as the de...nition of a "public body" in the context of de...ning the
reach of WTO disciplines on subsidies, and whether China'    s trading partners can
treat it as a non-market economy for purposes of administering their antidumping
laws ­which involve technical legal and factual questions that the WTO dispute
settlement body has little prior experience resolving, with trade stakes that are
potentially enormous. Left unaddressed and in light of China'     s sheer size, these
issues have the potential to upset the fundamental balance between market access
rights and obligations that lies at the core of the GATT/WTO bargain. And they
are the kinds of thorny issues posed by China, Inc. on which, Wu argues, the
WTO could founder.
    So how should the WTO confront the China, Inc. challenge? To answer this
question it is clarifying ...rst to pause and revisit a fundamental question that I
considered in chapter 2: What is the purpose of a trade agreement? In chap-
ter 2 I argued that the purpose of a trade agreement in a wide range of settings

                                          93
can be seen as expanding market access to internationally e¢ cient levels. But
in all of the settings I considered there, market forces ­ subject to the kinds of
government policy interventions that typify those found in market economies ­
were assumed to shape the decisions of ...rms and consumers everywhere. Does
the purpose of a trade agreement change when one of the countries adopts an
economic system like China, Inc.? Reassuringly, it is straightforward to see that
the answer to this question is "No," as long as world prices continue to be de-
termined via the international market clearing conditions that equate quantities
demanded to quantities supplied on world markets. This is because the fact that
one country chooses to organize the economic activity within its borders under
a policy regime that features important non-market elements does not alter the
fundamental international externality ­namely, the world-price or terms-of-trade
externality ­ that is generated by the unilateral policy choices of this country
and the unilateral policy choices of its trading partners, and that underpins the
essential insu¢ cient-market-access problem for a trade agreement to solve.
    A simple way to see this is to think of noncooperative Nash policies as being
determined in two steps: ...rst, facing the constraints imposed by international
market clearing conditions, a national social planner in each country determines
the economic magnitudes (the "allocation"      ) within its national borders; and sec-
ond, in each country the national social planner then chooses whether to decen-
tralize the implementation of the desired within-country allocation using a market
system and appropriate tax/subsidy/regulatory policies, or whether instead to im-
pose this allocation directly on its citizens by ...at. The choice made in this second
step could be interpreted as determining whether a country is market-oriented
or not. Choosing the ...rst option amounts to the familiar "primal" approach to
solving the optimal policy problem, whereby the ...ctional planner decides on the
allocation and then implements the desired allocation in a market economy with
the appropriate policy instruments. Choosing the second option simply omits the
use of markets to implement the desired allocation. But these choices will not
impact the nature of the problem for a trade agreement to solve.50
  50
     In chapter 2 I made use of the politically optimal point on the e¢ ciency frontier (Bagwell
and Staiger, 1999, 2002) to conclude that the purpose of a trade agreement is to eliminate the
unilateral incentive that governments have to manipulate their terms of trade. As long as the
underlying objectives of each government can be represented as a function of the within-country
allocation ­and the local and world prices that would be needed to implement that allocation
in a market economy ­as stipulated in (2.7)-(2.9), it is immaterial for those arguments whether
governments actually choose to implement their desired within-country allocations through the
decentralized mechanism of the market or rather through a command economy. This also helps


                                              94
    Con...rming that the purpose of a trade agreement is unchanged from that
identi...ed in chapter 2 when a country adopts an economic system like China,
Inc. is clarifying, because it indicates that the challenge for the WTO posed by
China'   s entry into the world trading system is not to ...nd the capacity to evolve
beyond its essential market-access focus in order to successfully accommodate
China. Rather, the challenge, succinctly put, is this: the WTO must ...nd a way
for China to make additional policy commitments, tailored to compensate for the
non-market elements of its economy, that can serve the role of preserving the
market access implied by its tari¤ bindings, much as the role that GATT Articles
play for market-oriented economies (see, for example, note 29). Evidently, there is
no reason to think that China'    s entry into the world trading system raises issues
that are fundamentally inconsistent with the WTO'          s underlying mandate. To
the contrary, the market access orientation of the GATT/WTO provides a useful
guardrail for what China should be willing to contemplate ­and what other WTO
members have a right to expect ­in the context of its WTO commitments.
    In essence, then, the current circumstances that the WTO ...nds itself in with
regard to China'   s economic policies can be summarized as follows. Upon China'    s
2001 accession to the WTO, its major industrialized trading partners believed that
existing WTO rules, in combination with (a) the very substantial tari¤ bindings
and additional speci...c market access commitments they had secured from China
as part of its accession negotiations and (b) their expectation that China would
evolve strongly in the direction of a more market oriented economy, were su¢ cient
to ensure that China'    s tari¤ bindings represented market access commitments
that would deliver the appropriate balance between rights and obligations. But
the initial set of speci...c commitments that China agreed to as a condition for
accession to the WTO has turned out to be unsatisfactory for this purpose. This
is not because China has failed to live up to its speci...c commitments or to comply
with WTO rulings against it when it has not.51 Rather, it is because China has not
to clarify what would cause a problem for my argument: if, for example, China sought to use
its policies to maximize its share of world trade, then its objectives would depend on more than
simply its within-country allocations ­ its objectives would depend also on the trade volumes
of other countries and therefore directly on their local prices ­ and the purpose of a trade
agreement would no longer conform to the purpose I described in chapter 2. But notice that
such an objective function would imply a di¤erent purpose to trade agreements independent of
whether this description ...t the government of a command economy or a market economy. So
this has nothing to do with China as China, Inc. per se.
   51
      As Wu (2016) notes, many of the speci...c commitments agreed to by China as part of its
WTO Protocol of Accession (see WTO, 2001) can be litigated successfully in the WTO (and


                                              95
evolved toward a market economy as quickly as these trading partners expected,
and it does not now appear that China is likely to evolve toward a market-oriented
economy as strongly as these trading partners once hoped.
    If this is an accurate summary of the China, Inc. challenge faced by the WTO,
then the non-violation clause provides a promising path for WTO members to
address the current impasse. This point is made forcefully by Hillman (2018) who,
in describing the role of a non-violation claim in the context of her Congressional
testimony about the best way for the United States to address the challenges
created by China'    s economic policies, observes:52

          It is exactly for this type of situation that the non-violation nulli...ca-
      tion and impairment clause was drafted. The United States and all other
      WTO members had legitimate expectations that China would increasingly
      behave as a market economy-- that it would achieve a discernible separation
      between its government and its private sector, that private property rights
      and an understanding of who controls and makes decisions in major enter-
      prises would be clear, that subsidies would be curtailed, that theft of IP
      [Intellectual Property] rights would be punished and diminished in amount,
      that SOEs would make purchases based on commercial considerations, that
      the Communist Party would not, by ...at, occupy critical seats within major
      "private" enterprises and that standards and regulations would be pub-
      lished for all to see. It is this collective failure by China, rather than any
      speci...c violation of individual provisions, that should form of the core of
      a big, bold WTO case. Because addressing these cross-cutting, systemic
      problems is the only way to correct for the collective failures of both the
      rules-based trading system and China. (Hillman, 2018, pp 10-11)

   Importantly, by focusing on the departure from reciprocity in market access
commitments and the implied imbalance itself, rather than attempting to identify
speci...c policies that may have violated WTO legal obligations and led to this
have been, where violation claims against it have been brought), so they are not the source of
the challenge posed by China, Inc.. And on China'   s record of compliance with WTO rulings
against it, see Webster (2014) and Zhou (2019).
  52
     The non-violation clause in the original GATT 1947 was incorporated into the WTO Agree-
ments in GATT 1994, in the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), and in the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). However, WTO
members agreed to an extendable 5-year moratorium on the use of the non-violation clause in
TRIPS, and this moratorium is still in place today. Hence, it is not clear that the non-violation
clause could be utilized to address concerns about China's intellectual property rights regime.

                                               96
imbalance, the non-violation complaint can side-step the kinds of thorny legal
and factual issues noted above and described by Wu (2016). This feature of non-
violation complaints is highlighted by Sykes (2005) in the context of disciplines
on domestic subsidies:

           A nice feature of the nonviolation doctrine is the fact that it does not
       require subsidies to be carefully de...ned or measured. A complaining mem-
       ber need simply demonstrate that an unanticipated government program
       has improved the competitive position of domestic ...rms at the expense of
       their foreign competition. (Sykes, 2005, p 98).

    Moreover, as I describe in Staiger (2021, chapter 6), under a successful non-
violation claim the defendant government is under no obligation to remove the
measures at issue, but if it does not remove them then the claimant government
is owed compensation, the level of which is subject to arbitration by the WTO
Dispute Settlement Body. Hence, a non-violation claim would provide China with
the freedom to decide whether and, if so, how best to o¤er secure market access
commitments to its trading partners that can reestablish reciprocity, with the
knowledge that if its o¤er of market access commitments is not su¢ cient for this
purpose then its trading partners have the right to restore reciprocity by withdraw-
ing market access concessions of their own as part of the resolution of a successful
non-violation claim. In this way, the non-violation clause would be serving ex-
actly the role it was designed to serve, namely, as Petersmann (1977) observes, to
provide a check on the domestic policy autonomy of member-countries, "... and
to prevent the circumvention of the provisions in GATT Article XXVIII ... if a
member, rather than withdrawing a concession de jure in exchange for compen-
sation or equivalent withdrawals of concessions by a¤ected contracting parties,
withdraws a concession de facto."(p. 172). And crucially, any disagreements over
the magnitude of the policy adjustments required to restore reciprocity between
China and its trading partners would be referred to the relevant WTO dispute
settlement bodies for a ruling, thereby keeping the resolution of these issues within
the rules-based multilateral system.53
  53
     What kinds of commitments might China o¤er as a way to reestablish reciprocity? It is pos-
sible that China might be able to ...nd certain policy commitments that would have clear market
access implications without undermining core features of its chosen economic system. And it is
possible that transparency issues would warrant the use of certain quantity commitments rather
than tari¤ commitments as a second-best tool for generating market access commitments, as
were utilized in the GATT accession agreements for Poland and Romania (see, for example,


                                              97
    This perspective also yields an important insight into the nature of the chal-
lenge that China, Inc. poses for the world trading system, and the choices that
are available to the WTO membership to address this challenge. Recall from
above that there were two elements to China'     s accession negotiations: (a) a list
of agreed speci...c market access commitments, and (b) an expectation that China
would evolve strongly toward a market economy. And recall that the imbalance
between China'    s market access rights and obligations has emerged as a result of
the failure of (b): China has not evolved toward a market economy to the extent
that its trading partners expected. Does this imply that the only solution is for
China to now promise to evolve to a market economy at the speed and to the
degree that ful...lls those expectations? Not at all, because it is clear from the
above that there is an alternative solution, and one that is more targeted to the
underlying source of the trade tension. The alternative is for China to agree to
additional speci...c market access commitments of its own choosing, and therefore
to compensate for the unanticipated non-market features of its economy and hence
for the shortfall in part (b) by augmenting its speci...c commitments in part (a);
and this is what the non-violation clause can facilitate. Looked at in this way,
there is no reason to think that, unless China chooses to relinquish China, Inc. as
its chosen economic model, "decoupling"China from the world trading system is
the inevitable endgame.54
Kostecki, 1974, and Haus, 1991). More generally, it is likely that a combination of measures
might be needed to secure market access commitments from China, but it is also likely that
China is in the best position to know what combination of measures would be most e¤ective
while minimizing inconsistencies with its desired economic system.
  54
     Here my position diverges somewhat from Hillman (2018, p. 13), who describes the choice
facing China as one of reforming its economic system or exiting the WTO. There is still the
important question of whether China can, in fact, ...nd ways to make the needed additional
market access commitments given the unique features of its economic system. And this would
no doubt be a di¢ cult task. But as observed above (see note 53), several of the non-market
economies of Eastern Europe found creative ways to do this when they joined the GATT in the
1960' s and 70's, suggesting that China might ...nd similarly unorthodox ways to make market
access commitments that can respond to those non-market features of its economic system that
were not anticipated by WTO members at the time of China'         s WTO accession but that China
wishes to preserve. And while ...nding e¤ective disciplines on China'   s subsidies will be particu-
larly important and may ultimately entail reforms of the WTO'        s Agreement on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures in the wider context of WTO multilateral or plurilateral negotiations
(see Bown and Hillman, 2019), Zhou and Fang (2021) have argued that these reforms are not
necessary to address the China-speci...c issues that arise in the context of subsidy disciplines and
that such reforms would therefore be better approached outside the context of China-speci...c
trade tensions.


                                                98
    Clarifying the challenge for the WTO posed by China, Inc. also has a po-
tential side bene...t. As is well known, bringing successful non-violation claims in
the GATT/WTO is exceptionally di¢ cult, and indeed this is so by design. As
one WTO Panel report put it, "... the non-violation nulli...cation or impairment
remedy should be approached with caution and treated as an exceptional concept.
The reason for this caution is straightforward. Members negotiate the rules that
they agree to follow and only exceptionally would expect to be challenged for ac-
tions not in contravention of those rules"(WTO, 1998). But once it is understood
that the goal of a non-violation claim is to ...nd a way to allow China to make
meaningful market access commitments, and not to confront China with a choice
between either reforming its economy or else decoupling from the world trading
system, it then also becomes more likely that China would see it in its own inter-
ests to facilitate a successful rebalancing within the context of such a claim, and
enlisting China'  s support in bringing such a claim might even be feasible. This is
because it is in China'  s own interests, just as it is in each WTO member'    s own
interests, to be part of a world trading system that is e¤ective in permitting the
voluntary exchange of secure negotiated market access commitments between its
members. And this is especially so if the current imbalances in the world trad-
ing system attributable to China'    s accession to the WTO are putting the WTO
at serious risk of foundering. So while enlisting China'   s support in bringing such
claims against it would be unprecedented, it is not unreasonable to attempt to
do so given the unique challenge that China poses for the WTO and the world
trading system.
    This is not to say that the more traditional WTO violation claims against
China, where viable, should not also be brought, just as with viable violation
claims against any WTO member. Indeed, in her testimony to Congress about
the WTO case that the US should bring against China, Hillman (2018) lists 11
speci...c issue areas where violation claims against China might be viable (and as
Hillman notes, her list is not meant to be exhaustive). But as both Hillman and
also Wu (2016) make clear, even if such violation claims were all successful they
are not likely to address the fundamental sources of the imbalances that have
emerged in China'    s market access rights and obligations and that have led to the
growing frustrations of industrialized countries with China, Inc. By channeling
these frustrations into non-violation claims, where such claims might perhaps be
aided by China itself and where the process of ...ling and resolving these claims
might also serve as a mechanism for resolving among the parties any pending
or imminent violation claims, the existing GATT/WTO procedures for dispute


                                         99
settlement can be most e¤ectively put to use.
    Finally, an added bene...t of addressing this issue with non-violation claims is
that it helps to draw a clean distinction between concerns over non-reciprocity
with China on the one hand, and the possibility that even with reciprocity es-
tablished a WTO member might wish to rethink its own level of market access
commitments on the other; and it allows these two separable issues to be ad-
dressed on separate tracks. As I describe next, the second issue is best addressed
within the context of Article XXVIII renegotiations. And the separation of these
two issues is crucial, because while the maintenance of reciprocity should be a
central concern of attempts to address the second issue (and would be under Ar-
ticle XXVIII renegotiations), by design it cannot be a feature of the solution to
the ...rst issue (and would not be under a non-violation claim, where the whole
point is to address an im balance and thereby restore reciprocity).

5.2. Reconsideration of the level of market access commitments
Suppose that the imbalance between China'    s market access rights and obligations
in the WTO can be addressed, and that reciprocity is restored in the world trading
system. Does this mean that all of the major challenges to the world trading
system presented by the rise of the large emerging markets will have been met?
In this and the next subsection I suggest that the answer to this question is "No,"
by describing two additional challenges that would still remain. A ...rst challenge
relates to the impact on industrialized country income inequality that the rise
of large emerging markets has had. Whether this impact would be mitigated
or rather exacerbated by the restoration of reciprocity with China depends in
part on how reciprocity is restored; and in particular this depends on whether
reciprocity with China is restored by an expansion of access to the markets of
China, or rather by a reduction in access to the markets of the industrialized
world. I discuss this challenge in this subsection. A second challenge relates
to the history of reciprocal tari¤ negotiations in GATT, the historical lack of
participation by nonindustrialized countries in these negotiations, and how that
history has positioned the world trading system going forward in the presence of
the large emerging markets today. I discuss this challenge in the next subsection.
    Concerns about the possible adverse e¤ects of trade on income inequality are
not new, and indeed such e¤ects are central predictions of the standard neoclassi-
cal models of trade. But as of the mid 1990'  s the general view among economists
was that as an empirical matter the distributional impacts of trade were relatively


                                        100
modest. Today that view is markedly less sanguine, thanks in part to changes in
the nature and scale of trade over the past three decades ­including a dramatic
rise in the manufacturing exports of developing and emerging economies ­ and
thanks in part also to changes in the focus of the economics research investigating
these e¤ects (a shift in focus from economy-wide impacts to local labor market
e¤ects).55 This observation is especially illuminating for the current discussion,
because the WTO tari¤ commitments in place today are the product of multi-
lateral market access negotiations in the Uruguay Round that were completed in
1994 with the signing of the Marrakesh Agreement that created the WTO. In this
light, there is a possibility that the Uruguay Round tari¤ commitments made by
some industrialized countries now imply the grant of a greater level of market ac-
cess than these countries are comfortable with given the level of income inequality
that they are now grappling with.56
    In short, it would not be unreasonable if those industrialized countries that
have experienced a signi...cant increase in income inequality over the past several
decades now wanted to pause and reconsider some of their existing tari¤ com-
mitments, given that these commitments were made before the rise of the large
emerging markets at a time when it was thought that the potential for trade to
generate signi...cant income inequality issues within industrialized countries was
small. Of course, a convincing argument that the reimposition of tari¤s is an
appropriate response to a country'   s concerns about income inequality would have
to clear several important hurdles.
    A ...rst hurdle is to demonstrate that there are not alternative policy responses
that are available to the government and that could address its concerns about
income inequality at lower overall cost to the economy. At a general level, the tar-
geting principle (Bhagwati and Ramaswami, 1963) implies that tari¤s will almost
never be the ...rst-best policy choice for achieving any particular goal (the ex-
ception being for purposes of terms-of-trade manipulation, a consideration which
should play no role in clearing this ...rst hurdle). For example, at least for those
countries that have the means to ...nance them, the use of production subsidies
would typically dominate tari¤s as a policy tool for addressing concerns about
  55
       See Krugman (2019) for a nice summary of the evolution of economists'thinking on the link
between trade and income inequality. The local labor market impacts of trade competition were
...rst considered by Borjas and Ramey (1995); Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) were the ...rst to
investigate the regional/local labor market impacts of trade with China.
    56
       Not all countries have experienced rising income inequality over this period. See Bour-
guignon (2019) on the substantial cross-country diversity of trends in income inequality over the
past 30 years.


                                              101
income inequality.57 But as I noted in chapter 2, in the real world such policies
may not, in fact, be widely available to all countries. Indeed, this may be true
even for rich countries: for example, after describing the labor market policies and
programs that are available in the United States, Kletzer (2019, p 171) concludes
that "Despite the array of US programs, there is considerable evidence that these
                                              58
labor market interventions are inadequate."
    A second hurdle is to demonstrate that the proposed tari¤ increases would
actually have the intended e¤ect on income inequality. This demonstration is
complicated by the fact that technology as well as factor endowments within the
industrialized countries have changed dramatically over the period that income
inequality has risen, and it is therefore almost certainly true that "turning back
the clock" with tari¤s to achieve the trade patterns and volumes that a country
experienced in an earlier time would not bring back the income distribution that
the country had experienced at that time. Notice, though, that the e¤ectiveness
of tari¤s as a response to rising income inequality in a country does not hinge on
whether trade has caused the rise in inequality; rather it is simply a question of
whether the use of tari¤s ­and the price e¤ects that their use would generate in the
country ­might be part of the optimal response to addressing inequality, whatever
its causes, given the technologies and factor endowments that exist today.59
    Where does this discussion leave us? The reimposition of tari¤s surely cannot
be the centerpiece of an appropriate response to concerns about income inequal-
  57
     In this regard, the WTO'      s Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM
Agreement), which regulates the use of subsidies relating to trade in goods, includes a provision
(Article 8.2(b)) that identi...es assistance to disadvantaged regions as "non-actionable,"granting
WTO member governments wide latitude to implement the kinds of subsidies that might be
called for in addressing income inequality related to the local labor market e¤ects of trade.
However, this provision was temporary, and it was allowed to lapse at the end of 1999. Reforming
the SCM Agreement to reinstate Article 8 in some form would help to remove WTO legal barriers
that could have the e¤ect of precluding the use of subsidies over tari¤s for purposes of addressing
income inequality concerns, and on these general grounds would be supported by the targeting-
principle logic. See, for example, Charnovitz (2014), who makes similar arguments for the
reinstatement of Article 8 in some form as that article relates to environmental subsidies.
  58
     That said, it should be noted that Kletzer (2019) advocates for implementing a program of
wage insurance in the United States, not the use of tari¤s.
  59
     I am abstracting from the dynamic e¤ects of tari¤s on technologies and factor supplies.
There is also the deeper question whether income inequality as typically measured, or rather
broader measures of economic inequality such as inequality in job tenure prospects and the
prospects for one' s children, should be the target of policy interventions, and how trade policy
interventions would measure up to other available policy responses with such targets in mind.
See Bourguignon (2019) for an illuminating discussion of these issues.


                                               102
ity. But in light of the complexity of the issues involved and the evident lack of
...rst-best policy instruments to address these issues, neither does there appear to
be a compelling reason that tari¤ responses ­above all other possible second-best
policy responses ­should be taken o¤ the table. In the abstract, a sensible posi-
tion might therefore be that industrialized countries that have experienced rising
income inequality and have concerns about this development should be able to
reconsider some of their Uruguay Round tari¤ commitments as part of a broader
package of policy interventions to address these concerns.
     How would the restoration of reciprocity between China and its industrialized-
country trading partners impact these considerations? As I mentioned above, that
would depend in part on how reciprocity is restored. If reciprocity with China is
restored as a result of a reduction in access to the markets of the industrialized
world, then this implies that some industrialized-country tari¤s would rise, and
these tari¤ increases might be structured so as to mitigate income inequality
concerns in industrialized countries. On the other hand, if reciprocity with China
is restored as a result of an expansion of access to the markets of China, then this
implies that China would be liberalizing its import regime which, if this does not
impact China'    s overall trade imbalance, implies that China will also be exporting
more, a scenario that is likely to exacerbate the existing income inequality concerns
of industrialized countries.60 The upshot is that restoring reciprocity between
China and its industrialized-country trading partners is unlikely to address the
existing concerns over income inequality in industrialized countries, and might
even exacerbate these concerns.
     This brings me to the possibility of Article XXVIII renegotiations. Speci...cally,
while I argued above that the non-violation clause is well-designed to deal with
concerns over non-reciprocity with China, I now argue that Article XXVIII is
well-designed to deal with the possibility that, even with reciprocity established,
a WTO member might wish to rethink its own level of market access commitments.
     Hoda (2001) describes the mechanics of Article XXVIII renegotiations in de-
tail, and provides a comprehensive history of the hundreds of renegotiations that
have occurred over the GATT and early WTO years. In brief, countries do not
  60
    Absent any impact on its overall trade imbalance, and holding its terms-of-trade ...xed,
China' s unilateral import liberalization would lead to equivalent increases in its exports; and if
China is large in the import markets where it liberalizes, then its terms of trade should dete-
riorate, implying an even larger increase in its exports to maintain its existing trade balance.
Of course, if China were to make policy changes that altered its overall trade balance, addi-
tional considerations would come into play. Krugman (2019) provides a recent discussion of the
potentially important impact of trade imbalances on U.S. income inequality in the short run.


                                               103
need to provide a rationale to initiate renegotiations under Article XXVIII, but
simply need to initiate these renegotiations following the procedures laid out in
Article XXVIII.
    As Hoda (2001) explains, the key features of Article XXVIII renegotiations
are that a country is allowed to modify or withdraw the tari¤ commitments that
are the subject of its renegotiations, even if it cannot (within de...ned time limits)
reach agreement in those negotiations with its impacted trading partners; and
that its impacted trading partners are then allowed to respond ­ at most ­ in a
reciprocal manner by withdrawing "substantially equivalent" tari¤ commitments
of their own, where any disagreements over what constitutes substantially equiva-
lent tari¤ commitments are subject to rulings of the relevant GATT/WTO dispute
settlement bodies. In this way, with reciprocal actions de...ning the disagreement
or "threat"point to the negotiations, Article XXVIII renegotiations avoid the pos-
sibility that a threatened or actual breakdown in those negotiations could hold
up the modi...cations that a country desires to make to its tari¤ commitments.
At the same time these renegotiations imply that the original balance of negoti-
ated reciprocal tari¤ commitments between the country and its trading partners
is preserved; this last feature is important, because as discussed in chapter 4, the
application of reciprocity that delivers it ensures that ine¢ cient terms-of-trade
motives are removed from the country'    s incentives to initiate the renegotiation.61
    The features of Article XXVIII that I have just described are the reason that
legal scholars claim that GATT/WTO tari¤ commitments are designed to oper-
ate as "liability rules." For example, as I describe in Staiger (2021, chapter 6),
Pauwelyn (2008) distinguishes between GATT Articles that are designed as lia-
bility rules and others that are designed as property rules, and he designates tari¤
commitments as liability rules on the basis of the renegotiation opportunities pro-
vided by Article XXVIII (as well as other similar but temporary escapes such as
the GATT Safeguard clause Article XIX). In explaining the logic of this design,
Pauwelyn (2008, p 137) writes:
         . . . trade negotiators cannot foresee all possible situations, nor can they
         predict future economic and political developments, both at home and in-
         ternationally. As a result of this uncertainty, they wanted the   exibility of
         a liability rule."

   An important bene...t of a liability rule is that it can allow for "e¢ cient breach."
Schwartz and Sykes (2002, p S181) put the point this way:
  61
       Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2002) emphasize these incentive e¤ects of reciprocity.

                                                104
           Economic theory teaches that a key objective of an enforcement system
       is to induce a party to comply with its obligations whenever compliance
       will yield greater bene...ts to the promisee than costs to the promisor, while
       allowing the promisor to depart from its obligations whenever the costs of
       compliance to the promisor exceed the bene...ts to the promisee. In the
       parlance of contract theory, the objective is to deter ine¢ cient breaches
       but to encourage e¢ cient ones.

It is exactly in the spirit of e¢ cient breach that limited use of Article XXVIII
renegotiations might be made by those industrialized countries that are concerned
about rising inequality and wish to reconsider some of their Uruguay Round tari¤
commitments as part of a broader package of policy interventions to address these
concerns. Importantly, under the rules of Article XXVIII, those countries would
not be making this choice "for free."Rather, they would be making this choice with
the knowledge that any modi...cation or withdrawal of tari¤ commitments would
be met with reciprocal withdrawals of market access by their e¤ected trading
partners; and if a country still prefers to raise its tari¤s under these conditions,
then that is how the GATT renegotiation process approximates e¢ cient breach.62
    It is also instructive to consider what can happen in a renegotiation of trade
commitments that are not designed to operate as liability rules. Although it is
not directly comparable to the Article XXVIII renegotiation of a GATT tari¤
commitment, the Brexit negotiations for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
from the European Union provide something of a cautionary tale. These negotia-
tions, which had no meaningful equivalent to the reciprocity "buy out"provision
of GATT'   s Article XXVIII that could have acted as a threat point for the outcome
of the negotiations, o¢ cially began on March 29 2017 when the United Kingdom
activated its withdrawal notice under Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union,
and the negotiations were concluded in October of 2019. As is well known, the
initial two-year negotiation period had to be extended in order that an agreement
on the terms of withdrawal could be reached, and the negotiations were fraught
with seemingly ample room for strategic behavior.63 The liability-rule structure
of GATT Article XXVIII renegotiations acts as an insurance policy against the
possibility that such renegotiations would devolve into a Brexit-like situation.64
  62
     Maggi and Staiger (2015) provide a formal rationale for the e¢ cient-breach role that the
reciprocity rule can play in a model where international transfers are costly.
  63
     See, for example, Martill and Staiger (2014) on the bargaining strategy pursued by the UK
in its Brexit negotiations.
  64
     In part, provided that   exibility in market access commitments is valued, this comparison

                                             105
5.3. The latecomers problem
I began this chapter by noting that there are three interrelated challenges for
the world trading system created by the rise in economic importance of the large
emerging and developing economies. The ...rst of the challenges that I described
above centers on China. And owing to its sheer size in world trade, China un-
doubtedly plays a leading role in the second challenge that I described above as
well.
    The third challenge that I now describe is due to an asymmetry in the level of
market access commitments between the developing/emerging economies on the
one hand, and industrialized countries on the other. This asymmetry arose as a
result of the historical lack of participation of non-industrialized countries in 50
years of GATT reciprocal tari¤ negotiations, and it has led to what Bagwell and
Staiger (2014) call a "latecomers problem" for the WTO which may be hinder-
ing the ability of many of the developing and emerging economies to gain from
GATT/WTO membership. Because China made far more signi...cant (though, as
it turned out, still not reciprocal) market access concessions as part of its 2001
protocol for accession to the WTO than have any other emerging and developing
economy WTO members to date, this third challenge is less about China than it is
about other emerging and developing economies.65 Following Bagwell and Staiger,
I now brie  y describe the latecomers problem and how it might be addressed with
GATT Article XXVIII renegotiations between industrialized countries followed by
Article XXVIII bis negotiations between industrialized and developing/emerging
countries.66
    Recall from chapter 4 that, according to the terms-of-trade theory, negotiations
that abide by the principles of MFN and reciprocity can eliminate third-party
spillovers from bilateral tari¤ bargaining. As I described in that chapter, this
feature underpins some of the desirable e¢ ciency properties of a tari¤ negotiating
also illustrates an advantage of GATT'   s shallow integration approach. It is di¢ cult to see how a
liability-rule approach to market access commitments could be possible with a deep-integration
agreement such as the European Union. On the other hand, if such         exibility is not valued, as
would be the case according to the commitment theory of trade agreements (see note 9), then
the fact that this possibility arises under shallow integration is not an attractive feature of the
GATT/WTO approach.
   65
      On the unusually far-reaching market access commitments that China agreed to in its pro-
tocol of accession to the WTO relative to other developing and emerging economy GATT/WTO
members, see for example, Lardy (2001).
   66
      In chapter 6 I will consider an additional, possibly complementary, way of addressing the
latecomers problem within the context of climate policy.


                                               106
forum such as GATT that relies heavily on bilateral tari¤ bargaining and is built
on the pillars of MFN and reciprocity.
    But historically GATT has extended to its developing country members an
exception to the reciprocity norm, codi...ed under "special and di¤erential treat-
ment,"or SDT, clauses. These clauses were intended to provide developing coun-
tries with a "free pass" on the MFN tari¤ cuts that the developed countries ne-
gotiated with one another, and in this way to allow developing country exporters
to then share with exporters from developed countries in the bene...ts of greater
MFN access to developed country markets.
    As Bagwell and Staiger (2014) point out, however, in the presence of SDT
the fact that third-party spillovers from bilateral tari¤ bargaining are neutralized
when those bargains abide by MFN and reciprocity now carries with it a more
negative connotation: it implies that, by design, these SDT clauses cannot suc-
ceed at their intended purpose. This is because, as I described in the context
of the three-country two-good general equilibrium model of chapter 4, when two
(developed) countries engage in a bilateral tari¤ negotiation that abides by MFN
and reciprocity while the third (developing) country sits it out, the third country
gets nothing from their negotiations.
    Indeed, a wide range of anecdotal and empirical evidence suggests that de-
veloping countries have in fact gained little from more than half a century of
GATT/WTO-sponsored tari¤ negotiations. For example, Jawara and Kwa (2003,
p. 269) conclude, based on interviews with WTO delegates and Secretariat sta¤
members, as follows:
     "Developed countries are bene...tting from the WTO, as are a handful of
     (mostly upper) middle-income countries. The rest, including the great ma-
     jority of developing countries, are not. It is as simple as that."

In an implicit acknowledgement of this fact, the WTO'    s Doha Round is semi-
o¢ cially known as the Doha Development Agenda, because a fundamental ob-
jective of the Round is to improve the trading prospects of developing countries.
But as the declaration from the WTO Ministerial Conference in Doha, Qatar,
November 14, 2001, states in part:
     "We agree that special and di¤erential treatment for developing countries
     shall be an integral part of all elements of the negotiations... ."

Ironically, as Bagwell and Staiger (2014) observe, according to the terms-of-trade
theory it is the GATT/WTO'     s embrace of SDT that explains the disappointing

                                        107
developing country experience with GATT/WTO membership to begin with; and
this suggests that the Doha Round cannot succeed in one of its fundamental
objectives under the current bargaining protocol that it has adopted.
    Even if one accepts the diagnosis of the problem o¤ered by the terms-of-trade
theory, simply abandoning SDT at this point and bringing the developing and
emerging market countries to the tari¤ bargaining table is unlikely to be su¢ cient
to address the issue, and this is where the latecomers problem becomes relevant for
the Doha Round: because they are "latecomers" to the bargaining table relative
to the industrialized countries, developing and emerging market countries are
unlikely to ...nd industrialized-country bargaining partners that can reciprocate
the substantial tari¤ cuts that they might have to o¤er.67 This kind of asymmetry
is at the heart of various diagnoses of the central sticking points at Doha, such as
this diagnosis from The Economist (April 28, 2011):

            "...the real bone of contention is the aim of proposed cuts in tari¤s on
       manufactured goods. America sees the Doha talks as its ...nal opportu-
       nity to get fast-growing emerging economies like China and India to slash
       their duties on imports of such goods, which have been reduced in previ-
       ous rounds but remain much higher than those in the rich world. It wants
       something approaching parity, at least in some sectors, because it reckons
       its own low tari¤s leave it with few concessions to o¤er in future talks. But
       emerging markets insist that the Doha round was never intended to result
       in such harmonization. These positions are fundamentally at odds."

    In some sense, then, the industrialized countries ...nd themselves in a position
in the Doha Round not unlike the position that the United States tried very hard
to avoid in the context of sequential bilateral tari¤ bargaining under the 1934
RTAA as described in chapter 2: new potential bargaining partners have arrived,
but due to previous tari¤ bargains with each other the industrialized countries
have not preserved su¢ cient bargaining power to engage in a substantial way
with these new potential partners. Mattoo and Staiger (2020) argue that the
  67
    If the eventual arrival of the developing and emerging economies had been anticipated by
the industrialized countries at the time that the latter were engaged in tari¤ negotiations,
then the ...ndings of Bagwell and Staiger (2010b) on bilateral sequential tari¤ bargaining in
a GATT/WTO-like bargaining forum as an e¢ cient means of accommodating the arrival of
new countries into the world trading system might apply. But it is the unanticipated arrival of
the "latecomers" that makes achieving e¢ cient tari¤ bargaining outcomes in the GATT/WTO
framework more di¢ cult.


                                             108
latecomers problem and its implications for the preservation of tari¤ bargaining
power in the WTO system may be helpful for interpreting recent United States
trade actions as signifying a switch from "rules-based" to "power-based" tari¤
bargaining. I discuss some of these points in Staiger (2021, chapter 5), and I
discuss Mattoo and Staiger more broadly in Staiger (2021, chapter 13). Here
I focus on the possibility of making use of existing GATT/WTO               exibilities to
address the latecomers problem within the rules-based system.
    The essential idea is to ...nd a way to give countries the negotiating        exibility
so that they can transition toward the set of tari¤ commitments that the current
WTO membership would have chosen to negotiate within the GATT negotiat-
ing forum had countries not been constrained in their negotiations by their pre-
existing tari¤ bindings. This means providing countries with the        exibility to ...rst
escape from their existing GATT/WTO tari¤ bindings in an orderly way when
necessary, in order that they can then engage in reciprocal MFN tari¤ bargaining
with all willing WTO-member bargaining partners. As Bagwell and Staiger (2014)
note, there are obvious dangers in encouraging such         exibility for this ...rst step,
and su¢ cient care would need to be taken to prevent uncontrolled unraveling of
existing tari¤ commitments. That said, the        exibility needed for the ...rst step is
already provided in GATT via the Article XXVIII renegotiation provisions that I
discussed in detail earlier in this chapter, while the    exibility for the second step
is provided by the standard bilateral tari¤ bargaining protocols that have been
employed in the various GATT rounds under Article XXVIII bis and that I de-
scribed in chapter 4. So at least in principle, the WTO has the design features that
would allow its member governments to address the latecomers problem. But a
necessary ingredient for success would be to revisit the commitment to SDT made
at the 2001 WTO Ministerial Conference in Doha.68
  68
     In note 64 I observed that a possible advantage of a shallow approach to integration is that it
can facilitate a liability-rule approach to market access commitments that allows for    exibilities
that would be di¢ cult under deep integration. A related observation can be made here, namely,
that it would be easier to address the latecomers problem and associated challenges created by
a rising WTO membership and rising importance of developing and emerging economies within
the membership when a shallow approach to integration is adopted than when deep integration
is attempted. With shallow integration, in principle what is at issue are tari¤ renegotiations and
further negotiations to adjust market access commitments for member governments in the face of
a changing membership. With deep integration, the task would likely be much more complicated,
including that of getting the increasing membership to agree on which deep commitments are
acceptable.




                                               109
6. Climate Change69
There is little doubt that crafting an e¤ective policy response to the changes in
global climate that are resulting from rising levels of atmospheric carbon will
be a de...ning challenge for the twenty-...rst century. The existential threats to
the planet from a failure to rise to this challenge are by now well documented.70
The WTO and the world trading system that it governs will by necessity play
a role in meeting this challenge. The only question is whether the WTO'     s role
will be seen as obstructionist, or rather whether it can be accommodating to the
world's attempts to solve the problem of climate change or even serve as an active
contributor to the solution. For example, Mattoo and Subramanian (2014, p 91)
describe the relationship between climate policy and trade policy in these terms:

           If countries cut emissions by di¤erent amounts, or impose carbon taxes
       at di¤erent levels, then carbon prices are likely to di¤er across countries.
       Countries with higher carbon prices may seek to impose additional border
       taxes on imports from countries with lower carbon prices in order to o¤set
       the competitive disadvantage to their ...rms and to prevent "leakage," an
       increase of carbon emissions in the form of increased production in countries
       with lower carbon prices.
           A key issue, therefore, is the scope for trade policy actions in any climate
       change agreement. ...

In e¤ect, as Mattoo and Subramanian note, the kinds of carbon policies required
to address global climate change are likely to have important trade e¤ects and lead
to policy disputes that the WTO may be called upon to adjudicate. And more
recently, Nordhaus (2015) has called for the creation of a "Climate Club"in which
member-countries agree to reduce their carbon emissions and nonparticipants are
penalized with tari¤s imposed on them by the club members.
    In this chapter I discuss some of the key issues faced by the WTO in accommo-
dating e¤orts to address climate change, and the constructive role that the WTO
might play in addressing this challenge. To aid in this discussion, I develop a
simple two-country partial equilibrium model of trade that features both a "trade
problem" (associated with the terms-of-trade externality) and a "climate prob-
lem" (associated with a global non-pecuniary externality from carbon emissions)
  69
    This chapter draws on material from my 2018 Frank D. Graham Memorial Lecture.
  70
    See, for example, Wallace-Wells (2019), or any of the recent Assessment Reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, available at https://www.ipcc.ch/reports/.

                                             110
for the world to solve. The model is intentionally simplistic, as my emphasis is on
broad themes rather than speci...c details.
    I begin by considering how the GATT/WTO architecture can continue to
work to address the trade problem in this setting. I then turn to the issue of
carbon border adjustments, and ask what role such adjustments might play in
maintaining the solution to the trade problem under the GATT/WTO architec-
ture while accommodating implementation of the carbon taxes that would result
from the successful negotiation of a global climate accord. Finally, I discuss a
more active role that the WTO might play in addressing the challenge of climate
change through a form of linkage between the WTO and the negotiated policy
commitments of a climate accord.

6.1. Climate policy and trade agreements
How does the GATT/WTO architecture work when there is both a trade problem
and a climate problem to solve? I now describe a simple model to provide answers
that can illuminate a number of the dimensions to this question.

A benchmark trade-and-carbon model I consider a partial equilibrium two-
country model of trade in a carbon-intensive good, which to ...x ideas might be
thought of as aluminum. I denote by c the reduction in per-capita welfare every-
where in the world from the carbon emitted by another unit of aluminum produc-
tion in the home country; and similarly I denote by c the reduction in per-capita
welfare everywhere in the world from the carbon emitted by another unit of alu-
minum production in the foreign country. The parameters c > 0 and c > 0 can
be thought of as the carbon content of production in the home and the foreign
country, measured in welfare (numeraire) units. If c 6= c , then the carbon content
of production di¤ers across home and foreign producers.71
    The home (importing) country is populated by L citizens, and the home gov-
ernment can impose a production tax t on its producers and an import tari¤ ;
and similarly, the foreign (exporting) country is populated by L citizens, and the
foreign government can impose a production tax t on its producers and an export
tari¤ . All taxes/tari¤s are expressed in speci...c terms, and negative taxes/tari¤s
  71
    The assumption that carbon emissions impact the welfare of both countries uniformly is
made for simplicity, so that I can focus on di¤erences across countries in the carbon content of
their production. But at the cost of more notation, it is straightforward to show that the results
I emphasize below do not depend on this assumption.



                                              111
correspond to subsidies. Notice that, given my assumptions, the home-country
                                                                           t
production tax t could equivalently be implemented as a carbon tax c         on home-
country producers, while the foreign-country production tax t could equivalently
                                       t
be implemented as a carbon tax c         on foreign-country producers; and it could
then be said that the home country "has a higher carbon price"than the foreign
                 t    t
country when c     >c   . In what follows, I will for convenience characterize policies
in terms of tari¤s and production taxes, but I will sometimes also make reference
to the carbon taxes implied by the production taxes.
    Home producers face producer prices q and the upward-sloping home supply
curve is S (q ), while home consumers face the consumer price p with p = q + t and
have downward sloping demand D(p). The analogous prices and magnitudes in
the foreign country are q , p , S (q ) and D (p ), with p = q + t . With strictly
positive imports (which I assume is always the case), the arbitrage condition
implies p = p             , and the world price can be de...ned in standard fashion as
  w
p     p     or, equivalently by the arbitrage condition, pw p + . Finally, with
home imports de...ned by M D S and foreign exports de...ned by E              S D ,
the market clearing condition equating home imports to foreign exports,

          D(pw + )        S (pw +          t) = S (pw              t)   D (pw    );

                                                                ~w ( ; t; ; t ), from
de...nes the equilibrium world price as a function of policies, p
which each of the other equilibrium prices may then also be derived using the
pricing relationships above:

                    p~(   +   ; t; t   )       ~w (
                                               p      ; t;   ;t   )+                  (6.1)
                    q~(   +   ; t; t   )       ~w (
                                               p      ; t;   ;t   )+    t
                   p
                   ~(     +   ; t; t   )       ~w (
                                               p      ; t;   ;t   )
                   q
                   ~(     +   ; t; t   )       ~w (
                                               p      ; t;   ;t   )         t:

The world price depends on the levels of each of the tari¤s and         (as well as
each of the production taxes t and t ), but re  ected in (6.1) is the now-familiar
property that only the sum of the tari¤s + enters into the home and foreign
consumer and producer prices (in addition to t and t ).
   I de...ne welfare in the home country W as a weighted sum of consumer surplus
(CS ), producer surplus (P S ) and net tax revenue (REV        M + tS ) minus the
welfare cost of world carbon emissions on home citizens (L [cS + c S ]), with a



                                               112
weight        1 placed on home producer surplus,

       W = W (~
              p( + ; t; t ); q
                             ~( + ; t; t ); q~ ( + ; t; t ); p~w ( ; t;                  ; t ))
           CS (~
               p( + ; t; t )) +     P S (~
                                         q ( + ; t; t ))                                          (6.2)
           +REV (~p( + ; t; t ); q
                                 ~( + ; t; t ); p~w ( ; t; ; t ))
            L [cS (~q ( + ; t; t )) + c S (~ q ( + ; t; t ))];

and with an analogous de...nition of foreign-country welfare W ,

       W    = W (~
                 p ( + ; t; t ); q
                                 ~ ( + ; t; t ); q~( + ; t; t ); p~w ( ; t;               ; t ))
              CS (~
                  p ( + ; t; t )) +        P S (~
                                                q ( + ; t; t ))                                (6.3)
              +REV (~ p ( + ; t; t ); q                ~w ( ; t; ; t ))
                                       ~ ( + ; t; t ); p
               L    [cS (~
                         q ( + ; t; t )) + c S (~
                                                q ( + ; t; t ))]:

The producer price of each country'  s trading partner enters the country's welfare
function as a result of the world-wide carbon (non-pecuniary) externality re ected
in c > 0 and c > 0. The weights on producer surplus and              are meant to
capture both distributional/political economy concerns associated with the pro-
duction of carbon-intensive goods, as well as possible development opportunities
not captured by the model that relate to the use of carbon-intensive technologies
and may di¤er across countries in light of di¤erent stages of development (see,
e.g., Mattoo and Subramanian, 2014). As will become clear just below, it is these
considerations that account for the possibility that e¢ cient carbon taxes in this
setting need not be uniform across countries as they would be under the classic
Samuelson (1954) public goods optimality condition (see, e.g., Weizman, 2014).

Nash ine¢ ciencies in a world of trade and climate problems I de...ne
e¢ cient policies as those that maximize the sum of home and foreign ("world"    )
welfare.72 Straightforward calculations con...rm that the e¢ cient tari¤s e and e
and production taxes te and t e in this setting are characterized by the following
conditions:
                                            e       e
                                                +       =0                                        (6.4)
                               e                                          e
                           q                                          q
           te =   (   1)   Se
                                   + (L + L )c; t   e
                                                        =    (   1)   S   e   + (L + L )c ;

  72
    I am thereby implicitly assuming here that lump sum transfers are available to distribute
surplus across the two countries as desired.

                                                113
where S is the producer-price elasticity of supply in the home country and S
is the producer-price elasticity of supply in the foreign country, and where a su-
perscript e denotes evaluation of the magnitude at e¢ cient policies. As expected,
the ...rst line of (6.4) con...rms that there is no e¢ ciency role for tari¤s, and that
only their sum is relevant for determining e¢ ciency. The second line shows that,
when the weights and             on producer surplus are both equal to one, the e¢ -
                         te                         e
cient carbon taxes ( c for the home country, tc for the foreign country) will be
uniform across countries and set at the Pigouvian level (L + L ) that internalizes
the world-wide carbon externality; but if there are distributional/development
concerns associated with carbon-intensive production so that these weights are
greater than one, then there is an o¤setting force that pushes toward subsidizing
production and that is inversely related to the elasticity of supply.
    Turning to non-cooperative policies, the ...rst-order conditions that de...ne the
best-response tari¤ and production tax policies for the home and foreign govern-
ments can be manipulated to yield the following characterization of Nash policies:
             2         S N
                            3                           2         SN
                                                                      3
                 N                                           N
               S       q N 5           p
                                       ~ wN                S      qN 5           p~wN
   N
        = 4             E N
                                 Lc +   E N
                                            ;    N
                                                   =    4
                                                                   MN
                                                                           L c +   MN
               E N     ~wN
                       p
                                                          MN     p~wN
                                                                                 (6.5)
                          N                                     N
                      q                                     q
 tN =       (    1)   SN
                              + Lc;    t   N
                                               =   (   1)   S   N   +L c ;

where M is the world-price elasticity of home-country import demand (de...ned
positively) and E is the world-price elasticity of foreign-country export supply,
and where a superscript N denotes evaluation of the magnitude at Nash poli-
cies. As the second line of (6.5) implies, in the Nash equilibrium each country
ignores the impact of its carbon emissions on the welfare of the other country'     s
citizens when choosing its production tax (that is, the home country ignores L c
when choosing its production tax, and the foreign country ignores Lc ). And as
a comparison with the second line of (6.4) reveals, this tends to make each coun-
try's Nash production taxes too low and its carbon emissions too high relative
to e¢ cient levels. The expressions in the ...rst lines of (6.5) then reveal that the
Nash tari¤s deviate from zero for two reasons: the ...rst term in each expression
compensates for the fact that the trading partner'     s production tax is too low,
and employs the tari¤ as an instrument to reduce the trading partner'      s produc-
tion and hence carbon emissions, modulated by the relevant elasticities; and the


                                           114
second terms in each expression correspond to the familiar Johnson (1953-54)
terms-of-trade-manipulation motive.
    To understand further the nature of the tari¤ ine¢ ciencies in the Nash equi-
librium, it is illuminating to consider the tari¤s that would be e¢ cient conditional
on the level of the Nash production taxes, tN and t N , characterized in (6.5). Re-
calling that only the sum of tari¤s is relevant for e¢ ciency (i.e., world welfare)
considerations, the tari¤s that maximize world welfare conditional on the level of
the Nash production taxes characterized in (6.5) satisfy
                                    2      S
                                               3         "       S #
                                      S    q
                                                           S    q
       (t ; t N ) + e (tN ; t N ) = 4
      e N
                                            E
                                               5 Lc              M      L c;    (6.6)
                                      E    p
                                           ~ w             M    p
                                                                ~ w



where all magnitudes on the right-hand side of (6.6) are evaluated at the Nash
production taxes tN and t N and the tari¤s e (tN ; t N ) and e (tN ; t N ). Notice
that, according to (6.6), e (tN ; t N ) + e (tN ; t N ) could be either positive (a net
tax on trade) or negative (a net subsidy to trade).
     Comparing (6.6) to the sum of the Nash tari¤s characterized in the ...rst line
of (6.5), what is missing from e (tN ; t N ) + e (tN ; t N ) is the second term in
each Nash tari¤ expression, namely, the terms-of-trade-manipulation motive that
makes each country'    s Nash tari¤ higher than it would otherwise be. Evidently, the
...rst term in each of the Nash tari¤ expressions, which re   ects the attempt of each
country to use its tari¤ to compensate for the ine¢ ciently low production tax of its
trading partner, remains present for the e¢ cient use of tari¤s conditional on Nash
production taxes. Intuitively, as the expression on the right-hand side of (6.6)
re   ects, controlling for the relevant elasticity considerations it is e¢ cient to use
tari¤s to shift carbon-intensive production to the country whose Nash production
taxes are closest to the e¢ cient level, which according to the second lines in (6.4)
and (6.5) will be the home country when L c < Lc (and therefore a net tax on
trade) and the foreign country (and therefore a net subsidy to trade) otherwise.73
     The upshot is that the nature of the Nash ine¢ ciencies in the absence of
trade and climate agreements can be described in simple terms. Carbon taxes
  73
     It is interesting to note that the e¢ cient use of tari¤s in this case does not necessarily shift
carbon-intensive production to the country with the highest Nash carbon tax. That will be true
if the weights and         are both equal to one, but otherwise not necessarily so. For example,
as (6.6) indicates, the sum of the e¢ cient tari¤s could be negative and therefore shift carbon-
intensive production toward the foreign country if L c is su¢ ciently large as compared to Lc ,
and yet the second line of (6.5) implies that the foreign country could have a lower Nash carbon
tax than the home country if        is su¢ ciently large as compared to .

                                                115
are too low, re ecting the presence of an international non-pecuniary externality
(a climate problem). And conditional on Nash carbon taxes, tari¤s are too high,
re ecting the presence of an international pecuniary externality (a trade problem).

A shallow integration approach to the trade problem To see whether
GATT'    s shallow-integration approach could still solve the trade problem in a world
where, as depicted above, the trade problem coexists with the climate problem, I
begin from the Nash tari¤s and production taxes characterized in (6.5) and sup-
pose that countries negotiate over tari¤s, with the understanding that (i) if either
country subsequently makes a unilateral policy adjustment that has the e¤ect of
withdrawing market access, then its trading partner will withdraw equivalent mar-
ket access in a reciprocal fashion, but that (ii) unilateral policy adjustments that
leave market access unchanged will trigger no response from the trading partner.
Recalling from chapter 4 (see also note 40) that a reciprocal withdrawal of market
access will hold ...xed the terms of trade p~w between the home and foreign country
and that unilateral policy adjustments that leave market access unchanged will
hold ...xed p~w as well, the unilateral policy options open to each country subse-
quent to their tari¤ negotiations amount to policy adjustments that may or may
not decrease the level of market access implied by their tari¤ commitments but
that in any case do not alter the terms of trade p  ~w .74 In e¤ect, the understanding
in (i) can be thought of as re   ecting in a shorthand way the reciprocity provisions
of GATT Article XXVIII discussed in previous chapters, while the understanding
in (ii) can be thought of as re   ecting GATT'   s "market access preservation rules."
    Can tari¤ negotiations solve the trade problem under this representation of
GATT'    s shallow integration approach? As I now demonstrate, the answer is
"Yes."To see this, suppose that in their tari¤ negotiations the home and foreign
countries agree to the tari¤ levels and , respectively, de...ned by
                      2       S
                                 3                  "         S #
                        S     q
                                                       S     q
                    =4         E
                                 5 Lc ;        =              M     L c;          (6.7)
                        E     ~w
                              p
                                                      M      ~w
                                                             p


where all magnitudes on the right-hand side of (6.7) are evaluated at the Nash
carbon taxes tN and t N and the tari¤s and . Notice from (6.7) that the home
country is agreeing to an import tari¤ while the foreign country is agreeing to an
  74
    On the formal relationship between reciprocity and terms-of-trade movements in a partial
equilibrium setting such as the one I describe here, see Bagwell and Staiger (2001a, note 19).


                                             116
export subsidy. And notice from (6.6) and the de...nitions of and in (6.7) that
  + = e (tN ; t N ) + e (tN ; t N ), implying that the two countries have agreed to
tari¤s that are e¢ cient given Nash production taxes. The question is then whether
subsequent to the negotiations the tari¤s will remain at the levels and            and
                                       N        N
the production taxes at the levels t and t under GATT'           s shallow integration
rules as I have modeled them. If so, then we may conclude that GATT'         s shallow
integration approach can solve the trade problem, leaving the climate problem
una¤ected (and presumably to be solved by other means).75
    Consider ...rst the policy options described in (i) above. Focusing on the home
country, it is direct to con...rm using (6.2) that, evaluated at the Nash production
taxes tN and t N and the tari¤s and ,
                           dW      dW d
                                +         jdp
                                            ew =0 = 0;
                            d      d d
implying that the home country can do no better than to select in light of the
reciprocal response from the foreign country that an increase in its tari¤ would
trigger. And again evaluated at the Nash production taxes tN and t N and the
tari¤s and , it is also straightforward to con...rm that
                                  dW    dW d
                                      +      jdp
                                               ew =0 = 0;
                                   dt   d dt
implying that the home country can do no better than to select tN in light of
the reciprocal response from the foreign country that a decrease in its production
tax would trigger. Finally, consider the policy options described in (ii) above.
Evaluated at the Nash production taxes tN and t N and the tari¤s and , it
follows that
                             dW     dW d
                                  +         jdp
                                              ew =0 = 0;
                              dt     d dt
implying that there is no mix of policies that the home country would prefer over
   and tN that could deliver its negotiated level of market access. Completely
analogous statements can be shown to hold for the foreign country using (6.3).
    Hence, GATT'   s shallow-integration approach can solve the trade problem in
a world where that problem coexists with the climate problem. And what is
  75
    In saying that the climate problem will be left "una¤ected,"I simply mean that it will still be
the case that carbon taxes are too low, re ecting the presence of an international non-pecuniary
externality (a climate problem), with no new (e.g., terms-of-trade manipulation) sources of
policy distortions in carbon taxes.


                                               117
left is a climate problem, where carbon taxes are ine¢ ciently low, but where the
ine¢ ciency is due only to an international non-pecuniary externality.

6.2. Carbon border adjustments
Suppose that countries are able to ...nd a way to negotiate an enforceable climate
accord and implement the increase in production (carbon) taxes that would be
needed to move from the Nash production taxes characterized in the second line
of (6.5) to the e¢ cient production taxes characterized in the second line of (6.4).
Can GATT'    s shallow approach to integration accommodate the implementation
of the climate accord and maintain its solution to the trade problem, so that with
the climate accord in place the world then reaches the e¢ ciency frontier?
    I now show that this is indeed possible, but only if the home-country tari¤ is
allowed to rise with its higher carbon tax, from its initial level de...ned in (6.7)
to the new higher level
                        2       S
                                    3         "       S #
                          S     q 5
                                                S    q
                    ^=4          E
                                       Lc +           M      L c;              (6.8)
                          E     p
                                ~ w             M    p
                                                     ~w



and similarly the foreign-country export subsidy is allowed to rise with its higher
carbon tax, from its initial level     de...ned in (6.7) to the new higher level
                         "         S #
                                                  2        S
                                                             3
                            S     q
                                                    S     q 5
                 ^ =               M     Lc 4              E
                                                                  Lc ;           (6.9)
                           M     p~w                E     ~w
                                                          p


where all right-hand-side magnitudes in (6.8) and (6.9) are evaluated at the tari¤s
^ and ^ and the e¢ cient production taxes te and t e . Notice from (6.8) and (6.9)
that ^ + ^ = 0 and hence, in combination with the e¢ cient production taxes te
and t e , the tari¤ adjustments that I have just described, which I will refer to as
"carbon border adjustments," will allow countries to reach the e¢ ciency frontier
as characterized in (6.4).
    Assuming that these carbon border adjustments are allowed, so that the home
country can increase its import tari¤ from to ^ and the foreign country can
increase its export subsidy from to ^ , the remaining question is, again, whether
the tari¤s will then remain at the levels ^ and ^ under GATT'    s shallow integration
rules as I have modeled them, given that the production taxes are pinned down
by the climate accord at the levels te and t e . But it is direct to show that this is

                                         118
indeed the case. Focusing again on the home country, and evaluated at the tari¤s
^ and ^ and the e¢ cient production taxes te and t e , it can be checked that
                                 dW   dW d
                                    +      jdp
                                             ew =0 = 0;
                                  d   d d
implying that the home country can do no better than to select ^ in light of the
reciprocal response from the foreign country that an increase in its tari¤ beyond
^ would trigger. An analogous statement holds for the foreign country.
    The carbon border adjustments that I have characterized above have some in-
teresting properties. They describe an increase in the home-country import tari¤
that is to occur as the home country raises its carbon tax, and an increase in the
foreign-country export subsidy that is to occur as the foreign country raises its
carbon tax. These carbon border adjustments therefore work to o¤set competitive
e¤ects that the implementation of higher carbon taxes would otherwise create for
each country. In this sense they resonate with the purpose of proposed carbon
border adjustments as seen from the perspective of the policy debate, namely as
a mechanism for addressing possible trade competitiveness impacts and "carbon
leakage" concerns that arise when a country considers implementing more strin-
gent carbon policies and that were highlighted in the passage from Mattoo and
Subramanian (2014) that I quoted at the beginning of this chapter.76
    However, there is also a crucial di¤erence: unlike the carbon border adjust-
ments typically considered in the policy debate, which envision tari¤s that would
discriminate across the sources of imports based on measures of the carbon con-
tent of those imports (see, for example, Bordo¤, 2008, Mattoo and Subramanian,
2014, and Jensen, 2020), the carbon border adjustments described by (6.8) and
(6.9) ­which imply changes in tari¤s relative to and only because the second
terms in these expressions are non-zero ­do not depend on the carbon content of
the production of one'   s trading partner (as captured by c from the perspective
of the home country and by c from the perspective of the foreign country). This
is because these carbon border adjustments are designed to moderate the market
access implication of a country'   s own increase in carbon/production taxes, and to
bring to an e¢ cient level the market access that the country provides its trading
partner as it raises its carbon tax to the e¢ cient level. And while the market ac-
cess implication of a country'  s carbon tax increase does re ect the carbon content
  76
     There is a large empirical literature investigating the trade e¤ects of environmental regu-
lation. See, for example, Cherniwchan and Najjar (2019) for a recent study of the impact of
Canadian air quality standards on the export performance of Canadian manufacturing plants.


                                             119
of the country'   s own production (because this enters into the determination of
the size of the country'   s carbon tax increase), that implication has nothing to do
with the carbon content of production in a country'      s trading partners.
    Indeed, as the second terms in (6.8) and (6.9) indicate, neither the carbon
content of a trading partner'    s production nor, aside from its impact on the world
price p~w , the level of the trading partner' s carbon tax, is relevant for the carbon
border adjustments that the model would support. In fact, in this light it is easy
to see that in a multi-country version of the model, the implied carbon border
adjustments would be non-discriminatory (i.e., they would comply with the MFN
principle). These properties can help avoid a number of practical problems often
associated with the implementation of carbon border adjustments as those border
adjustments are typically envisioned in the policy debate (see, for example, the
discussion in World Bank, 2021, pp 41-43).
    It is instructive at this point to consider the related discussion of Mattoo
and Subramanian (2014, p 24). They summarize the current state of the policy
disagreements over carbon border adjustments, and possible solutions, this way:

          The question is whether such [carbon border] taxes can be designed in a
      way that addresses industrial countries'concerns regarding competitiveness
      while limiting the trade costs for developing countries. What has to be
      avoided is the imposition of tari¤s applied across-the-board on the basis of
      the carbon content of imports, which would be a "nuclear option"in terms
      of trade consequences. For example, such an action by the United States
      and the EU would be the equivalent of imposing a tari¤ of over 20 percent
      on China and India, resulting in lost exports of about 20 percent.
          We see two possible solutions. One would be across-the-board tari¤s and
      rebates for exporters based on the carbon content in domestic production.
      These would almost completely o¤set the adverse e¤ects on U.S. output and
      exports of energy-intensive manufactures, while limiting declines in China's
      and India' s manufacturing exports to about 2 percent.
          Another possibility would be tari¤s based on the carbon content of im-
      ports but applied only to a narrow set of carbon-intensive products. These
      would dampen the adverse e¤ect of emissions reductions on U.S. output
      and exports of energy-intensive manufactures, which would decline by only
      about 0:5 percent and 7 percent, respectively, while limiting declines in
      China' s and India's manufacturing exports to about 3 percent. But this
      option would be tougher to implement because it would require informa-


                                          120
     tion on foreign countries'carbon content and hence would be more prone
     to abuse by protectionists.

The ...ndings above cast doubt on the logical basis for the "nuclear option" that
Mattoo and Subramanian say must be avoided, and lend support instead to the
...rst of the two possible preferred solutions that they described.
     More generally, the discussion above points to an important insight: while the
Nash tari¤s in (6.5) are responsive to the carbon content of a trading partner'     s
production, there is no reason for the e¢ cient tari¤s as characterized in (6.6) to
be based on the carbon content of a trading partner'   s production, and this is true
even in a world where cooperation over climate policy is impossible. The reason is
that e¢ ciency only pins down the sum of the tari¤s between the home and foreign
country, and so to achieve the e¢ cient sum of tari¤s in (6.6) each country'  s tari¤
can be set at the level that re  ects the carbon content of its own production. This
insight also extends to a multi-country version of the model (because in such a
world it is the sum of the tari¤s along any bilateral trade path that are relevant
for e¢ ciency), and it implies that the role for discriminatory tari¤s as a response
to non-cooperative carbon policies is con...ned to non-cooperative trade policy: if
international cooperation over tari¤s (and export subsidies) is possible, then the
existence of a climate problem as that problem is formalized here is not a reason
to abandon the MFN principle, even when attempts to cooperate over climate
policy have failed.

6.3. Negotiation linkage
Thus far I have assumed either that there is no cooperation over climate policy or
that a stand-alone climate accord is implemented, and I have considered how the
GATT/WTO architecture might work in each of those circumstances. I now turn
to a di¤erent question, the question of linkage between a climate accord and a trade
agreement such as the WTO. Maggi (2016) de...nes three kinds of possible linkage
between agreements: enforcement linkage, negotiation linkage and participation
linkage. While each of these kinds of linkage is relevant for consideration in the
speci...c context of trade and climate agreements, I focus here on the possibility
of a form of negotiation linkage, where a negotiation over tari¤ liberalization and
carbon taxes is linked through the market access implications of each.
    My starting point is the latecomers problem characterized by Bagwell and
Staiger (2014) and described in chapter 5. Recall that this problem refers to


                                        121
the asymmetry in the level of market access commitments between the devel-
oping/emerging economies on the one hand, and industrialized countries on the
other, an asymmetry that has emerged after decades of reciprocal tari¤ negotia-
tions among industrialized countries, with the developing and emerging economies
largely sitting on the sidelines as a result of exemptions to the reciprocity norm
that were granted to these countries and codi...ed in special and di¤erential treat-
ment clauses. This asymmetry is at the heart of various diagnoses of the central
sticking points at Doha. In essence, industrialized countries want emerging and
developing countries to agree to tari¤ cuts in the Doha Round, but have few tari¤
cuts of their own to put on the table in return.
    At the same time, a key sticking point in negotiating meaningful climate ac-
cords is the strong asymmetry in the positions of emerging and developing coun-
tries on the one hand, and industrialized countries on the other, regarding the
desired response to climate change. Emerging and developing countries want in-
dustrialized countries to agree to bear the brunt of addressing climate change,
by for example imposing high carbon taxes on their producers, but emerging and
developing countries have little leverage to induce industrialized countries to do
this (Mattoo and Subramanian, 2014). And where industrialized countries are
considering carbon taxes on their own, they see new carbon customs duties (car-
bon border adjustments) as a way to o¤set the trade competitiveness e¤ects of
carbon taxes on their ...rms and prevent carbon leakage (Jensen, 2020).
    The point I wish to emphasize is that these two asymmetries, one regarding
tari¤s and the other regarding carbon taxes, have market access implications that
are in broad terms mirror images of each other. This is illustrated in Figures
10.1 and 10.2. Figure 10.1, which is reproduced from the WTO web page and
depicts the simple average of MFN bound tari¤s by country with deeper red cor-
responding to higher average tari¤s, illustrates the ...rst asymmetry. Developing
and emerging economy tari¤s are still high (deeper red), while the tari¤s of indus-
trialized countries are already low (lighter red) and leave little room for further
cuts. Figure 10.2, which is reproduced from Carbon Brief (2017) and where deeper
red (blue) means higher carbon content of net imports (exports), illustrates the
second asymmetry. For countries where average bound MFN tari¤s are low in
Figure 10.1 (i.e., the industrialized countries), Figure 10.2 suggests that the car-
bon content of net import is high (deeper red) implying that the new carbon
customs duties that would likely accompany the imposition of carbon taxes by
the industrialized countries would also be high. Moreover, Figure 10.2 suggests
that it is many of the large emerging and developing countries whose exports have


                                        122
the highest carbon content (deeper blue) and who would therefore likely bear the
brunt of these new carbon customs duties and have the greatest interest in seeing
them removed, and these are countries that Figure 10.1 indicates have the highest
average bound MFN tari¤s of their own.




                        Figure 10.1: MFN Bound Tari¤s




                  Figure 10.2: Carbon Content of Net Imports

                                      123
    It is these asymmetries that might be combined into a viable, linked market
access negotiation.77 In particular, what is suggested by this discussion is the
possibility of combining into a single, reciprocal package of negotiations the market
access consequences of unilateral industrialized country carbon taxes ­ without
border carbon adjustments ­and the unilateral tari¤ cuts of emerging/developing
economies. In e¤ect, in such negotiations the emerging and developing countries
would o¤er reciprocal tari¤ cuts in exchange for the market access consequences
of carbon taxes o¤ered by the industrialized countries.
    How might this linkage be operationalized? A natural possibility within the
existing GATT/WTO structure (but in the absence of SDT) would be to follow
a three-step procedure. In a ...rst step, industrialized countries (and possibly
China, without whom a climate accord would likely fall short) would agree on an
aggressive package of carbon mitigation policies (e.g., carbon taxes). Then, in a
second step, these countries would initiate GATT Article XXVIII renegotiations
with their trading partners, and in the context of these renegotiations introduce
new MFN carbon customs duties on top of their existing tari¤ bindings, calibrated
to o¤set the trade competitiveness (i.e., market access) e¤ects of their new carbon
policies, while o¤ering their new carbon policies as compensation for their carbon
customs duties.78 And ...nally, in a third step, WTO members would engage in a
round of reciprocal tari¤ negotiations in the context of GATT Article XXVIII bis,
with cuts in (and possibly elimination of) the new carbon customs duties of the
industrialized countries now on the table and to be exchanged for reciprocal tari¤
cuts from emerging and developing countries. Upon completion of this third step,
the entire package of negotiated carbon taxes and negotiated tari¤ bindings would
  77
     As described in Carbon Brief (2017), the calculations of the carbon content of imports
and exports that underpin Figure 10.2 make use of the carbon content of production in each
country, and hence use a di¤erent methodology than the methodology that would be relevant
for calculating the carbon customs duties according to the logic that I have described in this
chapter. Hence, Figure 10.2 should be interpreted only as suggestive in a broad and schematic
way of the likely geographic patterns of carbon customs duties that I am describing here.
  78
     Paragraph 2 of GATT'  s Article XXVIII renegotiation clause states:

       In such negotiations and agreement, which may include provision for com-
       pensatory adjustment with respect to other products, the contracting par-
       ties concerned shall endeavour to maintain a general level of reciprocal and
       mutually advantageous concessions not less favourable to trade than that
       provided for in this Agreement prior to such negotiations.
The o¤ering of new carbon policies that o¤set the market access consequences of the new MFN
carbon customs duties that I describe in the text would be consistent with this stipulation.


                                             124
be implemented. In the end, if the new carbon customs duties were eliminated
as a result of the third-step negotiations, the emerging and developing countries
would have o¤ered tari¤ cuts to industrialized countries (and possibly China)
in exchange for the reciprocal market access consequences of the carbon taxes
imposed by these countries.79
    A number of features of this linkage possibility are notable. First, the new
carbon customs duties would be MFN, because they are designed simply to neu-
tralize the market access e¤ects of a country'  s new carbon taxes. This is therefore
what I would call a case of indirect linkage between climate and trade negotia-
tions, because it links the market access consequences of new carbon taxes with
the market access consequences of tari¤ cuts, combining the market access im-
plications of each into a reciprocal package. And in particular, from the WTO'      s
perspective, while this linkage could help to provide the balance across industri-
alized and emerging/developing countries needed to unlock the Doha Round, it
does not introduce issues beyond the market access consequences of policy that
are in any event the WTO'    s central concern.
    Second, there is an interesting political economy dimension: through this link-
age, industrialized country export interests would be harnessed to push for carbon
taxes, with the knowledge that carbon taxes would be accompanied by carbon cus-
toms duties, and that reductions in the latter could then be o¤ered as bargaining
chips to open foreign markets in GATT/WTO negotiating rounds. In making
the political environment potentially more favorable to carbon taxes in this way,
the linkage could help industrialized countries achieve more aggressive climate
commitments.
    And third, international commitments on climate policy would gain a potent
enforcement mechanism. If an industrialized country (or China) did not follow
through on its climate commitments, then from the WTO'       s perspective the coun-
try would be violating its market access commitments, and emerging and devel-
oping countries could then seek authorization from the WTO dispute settlement
  79
    Notice that I am assuming that the border carbon adjustments at issue would play the role
of neutralizing the trade e¤ects of carbon taxes, much as border tax adjustments neutralize the
trade e¤ects of destination-based value added taxes (VAT) such as those imposed by the EU
(see Lockwood and Whalley, 2010, for a discussion of the connections across these two policy
issues). I am then suggesting that industrialized countries could o¤er to reduce these border
carbon adjustments in market access negotiations with emerging and developing economies
precisely for the market access/trade implications that the carbon taxes without the border tax
adjustments would have.



                                             125
bodies to reciprocally raise their tari¤s.80
     In this way, under the linkage possibility I have considered here the market
access consequences of carbon taxes would be transformed from a bug into a
feature. Instead of simply responding to these consequences with border carbon
adjustments, industrialized countries could use the market access consequences
of carbon taxes as the engine of enforceable negotiated commitments on carbon
policies and un...nished Doha Round tari¤ cuts.
     What about carbon leakage, the increase in carbon emissions that could arise
from increased production elsewhere in the world if the countries that impose strin-
gent carbon policies lose international competitiveness in their carbon-intensive
sectors? This is a potential concern, because under the three-step procedure I have
described above the new carbon customs duties (carbon border adjustments) that
are meant to prevent carbon leakage when an industrialized country introduces
new carbon taxes would be largely or even completely bargained away.
     One approach to addressing this concern would be to link the reciprocal tari¤
negotiations in the third step of the procedure described above with the transfer of
clean technology. For example, Mattoo and Subramanian (2014) propose that an
international fund might be set up to ...nance the transfer of "green"technologies
to emerging and developing countries (see also the related discussion in World
Bank, 2021, p 17). The new access to industrialized country markets that would
arise from the described reciprocal tari¤ negotiations might be conditioned on the
adoption by emerging and developing country exporters of these green technolo-
gies. Or the desired technology transfer might be accomplished via foreign direct
investment (FDI) from industrialized countries to the emerging and developing
countries, with emerging and developing countries agreeing to make liberalizing
FDI commitments where needed as part of the third-step negotiations.
     Another approach to addressing this concern, possibly complementary to the
...rst approach, would build on the ability of bilateral tari¤ negotiations to minimize
third-party trade e¤ects when those negotiations conform to MFN and reciprocity
as described in chapter 4. Under this approach, industrialized countries would seek
out as bilateral tari¤ bargaining partners in the third-step market access negotia-
tions, not the principal suppliers of the products whose new carbon customs duties
are on the bargaining table, but rather those emerging and developing countries
with the cleanest technologies already in place for producing those products. As
  80
    Whether such reciprocal responses would be su¢ cient by themselves to enforce e¢ cient
carbon policies is an open question, but at a minimum they could form part of an e¤ective
enforcement mechanism for international climate commitments.


                                           126
in the chapter 2 discussion of tari¤ bargaining techniques used by the United
States in the context of the 1934 RTAA, judicious use of tari¤ reclassi...cations
might also be made to further guide the grant of industrial-country market access
toward clean-technology suppliers in the emerging and developing countries; and
split concessions could be used to hold in reserve some tari¤ reductions for later
adopters of green technology once they have adopted those technologies. This
would have the added bene...t of incentivizing emerging and developing countries
to invest in green technologies.


7. Conclusion
I have argued that the world trading system of the twentieth century can be
adapted to address the challenges of the twenty-...rst century. I have constructed
this argument in two steps, ...rst, by developing an understanding of why GATT
worked and the economic environment it is best suited for, and second, by eval-
uating according to this understanding whether the changes in the economic en-
vironment that have occurred in recent decades imply the need for changes in
the design of the GATT/WTO. I have argued that the terms-of-trade theory of
trade agreements provides a compelling framework for understanding the success
of GATT in the twentieth century, and I have argued (selectively here, more thor-
oughly in Staiger, 2021) that according to this understanding the logic of GATT' s
design features transcend many, though not all, of the current challenges faced
by the WTO. It is from this perspective that one could say, as I wrote in the In-
troduction, that rather than adopting an approach to the creation of an e¤ective
world trading system for the twenty-...rst century that follows that mantra "Move
fast and break things,"it may be possible to simply Keep Calm and Carry On.
    I am not claiming that reforms to the world trading system are not needed, or
that all is well at the WTO. But I am claiming that the broad architecture of the
GATT/WTO ­and of the GATT, in particular ­is well-suited as a basis for the
design of the world trading system of the twenty-...rst century.
    Even if the logic of my argument is accepted, there is still the question: How
could the designers of GATT have gotten it so right? Two observations can
help to answer this question. First, as I described in chapter 2, the designers of
GATT did not build GATT from scratch. Rather, GATT was modeled on the US
Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, whose design in turn bene...ted from decades of
experimentation with various trade agreement designs both in the United States
and Europe. So the designers of GATT were very much standing on the shoulders

                                       127
of those before them, and were bene...ciaries of a trial-and-error learning process
that had been going on for decades.
    A second observation may also help explain how the designers of GATT could
have gotten it so right. GATT was born in the aftermath of World War II when
the world economy was in a period of deep crisis, and some of the best economic
minds of the day, including James Meade and John Maynard Keynes, were re-
cruited to help in its design. Meade in particular was a member of the British
delegation to the London and Geneva conferences in 1946 and 1947 which pro-
duced the charter for the International Trade Organization and GATT, and along
with Keynes, Meade was widely regarded as a central ...gure in these conferences
(see for example Penrose, 1953, pp. 89-90). And so economics clearly held a po-
sition of prominence in shaping the design decisions that led to GATT, arguably
far more than would have been the case if GATT had been designed under less
exceptional circumstances.81
    Of course, this begs the question of whether these economists emphasized
the terms-of-trade externality associated with commercial policy that lies at the
heart of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements. But as Bagwell and Staiger
(2016) have observed, the Haberler Report, commissioned by GATT and written by
a Panel of Experts composed of Roberto de Oliveira Campos, Gottfried Haberler,
James Meade and Jan Tinbergen, suggests an a¢ rmative answer to this question.
    Writing on the topic of commercial policy in the 1950'   s and the agricultural
protectionism of industrialized countries during that period, the Haberler Report
does indeed emphasize terms-of-trade externalities, expressed in a multi-country
setting along the lines that I have sketched in chapter 4:

           The problem of the interests of di¤erent primary producing countries
       outside industrialized Western Europe and North America is ... not only
       a question which of the other countries would gain by a moderation of
       agricultural protectionism in these two great industrialized regions; there
       are undoubtedly cases in which an increase in agricultural protectionism
       in these two regions, while it would be to the disadvantage of some of the
       unindustrialized countries, would actually be to the advantage of others.
       Two examples will serve to illustrate the point. An increased stimulus to
       the production of wheat in any of the countries of North America or of
  81
    It has long been observed that periods of crisis can create favorable conditions for the
creation of institutions to solve otherwise intractable problems. See, for example, Langan-
Riekhof, Avanni and Janetti (2017).


                                            128
     Western Europe by increasing the exportable surplus of North America
     and decreasing the import requirements of Western Europe would depress
     the world market for wheat. This might mean that a country like India
     or Japan would obtain cheaper imports of wheat (either because of a fall
     in the world price or because of a development of special sales or gifts for
     the disposal of surplus wheat by the United States), but a country like
     Australia or the Argentine which competed in the world export market for
     wheat would be damaged. Another example of the same principle would be
     provided by measures which stimulated the export of raw cotton from the
     United States: this might increase the plenty and cheapness of raw cotton in
     world markets; an importing country like Japan would gain but competing
     exporters like Egypt, the Sudan, and Brazil would lose.
         In general, if one considers any particular agricultural product, a pro-
     tective stimulus to its production in any one country by increasing supplies
     relatively to the demand for that product will tend to depress the world
     market for that product. This will damage the interests of other countries
     which are exporters of the product on the world market. But it will be
     to the national interest of countries which import the product from world
     markets. Whether the initial protective stimulus confers a net bene...t or
     a net damage to all other countries concerned depends, therefore, upon
     whether the country giving the protective stimulus to its own production is
     an exporter or an importer of the product; if it is an exporter it is conferring
     a bene...t on the world by giving its supplies away at a cheap price; if it is
     an importer it is damaging the rest of the world by refusing to take their
     supplies.
         This general principle can be applied to a single country or to a whole
     region. It is because Western Europe and North America in combination are
     net importers of agricultural produce that we reach the general conclusion
     that a reduction of agricultural protectionism in these areas will on balance
     bene...t the rest of the world...(GATT, 1958, pp 93-94, original emphasis,
     footnotes omitted).

Here, when describing the impacts of agricultural protectionism in the industrial-
ized world on various countries in the rest of the world, the Report'
                                                                    s references to
"depress the world market," "fall in the world price," gains for other importing
countries from "cheaper imports" and losses for countries who are "competing
exporters"re  ect a simple terms-of-trade logic.


                                           129
    Moreover, the Harberler Report'   s references to the protective policies of "any
of the countries of North America or of Western Europe," "any one country"
and "a single country" suggest that the Report'      s authors accepted the notion
that a single country' s protective choices could have world price impacts; indeed,
the general principle for signing the international externalities associated with
commercial policy intervention stated by the Report in the quoted passage above
is couched in terms of "the country giving the protective stimulus."Hence, in these
paragraphs the authors appear to be describing the terms-of-trade externality that
is at the heart of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements.
    It is therefore accurate to say that the GATT was forged with the bene...t of
a substantial amount of knowledge, accumulated through prior experience, about
what worked and what did not work, and at a moment in history where the best
economists of the day were able to exert a remarkable level of in     uence over its
design. This unique set of circumstances may go a long way toward explaining
how the designers of GATT got it so right.
    More speculatively, this may also help to account for the fact that, with the
creation of the WTO, a number of features were added to the basic architecture
of GATT that are less clearly supported by economic arguments.82 The Uruguay
Round negotiations that gave birth to the WTO in 1995 did not correspond to
a period of crisis for the world economy in the way that GATT'         s creation in
1947 did, and it is perhaps in part for this reason that industry lobbies appear to
have had a much bigger role in driving the design of the WTO than was true of
GATT.83 Whether or not the world economy is entering a crisis phase akin to that
which gave rise to GATT, there is at least reason to hope that, with an economist
now at the helm of the WTO, economics may again be elevated to a position of
prominence in shaping the design decisions for the world trading system of the
twenty-...rst century.
  82
     For example, Sykes (2003) o¤ers a critique of the design and legal interpretations of the
elaborations on GATT Article XIX embodied in the WTO Safeguard Agreement, Bagwell and
Staiger (2006) have argued that the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
may have marked a step backward relative to GATT'      s treatment of subsidies (see also Sykes,
2005), and a number of economists have questioned the wisdom of including TRIPS in the WTO
and its particular design (see, for example, Deardor¤, 1990).
  83
     See, for example, the account in Gad (2003) of the in  uence of the pharmaceutical lobbies
on the TRIPS negotiations, among others.




                                             130
References
 [1] Amiti, Mary, Redding, Stephen J. and David E. Weinstein. 2019. "The Impact of
    the 2018 Tari¤s on Prices and Welfare," Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(4):
    187-210.

 [2] Antras, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. "O¤shoring and the Role of Trade
    Agreements," American Economic Review, 102(7): 3140-3183.

 [3] Antras, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. "Trade Agreements and the Nature
    of Price Determination," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
    102(3): 470-476.

 [4] Autor, David H., Dorn, David and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syn-
    drome: Local Labor Market E¤ects of Import Competition in the United States,"
    American Economic Review 103(6): 2121­ 2168.

 [5] Bagwell, Kyle, Bown, Chad, and Robert W. Staiger. 2016. "Is the WTO Passe?,"
    Journal of Economic Literature 54(4): 1125-1231.

 [6] Bagwell, Kyle and Lee, Seung Hoon. 2020. "Trade Policy under Monopolistic
    Competition with Firm Selection," Journal of International Economics 127: No-
    vember.

 [7] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1999. "An Economic Theory of GATT,"
    American Economic Review 89(1): 215-248.

 [8] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001a. "Reciprocity, non-discrimination
    and preferential agreements in the multilateral trading system,"European Journal
    of Political Economy 17(2): 281-325.

 [9] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001b. "Domestic Policies, National Sov-
    ereignty, and International Economic Institutions," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 116: 519-562.

[10] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World
    Trading System, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

[11] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2006. "Will International Rules on Sub-
    sidies Disrupt the World Trading System?," American Economic Review 96(3):
    877-95.

                                       131
[12] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010a. "The World Trade Organization:
    Theory and Practice," Annual Reviews of Economics 2: 223-56.

[13] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2010b. "Backward stealing and forward
    manipulation in the WTO," Journal of International Economics 82(1): 49-62.

[14] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2011. "What Do Trade Negotiators Negoti-
    ate About? Empirical Evidence from the World Trade Organization," American
    Economic Review, 101(4): 1238-1273.

[15] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. "Pro...t Shifting and Trade Agree-
    ments in Imperfectly Competitive Markets," International Economic Review
    53(4): 1067-1104.

[16] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. "The economics of trade agree-
    ments in the linear cournot delocation model," Journal of International Eco-
    nomics 88(1): 32-46.

[17] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2014. "Can the Doha Round be a Devel-
    opment Round? Setting a Place at the Table"in Robert C Feenstra and Alan M
    Taylor (eds), Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic
    Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century, University of Chicago Press,
    January.

[18] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. "Delocation and Trade Agreements
    in Imperfectly Competitive Markets," Research in Economics 69: 132-156.

[19] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2016. "The Design of Trade Agreements,"
    in Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds) The Handbook of Commercial
    Policy, vol 1A, December.

[20] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2018. "Multilateral Trade Bargaining and
    Dominant Strategies," International Economic Review, 59(4): 1785-1824.

[21] Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Ali Yurukoglu. 2018. " `Nash-in-Nash'
    Tari¤ Bargaining with and without MFN," mimeo, May.

[22] Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Ali Yurukoglu. 2020a. "Multilateral Trade
    Bargaining: A First Look at the GATT Bargaining Records,"American Economic
    Journal: Applied 12(3): 72-105.


                                       132
[23] Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Ali Yurukoglu. 2020b. " `
                                                                  Nash-in-Nash'
     Tari¤ Bargaining," Journal of International Economics 122: January.

[24] Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W. Staiger and Ali Yurukoglu. Forthcoming. "Quantitative
     Analysis of Multi-Party Tari¤ Negotiations," Econometrica.

[25] Beckett G. 1941. The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Program. New York:
     Columbia Univ. Press.

[26] Beitz, Charles. 1979. "Bounded Morality: Justice and the State in World Politics,"
     International Organization 33: 405­424.

[27] Beshkar, Mostafa and Eric W. Bond. 2017. "Cap and Escape in Trade Agree-
     ments," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 9(4): 171-202.

[28] Beshkar, Mostafa, Bond, Eric W. and Youngwoo Rho. 2015. "Tari¤ binding and
     overhang: Theory and evidence,"Journal of International Economics 97(1): 1-13.

[29] Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and V. K. Ramaswami. 1963. "Domestic Distortions, Tari¤s
     and the Theory of the Optimum Subsidy," Journal of Political Economy 71(1):
     44-50.

[30] Bordo¤, Jason E. 2008. "International Trade Law and the Economics of Climate
     Policy: Evaluating the Legality and E¤ectiveness of Proposals to Address Com-
     petitiveness and Leakage Concerns," Chapter 2 in Brookings Trade Forum
     2008/2009, Climate Change, Trade, and Competitiveness: Is a Colli-
     sion Inevitable? Brookings Institution Press: 35-68.

[31] Borjas, George J. and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995. "Foreign Competition, Market
     Power, and Wage Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 1075­
     1110.

[32] Bown, Chad P., and Meredith A. Crowley. 2016. "The Empirical Landscape of
     Trade Policy,"in Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds) The Handbook of
     Commercial Policy, vol 1A, December.

[33] Bown, Chad and Jennifer A. Hillman. 2019. "WTO'
                                                   ing a Resolution to the China
     Subsidy Problem," PIIE Working Paper No 19-17, Washington DC.

[34] Broda, Christian, Nuno Limão, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. "Optimal tari¤s
     and market power: the evidence." American Economic Review 98(5): 2032-65.

                                        133
[35] Buchanan, Allen. 2003. Justice, Legitimacy and Self-Determination, Ox-
    ford: Oxford University Press.

[36] Buchanan, Allen and Robert O. Keohane. 2006. "The Legitimacy of Global Gov-
    ernance Institutions," Ethics and International A¤ airs 20(4): 405­437.

[37] Campolmi, Alessia, Fadinger, Harald and Chiata Forlati. 2014. "Trade Policy:
    Home market e¤ect versus terms-of-trade externality," Journal of International
    Economics 93: 92-107.

[38] Campolmi, Alessia, Fadinger, Harald and Chiata Forlati. 2020. "Trade
    and Domestic Policies in Models with Monopolistic Competition,"
    http://fadinger.vwl.uni-mannheim.de/Research_...les/CFF_2018_1004.pdf.

[39] Carbon Brief. 2017. "Mapped: The world'
                                           s largest CO2 importers and exporters,"
    July 5, available at https://www.carbonbrief.org/mapped-worlds-largest-co2-
    importers-exporters.

[40] Cavallo, Alberto, Gopinath, Gita, Neiman, Brent and Jenny Tang. 2021. "Tari¤
    Pass-Through at the Border and at the Store: Evidence from US Trade Policy,
    American Economic Review: Insights 3(1): 19-34.

[41] Charnovitz, Steve. 2014. "Green Subsidies and the WTO,"Robert Schuman Cen-
    tre for Advanced Studies Research Paper No. RSCAS 2014/93.

[42] Cherniwchan, Jevan and Nouri Najjar. 2019. "Do Environmental Regulations
    A¤ect the Decision to Export?," mimeo, November 1.

[43] Corden, Warner Max. 1974. Trade Policy and Economic Welfare. Oxford:
    Clarendon Press.

[44] Costinot, Arnaud, Rodriguez-Clare, Andres and Ivan Werning. 2016. "Micro to
    Macro: Optimal Trade Policy with Firm Heterogeneity," NBER Working Paper
    No 21989.

[45] Costinot, Arnaud, Rodriguez-Clare, Andres and Ivan Werning. Forthcoming. "Mi-
    cro to Macro: Optimal Trade Policy with Firm Heterogeneity," Econometrica.

[46] Culbert J. 1987. War-time Anglo-American talks and the making of GATT. World
    Economy 10: 381-407.



                                       134
[47] Curzon, Gerard. 1965. Multilateral Commercial Diplomacy: The General
    Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade and Its Impact on National Commer-
    cial Policies and Techniques. London, U.K.: Michael Joseph.

[48] Dam, Kenneth W. 1970. The GATT: Law and International Economic
    Organization. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

[49] Deardor¤, Alan V. 1990. "Should Patent Protection Be Extended to All Devel-
    oping Countries?," The World Economy 13(4): 497-508.

[50] Drazen, Allan and Nuno Limao. 2008. "A Bargaining Theory of Ine¢ cient Redis-
    tribution Policies," International Economic Review 49(2): 621-657.

[51] European Commission. 2016. "Elements for a new EU strategy on China," Joint
    Communication to the European Parliament and the Council, Brussels, June 22.

[52] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Goldberg, Pinelopi K., Kennedy, Patrick J. and Amit K.
    Khandelwal. 2020. "The Return to Protectionism," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 135(1): 1-55.

[53] Franck, Thomas. 1990. The Power of Legitimacy Among Nations, New
    York: Oxford University Press.

[54] Gad, Mohamad O. 2003. "Impact of Multinational Enterprises on Multilateral
    Rule Making: The Pharmaceutical Industry and the TRIPS Uruguay Round
    Negotiations," Law and Business Review of the Americas 9(4): 667-697.

[55] GATT. 1958. Trends in International Trade: A Report by a Panel of
    Experts, Geneva, October.

[56] Grossman, Gene M. 2016. "The Purpose of Trade Agreements," in Kyle Bagwell
    and Robert W. Staiger (eds) The Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1A,
    December.

[57] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 1994. "Protection for Sale,"American
    Economic Review 84, September: 833-50.

[58] Grossman, Gene M., McCalman, Phillip and Robert W. Staiger. 2021. "The `
                                                                            New'
    Economics of Trade Agreements: From Trade Liberalization to Regulatory Con-
    vergence?," Econometrica 89(1): 215-249.



                                      135
[59] Haus, Leah. 1991. "The East European Countries and GATT: The Role of Real-
    ism, Mercantilism, and Regime Theory in Explaining East-West Trade Negotia-
    tions," International Organization 45(2): 163- 182.

[60] Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman. 1989. Trade Policy and Market
    Structure, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

[61] Hoda, Anwarul. 2001. Tari¤ Negotiations and Renegotiations under the
    GATT and the WTO: Procedures and Practices, WTO and Cambridge
    University Press.

[62] Hudec, Robert E. 1990. The GATT Legal System and World Trade Diplo-
    macy, Second Edition, Praeger Publisher: New York.

[63] Interim Commission for the ITO. 1949. The Attack on Trade Barri-
    ers: A Progress Report on the Operation of the General Agree-
    ment on Tari¤s and Trade. Geneva: Interim Commission for the ITO.
    https://docs.wto.org/gattdocs/q/GG/SPEC/61-300.pdf.

[64] Jackson, John H. 1969. World Trade and the Law of GATT. New York:
    Bobbs-Merrill.

[65] Jackson John H. 1997. The World Trading System, 2nd edition. Cambridge
    MA: The MIT Press.

[66] Jawara, Fatoumata and Aileen Kwa. 2003. Behind the Scenes at the WTO:
    the Real World of International Trade Negotiations, London: Zed Books.

[67] Jensen, Michael Friis. 2020. How could trade measures being considered to miti-
    gate climate change e¤ect LDC exports?, World Bank Group, The World Bank,
    Washington DC, October.

[68] Johnson, Harry G. 1953-4. "Optimum Tari¤s and Retaliation," Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 21(2): 142­53.

[69] Johnston, George A. 1970. The International Labour Organization: Its
    Work for Social and Economic Progress, Europa Publications, London.

[70] Kagan, Robert. 2018. The Jungle Grows Back: America and our Imper-
    iled World, Alfred A. Knopf, New York.



                                       136
[71] Keohane, Robert O. 1986. "Reciprocity in International Relations," International
     Organization 40(1): 1-27.

[72] Kletzer, Lori G. 2019. "Trade and Labor Market Adjustment: The Costs of Trade-
     Related Job Loss in the United States and Policy Responses," in Luis Catao,
     Maurice Obstfeld and Christine Lagarde (eds) Meeting Globalization' s Chal-
     lenges, Princeton university Press: 167-178.

[73] Kostecki, Maciej. 1974. "Hungary and GATT," Journal of World Trade Law
     8: 401-419.

[74] Krugman, Paul R. 2019. "Globalization: What did we miss?" in Luis Catao,
     Maurice Obstfeld and Christine Lagarde (eds) Meeting Globalization'
                                                                       s Chal-
     lenges, Princeton university Press: 113-120.

[75] Langan-Riekhof, Maria, Avani, Arex B. and Adrienne Janetti. 2017. "Sometimes
     the world needs a crisis: Turning challenges into opportunities,"Brookings Report,
     April 10.

[76] Lardy, Nicholas R. 2001. "Issues in China's WTO Accession,"Brookings Institu-
     tion Testimony, May 9.

[77] Limao, Nuno, and Patricia Tovar. 2011. "Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence
     from Commitment via International Trade Agreements," Journal of International
     Economics 85(2): 186-205.

[78] Lockwood, Ben and John Whalley. 2010. "Carbon-motivated Border Tax Adjust-
     ments: Old Wine in Green Bottles?," The World Economy 33(6): 810-819.

[79] Ludema, Rodney D. and Anna Maria Mayda. 2013. "Do Terms-of-Trade E¤ects
     Matter for Trade Agreements? Theory and Evidence from WTO Countries."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4): 1837-93.

[80] Maggi, Giovanni. 1999. "The Role of Multilateral Institutions in International
     Trade Cooperation." American Economic Review 89(1): 190-214.

[81] Maggi, Giovanni. 2016. "Issue Linkage," in Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger
     (eds) The Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1B, December.

[82] Maggi, Giovanni and Ralph Ossa. 2020. "Are Trade Agreements Good for You?"
     NBER Working Paper No. 27252, Cambridge MA.

                                        137
[83] Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. "The Optimal Design of Trade
    Agreements in the Presence of Renegotiation," American Economic Journal: Mi-
    croeconomics 7(1): 109-143.

[84] Martill, Benjamin and Uta Staiger. 2018. "Cultures of negotiations: Explain-
    ing Britain'
               s hard bargaining in the Brexit negotiations," Dahrendorf Forum IV,
    Working Paper No. 04, 14 September.

[85] Mattoo, Aaditya and Robert W. Staiger. 2020. "Trade Wars: What do they
    mean? Why are they happening now? What are the costs?," Economic Policy
    35(103): 561-584.

[86] Mattoo, Aaditya and Arvind Subramanian. 2013. Greenprint: A New Ap-
    proach to Cooperation on Climate Change, Center for Global Development,
    Washington DC.

[87] Mayer, Wolfgang. 1981. "Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tari¤ Adjust-
    ments," Oxford Economic Papers 33: 135-53.

[88] McLaren, John. 1997. "Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker'
                                                             s Objection to Free
    Trade," American Economic Review, 87(3): 400-20.

[89] Meade, James Edward. 1942. A Proposal for an International Commercial Union.
    E.C.(S)(42) 19. British Library of Political and Economic Science, London, 28
    July.

[90] Nicita, Alessandro, Olarreaga, Marcelo and Peri Silva. 2018. "Cooperation in
    WTO'
       s Tari¤ Waters?," Journal of Political Economy 126(3): 1302-1338.

[91] Nordhaus, William. 2015. "Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-riding in Interna-
    tional Climate Policy," American Economic Review 105(4): 1339-1370.

[92] Ossa, Ralph. 2011. "A `
                           New Trade'Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations," Jour-
    nal of Political Economy 119: 122-152.

[93] Ossa, Ralph. 2014. "Trade wars and trade talks with data," American Economic
    Review 104(12): 4104-46.

[94] Pauwelyn, Joost. 2008. Optimal Protection of International Law: Navigat-
    ing between European Absolutism and American Volunteerism, Cam-
    bridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

                                       138
 [95] Penrose, Ernest F. 1953. Economic Planning for the Peace. Princeton Uni-
      versity Press. Princeton New Jersey.

 [96] Peter, Fabienne. 2017. "Political Legitimacy," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
      losophy (Summer), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

 [97] Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich. 1997. The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement
      System: International Law, International Organization and Dispute
      Settlement. London: Kluwer Law International.

 [98] Rhodes, Carolyn. 1993. Reciprocity, U.S. Trade Policy, and the GATT
      Regime, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York.

 [99] Rodrik, Dani. 1987. "Policy Targeting with Endogenous Distortions: Theory of
      Optimum Subsidy Revisited," Quarterly Journal of Economics 102(4): 903­911.

[100] Samuelson, Paul A. 1954. "The Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of Eco-
      nomics and Statistics 36(4): 386­389.

[101] Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 2002. "The economic structure of rene-
      gotiation and dispute resolution in the World Trade Organization." Journal of
      Legal Studies 31(1): S179-204.

[102] Staiger, Robert W. 2021. A World Trading System for the Twenty-First
      Century. mimeo, June 1.

[103] Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2011. "International Trade, National
      Treatment, and Domestic Regulation," Journal of Legal Studies 40(1): 149-203.

[104] Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2021. "The Economic Structure of Trade-
      in-Services Agreements," Journal of Political Economy 129(4): 1287-1317.

[105] Sykes, Alan O. 2003. "The safeguard mess: A critique of WTO jurisprudence,"
      World Trade Review 2(3): 261-295.

[106] Sykes, Alan O. 2005. "Subsidies and Countervailing Measures," The World
      Trade Organization: Legal, Economic and Political Analysis, Patrick
      F. J. Macrory, Arthur E. Appleton and Michael G. Plummer (eds), New York,
      Springer Science and Business Media: 83­108.

[107] Tasca H.J. 1938. The Reciprocal Trade Policy of the United States: A
      Study in Trade Philosophy. Philadelphia PA: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press.

                                         139
[108] The Economist. 2011. "Dead Man Talking: Ten years of trade talks have sharp-
      ened divisions, not smoothed them," The Economist Magazine, April 28.

[109] USTR. 2021. 2020 Report to Congress on China's WTO Compliance, O¢ ce if the
      United States Trade Representative, Washington DC, January.

[110] Wallace Benjamin B. 1933. Tari¤ bargaining. Foreign A¤ airs. 1933: 621-33.

[111] Wallace-Wells, David. 2019. The Uninhabitable Earth: Life After Warm-
      ing, Tim Duggan Books, New York.

[112] Webster, Timothy. 2014. "Paper Compliance: How China Implements WTO De-
      cisions," Michigan Journal of International Law 35(3): 525-578.

[113] Weitzman, Martin L. 2014. "Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to
      Internalize the Global Warming Externality?," Journal of the Association of En-
      vironmental and Resource Economists, March/June: 29-49.

[114] World Bank. 2021. "The Nexus between Trade and Climate Change: Impacts
      and Issues for Developing Countries (Summary Report)," World Bank Group,
      Washington DC. April 7 draft.

[115] World Trade Organization. 1998. Japan ­ Measures A¤ecting Consumer Photo-
      graphic Film and Paper, WT/DS44, adopted 22 April: para 10.36.

[116] World Trade Organization. 2001. Accession of the People'
                                                             s Republic of China:
      Decision of 10 November 2001, WT/L/432, November 23.

[117] World Trade Organization. 2007. World Trade Report. Six decades of mul-
      tilateral trade cooperation: What have we learnt?, Geneva.

[118] Wu, Mark. 2016. "The `
                           China, Inc.' Challenge to Global Trade Governance,"
      Harvard International Law Journal 57(2): 261-324.

[119] Zhou, Weihuan. 2019. China's Implementation of the Rulings of the World
      Trade Organization, Hart Publishing, United Kingdom.

[120] Zhou, Weihuan and Mandy Meng Fang. 2021. "Subsidizing technology competi-
      tion: China'
                 s evolving practices and international trade regulation in the post-
      pandemic era," Washington International Law Journal 30(3).



                                        140
