                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GENDER DIFFERENCES IN PEER RECOGNITION BY ECONOMISTS

                                          David Card
                                      Stefano DellaVigna
                                         Patricia Funk
                                        Nagore Iriberri

                                      Working Paper 28942
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28942


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We thank the Executive Committee of the Econometric Society for pursuing this study and for
agreeing to share the confidential data on nominations for Econometric Society Fellows. We
thank Vincent P. Crawford, Avinash Dixit, Robert Gordon, Dan Hamermesh, Erin Hengel, Shelly
Lundberg, Enrico Moretti, Muriel Niederle, Rafael Repullo, Heather Sarsons, Joel Sobel, and
Heidi Williams and seminar audiences at the COSME conference, at Stanford University, UCL,
the Univeristy of Bolzano, the University of Vienna, and Washington University for comments
and Robert Gordon, Dan Hamermesh, Rafael Repullo, Jose Scheinkman, and Chris Shannon for
helping with various aspects of the data collection. We are grateful to Joshua Archer, Zihao Li,
Chris Lim, Dan Ma, Anna Sun, Henry Xu, and a team of undergraduate research assistants for
their extraordinary help. Nagore Iriberri acknowledges financial support from grants
PID2019-106146GB-I00 MINECO/FEDER and IT367-19. Patricia Funk acknowledges financial
support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 178887). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Differences in Peer Recognition by Economists
David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri
NBER Working Paper No. 28942
June 2021
JEL No. J16

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the selection of Fellows of the Econometric Society, using a new data set of
publications and citations for over 40,000 actively publishing economists since the early 1900s.
Conditional on achievement, we document a large negative gap in the probability that women
were selected as Fellows in the 1933-1979 period. This gap became positive (though not
statistically significant) from 1980 to 2010, and in the past decade has become large and highly
significant, with over a 100% increase in the probability of selection for female authors relative to
males with similar publications and citations. The positive boost affects highly qualified female
candidates (in the top 10% of authors) with no effect for the bottom 90%. Using nomination data
for the past 30 years, we find a key proximate role for the Society's Nominating Committee in
this shift. Since 2012 the Committee has had an explicit mandate to nominate highly qualified
women, and its nominees enjoy above-average election success (controlling for achievement).
Looking beyond gender, we document similar shifts in the premium for geographic diversity: in
the mid-2000s, both the Fellows and the Nominating Committee became significantly more likely
to nominate and elect candidates from outside the US. Finally, we examine gender gaps in several
other major awards for US economists. We show that the gaps in the probability of selection of
new fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of
Sciences closely parallel those of the Econometric Society, with historically negative penalties for
women turning to positive premiums in recent years.

David Card                                        Patricia Funk
Department of Economics                           Università della Svizzera italiana
549 Evans Hall, #3880                             Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
University of California, Berkeley                6904 Lugano
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Switzerland
and NBER                                          patricia.funk@usi.ch
card@econ.berkeley.edu
                                                  Nagore Iriberri
Stefano DellaVigna                                University of the Basque Country
University of California, Berkeley                Av. Lehendakari Aguirre 83
Department of Economics                           Bilbao
549 Evans Hall #3880                              Spain
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           nagore.iriberri@gmail.com
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
The Econometric Society (ES) is one of the oldest and most prestigious societies in economics. Its
Fellows have a remarkable track record: over 90% of Nobel Memorial prize winners have been ES
Fellows. As in the upper echelons of business and government (Bertrand, 2018), women make up
only a small share of these Fellows. Figure I shows that the fraction of women among the newly
elected Fellows was near 0 until 1970, and remained under 5% until the 1990s, but has recently
risen to 20%. Similar trends are evident among newly elected fellows of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences (AAAS), the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), the American Economic
Association (AEA), and among Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellows. The patterns in Figure I raise
two important questions. To what extent did the historically low share of female Fellows reflect a
lack of qualified women, versus a lack of recognition for female scholars? And how can we account
for recent increases in the representation of women?
        In this paper we develop a simple framework for answering these questions and for analyzing
gender differences in peer recognition in academia. Specifically, we study the gender gap in the
probability of selection as an ES Fellow from the underlying population of active scholars. Our
framework, which incorporates both the nomination and election phases of a multi-stage process
like the one used by the ES, is motivated by three factors. First, the low rate of selection as a Fellow
of the ES is largely driven by the low probability of nomination. In 2015, for example, there were
over 1,500 economists with at least three "top 5" publications who were not yet ES Fellows. Of
these, only 57 were nominated; ultimately 12 were elected. It is therefore crucial to study gender
gaps in both the nomination and election processes.1 Second, an advantage of studying the relative
recognition of women in an academic setting is that we can measure the population at risk for
receiving an honor, and quantify the accomplishments of different candidates. Parallel analyses
for CEO's or political office holders are infeasible, making it virtually impossible to assess whether
there is a shortage of qualified women for top posts, or a preference for males among the set of
qualified candidates. Third, our models could be used to identify candidates for nomination who
have been overlooked.
        We begin by constructing a data base of economists who have authored at least one paper in a
set of 36 high-impact journals, yielding a list of over 40,000 scholars from the early 1900s to 2019.
After assigning gender using methods developed in Card et al. (2020), we construct dynamically
evolving CVs for each economist that incorporates their cumulative publications (in any of the
36 journals) and cumulative citations (for papers in the "top 5" economics journals) up to the
current year. We then estimate hazard-style models for the probability that someone who is not
yet a Fellow is elected in a given year, conditional on publications and citations up to that point,
allowing people to remain at risk for selection for up to 18 years after their last publication.
        Our sample includes nearly a century of data, from 1933 to 2019. Recognizing the Society's
emphasis on "economic theory in its relation to statistics and mathematics" (Roos, 1933), we allow
    1
        An earlier study by Hamermesh and Schmidt (2003) focuses only on election conditional on nomination.



                                                          1
for differing effects of publications and citations in each of the top-5 journals. We also allow separate
effects for publications in the other 31 journals (e.g., Journal of Econometrics v. Journal of Labor
Economics ), implicitly controlling for field and methodological focus. We fit separate models for
three broad periods ­ 1933-79, 1980-99, and 2000-19 ­ allowing the effects of gender to vary by
decade within each period.
   Across all three periods we find that publications and citations are strong predictors of election to
Fellow. Cumulative Econometrica (EMA) publications play an especially large role, while those in
the Review of Economic Studies (REStud) matter slightly less. Publications in the other top 5
journals and in the field journals also matter, as do citations.
   While the effects of publications and citations are relatively consistent over time, the impact of
author gender shifts dramatically. For the period up to 1979 we estimate a large negative impact
of female gender on the probability of selection as a Fellow (145 log points ­ a penalty equivalent
to about 1.5 extra EMA's in models that control only for top 5 publications). For the 1980s,
1990s, and 2000s we estimate positive but more modest effects (all statistically insignificant). We
then estimate a larger and highly significant effect (93 log points) in 2010-2019, equivalent to an
additional EMA publication
   These changing gender gaps are readily apparent in the raw data. Figure II shows the female
share of newly elected ES Fellows, along with the share of females among all active publishers, the
share with at least one EMA or REStud, the share with at least one Quarterly Journal of Economics
(QJE ), and those with at least 3 top-5's. Prior to 1980 the share of female Fellows was clearly
below the share of female economists with 3+ top-5 publications. By the early 1980s, however, the
female share of Fellows had caught up, and the two shares trend upward together until about 2010.
Thereafter, the female share of newly elected ES Fellows rises sharply, and is now approaching the
female share of active publishers.
   An important question is whether the recent boost for female candidates applies to all authors,
to highly-qualified authors, or only to super-star candidates. Our basic logistic regression models
assume that the female effect is proportional to the probability of selection ignoring gender. We
evaluate this assumption and find a fairly consistent boost of around 100 log points for female
authors ranked in the top 10% of potential candidates. We find no evidence of a boost for candidates
in the bottom 90% of authors (for whom the probability of selection is extremely low).
   A concern with our analysis is that we may be more likely to undercount publications for women
than men, due to name changes at marriage. We conduct a detailed audit of our constructed CV's
for 150 scholars and find an error rate of <2% in the attribution of published papers for both men
and women. A second concern is that the publication bar in economics is higher for women (Hengel,
2018; Card et al., 2020), or that citation rates are lower for female-authored papers, leading us to
undercount the true productivity of women. While acknowledging these possibilities, we emphasize
that they cannot account for the dramatic changes in the gender gap in the probability of selection
as an ES Fellow. We also note that the estimated selection premium for women tends to get larger
when we control for broader measures of past productivity - the opposite of what might be expected


                                                    2
under a mismeasurement concern.
       Fellows of the Econometric Society can be nominated by either existing Fellows or by the
Society's Nominating Committee. Nominees who receive a minimum share of votes cast in the
annual election are then elected. To gain additional insights into the drivers of the gender gap in
selection rates, we use confidential ES data on the nominees ­ available (with some gaps) from 1990
onward ­ to analyze gender effects on nomination and election.
       Considering the probability of nomination, conditional on publications and citations, we find an
inconsistent gender gap for the period 1995-2011, but a clear 61 log point gap advantage for women
(s.e.=23 points) for the period 2012-2019. An important component of this effect arises through
a shift in choices of the Nominating Committee, which since 2012 has had an explicit mandate to
put forward the names of highly qualified female economists.
       Turning to the probability of election, conditional on nomination and controlling for publica-
tions and citations, we find an inconsistent pattern for the period 1995-2011, and a positive election
premium for females in the period 2012-2019. We also find that over the past 15 years Committee
nominees have had a higher probability of election, irrespective of gender. The emergence of this
preference for Committee nominees coincides with a switch from paper to electronic voting in 2006,
and a new procedure for explicitly designating Committee nominees on the ballot.2 The high frac-
tion of female candidates nominated by the Committee since 2012, together with voters' preferences
for Committee-nominated candidates, imply that the choices of the Nominating Committee have
played an important proximate role in the rising recognition of female scholars.
    Next, we focus on three mechanisms that potentially mediate gender differences in the proba-
bility of selection. First, female economists may be differentially visible to members of the ES. To
measure visibility we use appointments to editorial roles at EMA. Second, female economists may
be less connected to existing Fellows (e.g., Nielson, 2015). We therefore control for coauthorships
with current Fellows, and with members of the Nominating Committee. Third, Sarsons et al. (2021)
show that women receive less credit for coauthored work than men in tenure decisions. We thus
test whether coauthored papers by women receive a lower weight.
       We find that visibility and connections both matter. Serving as Associate Editor of EMA leads
to a large increase in the probability of selection as a Fellow. Coauthorships with ES Fellows increase
the probability of nomination as an ES Fellow, while coauthorships with members of the Nominating
Committee matter for the probability of being nominated by the Committee. Nevertheless, adding
these controls has almost no effect on the estimated gender gaps. With respect to coauthorships,
we do not find that women receive less recognition for coauthored work. Thus the gender gaps in
selection as an ES Fellow are largely unaffected by differences in coauthorship patterns.
       Having documented the impact of gender, we go on to consider geographic diversity. Although
we do not observe the locations of all actively-publishing economists, we see affiliations of the
nominees. In the period up to 2005 we find an election premium for nominees based in top US
   2
    We also identify a second impact of the design of the ballot, which until 2020 listed candidates alphabetically:
candidates with last names earlier in the alphabet are more likely to be elected (but no more likely to be nominated).



                                                          3
schools and in Europe (relative to those in lower-ranked US schools), but no such premium for
those based in Asia, Australia, Latin America, or Africa. Starting in 2006, however, we see a large
boost in the probability of election for nominees from these under-represented areas ­ a boost that
is 2-3 times as large as the boost for female candidates post-2012.
   Similar to the case for gender, we document a role for the Nominating Committee, which since
the mid-1990s has made an effort to expand geographic diversity in the Society. Interestingly, prior
to the mid-2000s these efforts had minimal impact. After the ballot started to identify Committee
nominees, however, Committee nominees from under-represented areas became much more likely
to be elected, holding constant prior publications and citations.
   Finally, we examine whether the changing pattern of gender gaps in fellowship selection are
specific to the Econometric Society, or reflect more general patterns in the profession. We consider
the selection as a Fellow of the AAAS (438 Fellows elected since 1933), the NAS (146 Fellows since
1968), the AEA (172 Fellows elected since 1965), and as a winner of an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Fellowship (305 awards since 1981). We fit hazard-style models similar to the ones for the ES.
   We show that the pattern of gender gaps in selection as a Fellow of the AAAS and NAS, who
have similar selection processes as the ES, are remarkably similar to the pattern for the ES. Before
1980, women appear to have faced a higher bar for selection as a Fellow of both Societies. In
the 1980s and 1990s the gender gap became positive, if statistically insignificant, and in the most
recent decade we estimate large positive selection premiums for female scholars at both Societies
(larger in magnitude than for the ES). We also document positive female selection premiums as
AEA Fellows and (with smaller margintudes) as Sloan Fellows. The parallel pattern of gender gaps
at the three Societies suggests to us that similar forces may have been at work, and leads us to
emphasize that the Nominating Committee's role at the ES is only a proximate cause of the changes
there. External forces may have worked through different channels at the AAAS and NAS, but
appear to have had the same overall effect as at the ES.
   Our findings make three main contributions. First, we contribute to an emerging literature
within economics on gender-related differences in the evaluation of scientific work, including studies
by Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017) and Hospido and Sanz (2019) on conference submissions,
Card et al. (2020) on journal submissions, and Sarsons et al. (2021) on coauthorship and promotions.
In contrast to these papers, we focus on recognition for the highest levels of achievement. This
difference may be important if, for example, evaluators hold stereotyped priors on women at entry
to the field that lead them to under-value the work of female researchers, resulting in a paucity of
women at higher levels. Under such circumstances, Fryer (2007) showed that beliefs may "flip,"
leading to a presumption that successful females are actually better-qualified than men, consistent
with the findings by Bohren et al. (2019) and Kahn (2012).
   Second, we contribute to the literature originating with Rossiter (1993) on the recognition of
female scientists. Recent studies document the under-representation of women in the American
Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (Silver et al., 2017), the American Academy of
Neurology (Silver et al., 2018), and as winners of top prizes in the biomedical sciences (Uzzi, 2019),


                                                  4
anesthesiology (Ellinas et al., 2019), and STEM fields as a whole (Lincoln et al., 2012). Relative
to these studies, we measure not only the number of females in a field who are at risk to win an
award, but also their scientific contributions as measured by publications and citations.
    Finally, we also contribute to the small literature on honors in Economics, including the studies
of elections for ES Fellows by Hamermesh and Schmidt (2003) and for members of the AEA Ex-
ecutive Committee by Donald and Hamermesh (2006). Our innovations are to consider the joint
process of nomination and election, which is particularly important given the low probability of
nomination, and to broaden the set of honors under consideration.


2     Data and Summary Statistics
Our analysis combines data from public sources and confidential records of the Econometric Society.
In this section we briefly describe our data sets of actively publishing economists and of scholars
nominated and elected as Fellows. Online Appendix A presents additional details on the data set
and discusses changes from our pre-registered analysis plan.

2.1   Data Set of Actively Publishing Economists
Sample of Journals and Articles. We constructed a sample of actively publishing economists
from information on articles in the 36 journals listed in Appendix Table AI. These include the
top-5 journals, 8 other general interest journals (counting AER/AEA Papers and Proceedings as
a separate journal), and 23 field journals (many of which only started publishing in the 1970s or
later). Given the focus of the ES on contributions in theory and econometrics, we oversample
field journals in these fields and include the Journal of the American Statistical Association. We
downloaded all articles in each journal from its earliest publication date, eliminating notes and
comments. The final data set contains 103,563 separate articles.
    From this data set we construct an annual CV for each author, containing the cumulative set of
papers published by a given scholar in the 36 journals up to that year. We consider an economist
to be an active publisher from the year of his or her first paper (in the set of 36 journals) to 18
years after his or her last publication (unless he or she died before). We supplement publication
counts with cumulative citations to a scholar's prior publications in each of the top 5 journals up
to that year, extracted from SSCI/Web of Science. (Citations are set to zero for individuals with
no publications in the relevant top-5 journal up to that year).
    Disambiguating Names. To construct accurate CV's we need to disambiguate author names.
Appendix A contains a detailed description of our process, which included using undergraduate
assistants to look up first names for authors with only a first initial. After merging and correcting
records, our database of actively publishing economists includes over 40,000 unique names.
    Fellowships. Information on the Fellows of the ES, the AAAS, the NAS, the AEA, and the
Sloan Foundation was obtained from webpages of these institutions. All but 30 of the 1,021 ES
Fellows selected from 1933 to 2019 are included in our data base of active publishers. The excluded


                                                  5
group consists mainly of statisticians and methodologists from other fields (see Appendix A).
       Gender Coding. We identify gender using the protocol laid out in Appendix Figure 1 of Card
et al. (2020). We were able to identify gender for about 94% of actively publishing economists,
leaving 2,631 names (6.1% of ever-active scholars) with unknown gender.
       Wiki Profiles. We identify all available Wikipedia pages for authors in the sample and use
it to identify gender (from the pronouns used) and year of death (if available). We use the gender
information to validate the gender coding and resolve some cases of unknown gender. We exclude
individuals from the sample after their year of death.
       Accuracy Check. Despite our best efforts, our measures of gender and our CV's have some
measurement errors. A particular concern for our analysis arises if the error rate in disambiguating
names is higher for female candidates, for example because some women change their name at
marriage. To assess the error rate we conducted an audit of 150 economist names, 100 classified
as male and 50 as female. The names were randomly drawn from the subset of authors with a
first publication after 1979 and at least 2 top-5 publications by 2019. As shown in Appendix Table
AII, an extensive hand checking revealed that our gender coding was correct in 100% of the cases.
Among the 145 economists for whom we could find an actual CV, we measure two types of errors in
our constructed CV's: missing publications; and incorrectly attributed publications. Reassuringly,
the error rate in our constructed CV's is low. Only 4 publications were incorrectly attributed, and
only 13 (out of 2,305) were missing: 2 due to a name change at marriage; 8 due to use of different
first names, and 3 due to erroneous or missing meta data. While the error rate is higher for females
(11/629=1.8%) than for males (6/1,676=0.4%), the difference is substantively small.
   Measure of Connection. We define "connection to an ES Fellow as of year t" as the event of
having coauthored at least one paper with that Fellow in years up to and including t in our data set
of 36 journals.3 Similarly we define connection to a member of the Nominating Committee. Unlike
the measure of connections to ES Fellows (which can only increase over time), this variable reverts
to 0 when the Committee member to whom a person is connected rotates off the Committee.

2.2      Confidential Nomination Data and Nomination Process
Nomination Data. We obtained confidential data on nominations and votes for ES Fellows from
the ES and other sources. We use the same data as Hamermesh and Schmidt, 2003 for 1990-
2000, supplemented with parallel information for 2001-2002. These data include a list of nominees,
whether the person was nominated by the committee (available starting in 1995), and the institution
of affiliation (coded in 7 categories). The data for 2006-2019 include additional information on the
number of votes received by each nominee, the number of Fellows endorsing the nomination, and
the nomination statement. For the years 2003-05 we obtained the list of nominees from copies of
the paper ballots. We were also able to identify the nominees by the committee (which are not
listed separately on the ballot) for the years 2004 and 2005, but not for the year 2003. We thus
   3
   This variable increments by 1 when an economist publishes a new paper coauthored with an existing Fellow (to
whom the economist is not yet connected), or when a coauthor of a previously published paper is elected as a Fellow.



                                                         6
omit 2003 from most of the nomination analysis.
      Nomination and Election Process. Appendix Table AIII describes the nomination and
election process from 1933 on, drawing on documents in EMA. In the years 1990-2019, the process
involved two main steps. First, scholars were nominated, either by at least 3 current Fellows, or
by the Nominating Committee. Second, the list of nominees was circulated to the current Fellows,
who voted; nominees with the support of at least 30% of the ballots cast were elected.
      Within this framework there were a few important changes to the election process over time.
From 1990 to 2005 the ballot was a paper form and nominees (typically around 50) were listed
alphabetically, with no indication of whether the nomination came from the committee or other
Fellows. In addition, a separate document with the nominating statement for each candidate was
provided to voters, including information on the source of the nomination.
      Starting in 2006 the ES used an online ballot (with the nominees still listed alphabetically) that
provided access to the nominating statement by clicking on a nominee's name. From 2007 to 2010,
a single-click feature allowed Fellows to vote for all the candidates nominated by the Committee.
This feature was discontinued in 2011 out of concern that it provided an excessive advantage to
Committee nominees. Thereafter, Committee nominees were still identified on the ballot by an
"(N)" next to their name. Starting in 2009, the ballot listed nominees by region, starting from the
regions with the lowest representation in the Society, in alphabetical order within a region.
      There have also been changes in the mandate of the Nominating Committee. Anecdotal sources
suggest that in the early 1990s the Committee was tasked with bringing forward names of can-
didates in under-represented regions (e.g., Asia and Latin America). Starting in 2012 a parallel
mandate was issued to nominate female candidates. Specifically, the Executive Vice-President
noted: "The committee is expected to nominate candidates who might have been overlooked, with
special consideration to geographical and field diversity. Gender was recently added to the list and
it is now in the mandate of the 2012 Fellows Nominating Committee."4
      In light of the changes in 2006 (ballot format) and 2012 (mandate for the Nominating Commit-
tee), in our analysis of the nomination process we split the years 1990-2005, 2006-11, and 2012-19.

2.3      Summary Statistics
Tables I and II show summary statistics for our author×year data base of actively publishing
economists and for the newly elected ES Fellows, respectively. We present data for the 1933-79
period (Columns 1-3), for 1980-99 (Columns 4-6) and for 2000-19 (Columns 7-9). Within each
period, we present characteristics of all authors/Fellows and for males and females separately.
      The female share of actively publishing economists was only 5.2% in the 1933-79 period but
has risen to 17.2% in the latest period.5 Among newly elected ES Fellows the female share is even
smaller. Indeed, between 1933 and 1979 only 3 women were selected: Dorothy Brady in 1950, Irma
Adelman in 1968, and Anne Carter in 1973. As shown in Figure I, however, the female share of
  4
      This is from a 2012 note from the Executive Vice-President, posted on a Fellows forum.
  5
      See Bayer and Rouse, 2016 and Lundberg, 2017 for a discussion of the low female share in economics today.



                                                         7
new Fellows has risen, averaging just over 12% in the 2000-2019 period. Among actively publishing
economists, the share with unknown gender is 11% in the earlier years, but is just 3% in 2000-19.
The genders of all the ES Fellows and nominees are known. For simplicity, in the remainder of the
paper we drop all authors with unknown gender from our analysis.
   The second panel of Table I gives the percent of active publishers who have been selected as
Fellows of the ES, AAAS, NAS, AEA, and as Sloan Foundation Fellows. ES Fellows are most nu-
merous, reflecting the longer history of the ES Fellows program and the low numbers of economists
selected by the AAAS and NAS. The corresponding panel in Table II shows that only a small
share of new ES Fellows are already AAAS or NAS Fellows. Sloan Fellowships (which are awarded
relatively early in a career) are more common among new ES Fellows. Indeed, a remarkable 44%
of newly elected female Fellows in the 2000+ period had received a Sloan award.
   The remaining rows of Tables I and II summarize the publication and citation records of active
publishers and newly elected Fellows. Focusing first on top-5 publications, publishing in these
journals is relatively rare, with fairly stable cumulative averages of about 0.2 EMA papers, 0.1
REStud papers, and 0.3 AER papers per active economist. Among newly elected Fellows the
averages are much higher, with around 1.9 EMA papers, 1.1 REStud papers, and 1.6 AER papers
per new Fellow in the most recent decade. Citations to papers in the top-5 journals tell the same
story. In the most recent decades, newly elected Fellows have on average about 425 cumulative
citations to their top-5 publications, compared to an average of 75 among all actively publishing
economists. Newly elected Fellows also have more publications in the non-top-5 journals.
    Finally, we report the average number of years since first publication. In the earlier years newly
elected ES Fellows were "younger" than a typical active economist (9.9 years since first publication
versus 11.2 years) but more recently the new Fellows are further along in their careers (17.6 years
since first publication versus 12.7), consistent with increasing competition for Fellows slots.
   Table III shows summary statistics on nominees (Columns 1-4) and newly elected ES Fellows
(Columns 5-8) based on confidential data from the ES, with additional detail in Appendix Table
AIV. There are 771 nominations for 460 economists in the years 1990-2005 and 1,017 nominations
of 494 economists in the years 2006-19. On average one quarter of nominees were put forward by
the Nominating Committee, though this share is higher for female nominees in recent years, as we
discuss below. The share nominated by the Committee is larger among elected Fellows, reflecting
the higher election success of Committee nominees, especially in the later period. The number of
votes is around 80-90 for an average nominee and 120 for an elected Fellow.
   The publication and citation data in Table III show a number of interesting differences between
male and female nominees and new Fellows. In the 2006+ period nominated and elected female
scholars tend to have relatively fewer publications in EMA and REStud than males but relatively
more papers in the AER and QJE. Elected females also stand out for the relatively high numbers
of citations for their past work, particularly for their QJE papers.
   There are also some relatively large gender differences in institutional affiliation. Female nomi-
nees and new Fellows are particularly concentrated in top-5 US departments, are less likely to be


                                                  8
from Asia or Australia, and are virtually absent from Latin America and Africa. The lack of female
economists from under-represented regions suggests that gender diversity and regional diversity are
potentially conflicting goals for the ES, a point to which we return below.


3        Gender Differences in Selection of Econometric Society Fellows
In this section we present our main results on gender differences in the selection of ES Fellows.
We begin with simple logistic regression models that describe the probability of being selected as
a new Fellow in year t, conditional on cumulative publications and citations up to t.6 The risk
set in each year includes actively publishing fellows who are not yet Fellows (allowing a scholar to
remain at risk for 18 years after his or her last publication in the 36 journals in our sample, or until
death). We then turn to an analysis of the nomination and election data, decomposing the gender
gaps in selection as a Fellow into gaps in the probability of nomination and probability of election,
conditional on nomination. Lastly, we analyze several possible mechanisms.

3.1       Selection of New Fellows
Table IV summarizes the key coefficients from our new Fellow selection models. To account for
changes in publication and citation practices and the entry of new journals, we estimate the models
separately for the periods 1933-79, 1980-99 and 2000-2019. All the models include year fixed effects
that adjust for year-to-year differences in the numbers of Fellows selected relative to the population
at risk.7 Our main focus is the female coefficients, which measure the difference in log-odds of
selection for females versus males, conditional on publications and citations. Since the probability
of selection is low, this is approximately the gender gap in the log of the probability of selection.
Given the small number of women selected as Fellows before 1980 we assume a constant gender
effect in the first period. For the two later periods, we allow the gender gap to vary by decade.
        In our first specification (Columns 1, 4, and 7) we control for an authors' cumulative count of
papers in each of the top-5 journals. In all three time periods the strongest determinant of selection
is the number of Econometricas : each EMA article increases the probability of selection by about
100 log points (s.e.=7) in the earliest decades and by 100 log points (s.e.=6) in the most recent
period. A publication in the REStud has the next largest impact, with an impact of 64 log points
(s.e.=7) early on and 52 log points (s.e.=8) more recently. Publications in the other top-5 journals
have smaller coefficients, especially in the earlier decades.
        In our next set of models (columns 2, 5, and 8), we add controls for the inverse hyperbolic
sine of total cumulative citations to the author's prior publications in each of the top-5 journals.8
Citations have a relative large effect on the probability of selection and their addition leads to
    6
     As noted by Efron (1988), this specification closely approximates a standard discrete time hazard model.
    7
     Years in which no individuals are elected as Fellows, such as 1934 or 1969, are automatically dropped in the logit
specification given the presence of year fixed effects.
   8
     We use the asinh transformation to approximate the natural logarithm but accommodate zero citations. We
note that for x > 2, asinh(x)  log (2x).



                                                          9
some diminution in the effect of counts of papers. In the most recent period, for example, the
elasticity of the probability of selection with respect to cumulative EMA citations is 0.25, with
smaller elasticities in the other top-5 journals. We also add controls for the cumulative numbers of
publications in each of the other 31 journals we consider, with the coefficients on these variables
reported in Appendix Table AV. We find sizable impacts of publications in some field journals (e.g.,
the Journal of Econometrics ) particularly in the early period. In the latest period, we also find
relatively large effects of publications in several newer journals (e.g., AEJ: Applied ). Articles in
the AEA Papers and Proceedings are strong predictors since 1980.
   In our most comprehensive specifications (columns 3, 6, and 9) we add four additional groups
of controls: (i) indicators for the number of top-5 publications, 1, 2, 3,..., up to 7+, to estimate
the importance of such publications; (ii) indicators for 1, 2, and 3+ cumulative publications for
EMA and similarly for each of the other top-5 journals, to allow for a non-linear effect of such
publications; (iii) indicators for percentiles of cumulative citations in top-5 journals (50-60, 60-70,
70-80, 80-90, 90-95, 95-97.5, 97.5-99, 99+) to allow for effects not captured by the asinh functional
form; (iv) a proxy for academic age, with fixed effects for 10-19, 20-29, and 30+ years since first
publication. The additional controls raise the R2 significantly, in the most recent period from 0.361
to 0.424. Among the control variables (reported in Appendix Table AV), in the last 4 decades
the presence of at least 1 or 2 top-5s is a very strong predictor: 121 log points for 1 top-5 and
289 log points for 2 top-5s in the last 2 decades. The first or second EMA publication also has a
disproportionate effect, and there is a negative impact of 30+ years since first publication.
   Focusing on the most comprehensive specification, the estimated female coefficients in Table
IV parallel the patterns in Figure II. In the 1933-79 period there was a large negative gender gap
(-144 log points) suggesting that female economists faced a significantly higher bar for selection as a
Fellow (equivalent to about 1.5 extra EMA publications in models that only use top-5 publications).
In the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s, the gender gap turns positive though not statistically significant:
63 log points (s.e.=47 points) for the 1980s, 3 log points (s.e.=48 points) for the 1990s and 54 log
points (s.e.=34) for the 2000s. Finally, in the 2010s we detect a larger and statistically significant
positive effect of 93 log points (s.e.=24 points) for 2010-2019.
   We note that the estimated gender gaps across all periods tend to become larger as we add
additional controls. Such a pattern suggests that the unobserved determinants of Fellow selection
may be negatively correlated with female gender (e.g., Altonji et al. (2005)). If so, then we may be
under-estimating the causal effect of female gender on selection i.e., the boost for females is larger
than we estimate in the specification in column 9. We stress though that the qualitative patterns
for the gender coefficients are not sensitive to having a more parsimonious set of controls (as in
Columns 1, 4, and 7) or an extensive set (as in Columns 3, 6, and 9). Further, a very parsimonious
specification which only includes counts for the number of top-5 publications and the quantiles for
top-5 citations (Appendix Table AVI) yields very similar coefficients to our benchmark model.
   To put the estimated female coefficients from our richest specifications in perspective, we cal-
culated the number of female Fellows that would have been selected in the absence of a female


                                                  10
disadvantage in the 1933-79 period, or a female advantage in the 2010-2019 period. This analysis
shows that the number of female Fellows selected up to 1979 would have risen from 3 to about
13 ­ an addition of 10 extra female Fellows ­ while the number of female Fellows selected from
2010-2019 would have fallen from 28 to about 12 ­ a loss of 16.
       Graphical Evidence. Figures IIIa-b display the average probability of election for male and
female candidates, within each bin of the probability of election, for the years 1960-79 and 1980-99
(Figure IIIa) and 2000-09 and 2010-19 (Figure IIIb). Specifically, we re-estimate the models in
Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV just for male authors. We then generate the predicted probability
of election for each active scholar and form percentile bins based on these probabilities. Finally, for
each gender group and percentile bin we calculate the average probability of selection as a fellow.
       The figures show that, irrespective of gender, almost no one is elected as a Fellow in bins below
the 90th percentile, and the probability is still very low in the 95th to 97.5th percentile. It rises
in the next percentile, and reaches 5-10% in the 99th percentile. Within a given percentile, the
probability of election is lower in the most recent years, reflecting the rise in the number of actively
publishing economists and a fairly constant number of elected Fellows.
       Turning to the gender differences, Figure IIIa shows that in the 1960-79 period the election
probability for females was clearly lower than for males in the same percentile bucket, consistent
with the estimates in columns 1-3 of Table IV. The selection rates for females and males are
more comparable in the 1980-99 period. In the last 20 years (Figure IIIb) female candidates
have approximately a 2 times higher probability of election than similarly qualified males, again
consistent with the estimates in columns 7-9 of Table IV.
   An important question is whether our logistic regression models, with a single coefficient for
female authors, are able to replicate the patterns of election probabilities shown in Figures IIIa-
b. To assess this visually, we used the models in columns 3, 6 and 9 of Table IV to estimate
the predicted probabilities of election for economists in each of the percentile bins. As shown in
Appendix Figure AI, the logit models do a good job of capturing the patterns of actual selection
probabilities for both male and female economists in the various percentile bins.
       As a further check, we estimated a logit model for the years 2000-19, including the index
used for the percentile bins in Figure IIIb (estimated using only the data for males) and a set of
indicators for females in each percentile bin.9 This specification allows the effect of gender to vary
across the percentile bins in an unrestricted manner. We also estimated specifications that include
the estimated index and dummies for each of the percentile bins, to test whether the logit model
provides a good fit to the election probabilities of highly qualified men (see Appendix Table AVII).
       The estimated female effects by percentile bin are plotted in Figure IIIc. For reference, we show
the pooled female effect for the two decades, which is 0.63 ­ about half way between the estimated
effects for 2000-2009 and for 2010-2019 reported in column 9 of Table IV. Reassuringly, the female
effects for each of the four highest bins (covering the top decile of authors) are close to the pooled
   9
    To increase the statistical power of these models we pooled the 2000-2009 and 2010-2019 decades. However,
specifications that allow separate female effects for each percentile bin and decade suggest relatively small differences
between the decades for females in each percentile bin (Appendix Figure AII).


                                                           11
estimate. The point estimate of the female effect for authors in the bottom 90% is actually negative,
but very imprecise, reflecting the fact that almost no authors (of either gender) are elected as fellows
from this group. Thus a simple logit model with a single coefficient for female economists provides
a remarkably good description of the gender gap in election probabilities. Moreover, as shown by
the additional specifications in Appendix Table AVII, the logit model also provides a relatively
good fit for the election probabilities of highly qualified men.10

3.2    Decomposing Differences in Election Probabilities
Framework and Basic Summary Statistics

In this section we attempt to shed light on the sources of the remarkable changes in the fraction
of females selected as new Fellows documented in Section 3.1. We ask how much of the change is
due to changes in the probability that women are nominated versus changes in the probability of
election conditional on nomination. To set the stage, let F denote female gender, let E denote the
event of election, and let N denote the event of nomination. Using Bayes law,

                                                     P [E |N, F ]
                                       P [F |E ] =                × P [F |N ]                                   (1)
                                                      P [E |N ]

Thus the fraction of females among newly elected Fellows can be decomposed into two factors: (1)
the relative election success of female candidates compared to all candidates who are nominated,
and (2) the fraction of females who are nominated. If, for example, female nominees have the same
election probability as male nominees, then changes over time in the fraction of females among
newly elected Fellows will be entirely driven by changes in the fraction of female nominees.
    We can further distinguish between nomination by the Nominating Committee (denoted by Nc )
and nomination by a group of Fellows (Nf ). Specifically:

                          P [F |N ] = P [F |Nc ] × P [Nc |N ] + P [F |Nf ] × P [Nf |N ].                        (2)

Combining (1) and (2) we can write:

                                            P [E |Nc , F ]
                            P [F |E ] =                    × P [F |Nc ] × P [Nc |N ]
                                              P [E |N ]
                                              P [E |Nf , F ]
                                            +                × P [F |Nf ] × P [Nf |N ]                          (3)
                                                P [E |N ]

This decomposes the overall fraction of females among newly elected Fellows into shares attributable
to the nominees of the committee and the nominees of the Fellows. For each subset of nominees,
the contribution to the overall share of female Fellows depends on the relative election success of
the female nominees in that group, and the fraction who are female.
  10
     In contrast, Column 8 of Table AVII shows that the specification with fewer controls used in Column 2, 5, and
8 of Table IV does not pass the test, as the percentile indicators for men are highly significant and we confidently
reject a coefficient of 1 on the index.


                                                         12
   Table V presents the mean values of the probabilities in equations (1)-(3) using data from 1995
forward. Based on the timing of key institutional changes in 2006 and 2012 discussed above, we
consider 3 intervals: 1995-2005, 2006-2011, and 2012-2019, with year-by-year evidence in Appendix
Table AVIII. The first row shows that the average fraction of females among newly elected Fellows
(i.e., P [F |E ]) was 6.2% in the 1995-2005 period and 5.6% in the 2006-2011 period, but then rose
to 19.3% in the 2012+ period. Next, we show the fractions of female nominees (P [F |N ]), and the
fractions of females nominated by the Committee (P [F |Nc ]) and by the Fellows (P [F |Nf ]). The
fraction of female nominees rises from 5.4% in the first interval, to 5.7% in the second and 12.6%
in the third, driven by a large increase in the share of female Committee nominees. If the relative
election success of females and males had remained constant, equation (1) suggests that this 2.3×
increase in P [F |N ] would have increased P [F |E ] from 6.2% to 14.2% in the latest interval ­ a little
over one-half of the actual rise. Thus, the total increase in P [F |E ] can be attributed approximately
equally to a rise in the fraction of female nominees and a rise in their election success.
   The Nominating Committee has put forward about one-quarter of nominees, with a slight
decline from the first interval (26.8%) to the last (22.5%). This modest share means that despite
the rapid rise in the female share of the Committee's nominees, the share of female nominees
attributable to the committee rose only modestly, from 29.6% in 1995-2005 to 40.5% in 2012-2019.
   The election success (P [E |N ]) has declined from about 29% in the late 1990s to just over
21% recently. The election success of Committee nominees, however, actually rose from 39% in
1995-2005 to 51% most recently, offset by a steady decline in the success of the Fellow's nominees.
Below we suggest that the increase in success of Committee nominees was at least partly due to an
endorsement effect: starting in 2006, with the switch to online voting, Committee nominees were
identified on the ballot and this shift led to an immediate rise in their election success rate.
   The election success rate of the Committee's female nominees closely followed the trend for
all their nominees, rising from 38% to around 53% most recently. The females nominated by the
Fellows experienced a decline in selection success quite similar to that for all Fellow nominees.
   Figure IV presents year-by-year data on the female shares of Committee and Fellows' nominees
and newly elected Fellows. From 1995 to 2011 the four series track each other with about 5% females
in each group. In 2012, however, the female share among the Committee nominees increased to
over 20 percent, and has remained at that level in most years since. Correspondingly, there is
an increase in the female share among the overall nominees and among the elected Fellows. This
shift in the gender composition of Committee nominees appears to reflect the new mandate for the
Nominating Committee to seek out female nominees ­ a policy that seems to have largely worked.

Models of Nominations and Election Outcomes

The data in Table V suggest that the rise in the female share of newly elected Econometric Society
Fellows can be traced to three main proximate causes: (i) a sharp rise in the share of females
nominated by the Nominating Committee; (ii) a more modest but still important rise in the share
of females nominated by the Fellows; (iii) the relatively high and rising election success rate of


                                                   13
nominees put forward by the Nominating Committee. Of course the probabilities reported in
the table take no account of changes in the relative qualifications of actively publishing female
economists, or of the potential selectivity of the (relatively small number of) nominees of either
gender put forward by the Nominating Committee. To address these factors we turn to a series of
simple models that adjust for the detailed publication and citation data.
       Panel A of Table VI presents a set of nomination and election models, fit to pooled data for the
period from 1995 to 2019 but allowing a separate coefficient on female gender for each the three
time periods. These models use the same controls as those in columns 3, 6 and 9 of Table IV; the
other coefficient estimates are reported in Appendix Tables AIX and AX.
       The first model is a logistic regression for the probability of election as a Fellow, fit to the
sample of actively publishing economists who are not yet Fellows. The estimates for the first two
periods fluctuate, with a positive and sizable female coefficient in 1999-2005 and a smaller, negative
coefficient for the 2006-2011 period, consistent with the fluctuations in Figure II for this period. In
the more recent period, 2012-2019, we detect a large positive coefficient, consistent with Table IV.
       Next we present a model for the probability of nomination as a Fellow. The female coefficients
for 1995-2005 and 2006-11 are relatively similar to the female coefficients in the model for selection
as a Fellow in that interval, implying that, conditional on the controls, there was relatively little
gender difference in the probability of election given nomination in these periods. In the third
interval, however, we estimate a +0.61 boost in the log odds of nomination for female candidates ­
about half as big as the boost in the log odds of selection as a Fellow. Thus, about half of the large
boost in the probability of selection as a new Fellow for women in the 2012+ period is attributable
to a boost in their log probability of being nominated, and half to their higher election success.11
       Next we present separate models for the probability of nomination by the Committee or by
one or more Fellows. In the first two time intervals neither of these has a large or statistically
significant female gap. In the most recent interval, however, we see a large positive female effect
for nomination by the Committee, consistent with the patterns in Figure IV and Table V. These
patterns point to two conclusions. First, as noted above, the Nominating Committee appears to
have shifted toward a strong positive preference for female candidates in the 2012+ period. Second,
while the fraction of female candidates proposed by the Fellows also rose between the second and
third intervals (from 5.6% to 9.7% ­ see Table V), this increase reflected a relative rise in the
fraction of qualified female economists, rather than a change in preferences of the Fellows.12
       Panel B of the table presents a series of models for election outcomes, conditional on nomination.
We begin with a logit model for the probability of election that includes controls for the candidate's
publications and citations, and for the year of election. The results are consistent with the patterns
for selection as a Fellow (row 1 of the table) and for nomination (row 2).
  11
     Since P (E ) = P (N ) × P (E |N ), the male-female gap in the log of the probability of selection as a Fellow is
equal to the sum of the gender gaps in the log probabilities of nomination and election conditional on nomination.
And since P (E ) and P (N ) are both small, the male female gaps ln P (E ) and ln P (N ) are approximately equal to
the female coefficients in the logit models for these outcomes. For P (E |N )  0.21, the gender gap in ln P (E |N ) is
approximately 0.8 times the female coefficient in the logit model for election conditional on nomination.
  12
     Appendix Figure AIII presents parallel graphical evidence on nominations along similar lines to Figure III.


                                                         14
   The next model adds a control for whether the candidate was nominated by the Committee, and
an interaction between female gender and nomination by Committee. Prior to the ballot change
in 2006, Committee nominees had only a slightly higher probability of election. After the change
explicitly identifying Committee nominees, the boost became very large (around 300 log points) and
highly significant, implying a strong endorsement effect on Fellow voting. The interaction effects
between Committee nominees and female gender are insignificant, suggesting a similar endorsement
effect for men and women, though we cannot rule out small or moderately large interactions. In
the most recent interval we also estimate a sizable, if not statistically significant effect for female
gender, suggesting that the ES voters shifted to exhibit a preference towards female candidates,
even controlling for the source of the nomination.
   The next three models in Table VI are Poisson regressions for the number of votes received.
We estimate them over the last two time periods (since vote counts are only available after 2006),
allowing the effects of the key variables to vary by interval. Consistent with the results above, we
find that votes received by female candidates rose substantially in the latest period (by 15%), that
Committee nominees receive many more votes, and that even controlling for Committee nominee
status, there was some evidence of a rise in the votes received by female candidates (by 9%).
   In the last row we estimate Poisson models for the number of endorsements for nominations by
Fellows. We find no gender differences in either period; we do not study endorsements any further.

3.3   Nomination Statements
A part of the election process that we have neglected so far is the nomination statement. Each
nomination is accompanied by a short statement from either the Fellows submitting the nomination
or the Nominating Committee. In light especially of the analysis of Wu (2018), we consider if
the nomination statements show any differences between male and female nominees, or between
successful and unsuccessful nominations.
   We analyze 1,017 nominations from 2006 to 2019 (earlier statements are unavailable), identifying
all word lemmas used in at least 20 statements. This process yielded 567 words. Panels A-D of
Appendix Figure AIV show all words with an odds ratio above 2 for predicting gender (Panels
A and B), and a successful nomination (Panels C and D). Comparing the words most predictive
of gender, we see that female words like "measurement" and "experiment" reflect a more applied
orientation, while male words like "bayesian" and "strategy" reflect a more theoretical orientation.
We do not find any systematic evidence of the differential use of words characterizing the quality
or impact of the work in female nomination statements. Similarly, the words most predictive of
election success or failure seem to largely reflect the substantive orientation of a nominee's work.
   We also examined the correlation between the effects of different words in identifying gender
versus election success (see Appendix Figure AV). There does not appear to be any systematic
correlation (positive or negative) in the effect of a given word across these two domains. Appendix
Table AXI presents further evidence on words that are predictive of the various outcomes, control-
ling for publications and citations, yielding similar results. Overall, we do not find any obvious


                                                  15
evidence of gender stereotyping in the nominating statements.

3.4    Mechanisms: Visibility, Networks and Credit for Collaboration
In this section we examine three potential mechanisms for the gender differences in recognition in
Economics. First, we consider the visibility of a scholar to other members of the ES. One obvious
indicator of visibility is being named to the editorial board of EMA (though admittedly it is also
a signal of quality).13 Motivated by Einav and Yariv (2006), who find that ES Fellows are more
likely to have last names earlier in the alphabet and attribute this to visibility of their work, we
control for the quantile of the first letter of the last name within the sample of active publishers.
    Next we consider the potential role of personal connections. Specifically, we examine the effect
of having previously coauthored with existing ES Fellows, as well as coauthorships with members
of the Nominating Committee in a particular year. We also examine the impact of the share of
female economists serving on the Nominating Committee.
    Table VII presents our models for the effects of these two channels on the probabilities of
selection and of nomination as an ES Fellow for the years 1990 on. The specification in Column
1 mirrors the one in Table IV, except that for parsimony the coefficients on the control variables
are kept constant from 1990 on; the estimated gender coefficients are very close to those in Table
IV. Similarly, in Columns 3, 5, and 7 we replicate the specifications on nomination as Fellow from
Table VI, presenting the gender effects by decade (1990-99, 2000-09, 2010-19).
    In Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 we add the visibility and connection controls. We find that having
served as Associate Editor at EMA has a large positive effect on both selection as an ES Fellow and
on nomination. In Column 2 we also replicate the finding of Einav and Yariv (2006) that economists
with names later in the alphabet are less likely to be elected Fellows. Contrary to a visibility
explanation for this finding, however, we do not find a statistically significant effect on nominations
either by Fellows or the Nominating Committee. This suggests a different interpretation, based
on ballot design: the nominees are listed in alphabetical order, and candidates near the top of
the (long) ballot likely capture more votes. If true, a reform in 2020 to randomize the order of
candidates is a valuable innovation.
    We also find that previous coauthorships with ES Fellows have a significant effect on the prob-
ability of selection as a Fellow, nomination as a Fellow, and nomination by existing Fellows or the
Nominating Committee. Interestingly, connections with members of the Nominating Committee
also matter a lot for the probability of being a Committee nominee, but not for nomination by
other Fellows, with thus a muted impact on ultimate selection as Fellow. We also find suggestive
evidence that a higher share of women on the Nominating Committee increases the likelihood that
female candidates are nominated by the Committee.
    Overall, visibility and connections matter for election as Fellow of the ES. Nevertheless, the
estimated gender gaps are largely unchanged when we control for these features, suggesting that
  13
     We also considered the impact of being named co-editor or editor at EMA. Since virtually all editors and co-editors
are already Fellows at the start of their term, however, this measure is not very useful.



                                                          16
male-female differences in connections or visibility cannot account for the gender gaps.
    In Appendix Table AXII we examine whether females receive different credit for their coauthored
works than males, as suggested by Sarsons et al. (2021) in the context of tenure decisions. We create
an index of publications in the 36 journals and citations taking as weights the coefficients from the
ES selection regression as in Table IV, Column 9 (except that we run it over the years 1990-2019
and just for male authors). We then create an additional index which uses the same coefficients
as the main indexes but counts only single-authored papers. The coefficient on this index would
be positive if authors (of either gender) get less credit for joint papers. Finally, we create an index
capturing the remaining controls ('Remaining Index') used in Table IV, Column 9, to match our
benchmark specification. All indices are re-centered around their mean for newly elected fellows.
    In Column 1 we estimate a specification with these indices, not splitting by the gender of the
economist. The coefficient on the single-authored index is not significantly different from zero: we
cannot reject point estimates of zero discounting for joint work ­ consistent with the finding by
Ellison (2013) that job placements of recently tenured economists are best explained by a model of
academic credit that barely discounts co-authored work.
    Next we examine whether these findings differ for female authors. For the coauthored papers
(captured by the overall index), we cannot reject that women get the same credit as men. Turning
to the index for single-authored papers, we find suggestive evidence of more weight on such papers
for the selection of females as ES fellows, but no such difference for either source of nomination as
ES fellows, or for selection as AAAS or NAS fellow. Furthermore, allowing for these index variables
does not affect much the estimates of the key female coefficients. We conclude that differing credit
for coauthored work does not appear to account for the pattern of gender gaps we document.


4    Geographic and Institution Differences in Election to ES Fellows
While gender differences in the selection of ES Fellows are the focus of this paper, the ES Nominating
Committee has had a mandate to expand the geographic diversity of Fellows for many years, and
the ballot in recent years lists nominees by region to draw attention to the issue. In this section
we explore the gaps associated with geography and institutional prominence in elections for ES
Fellows, using information drawn from the nomination forms. Unfortunately, such information is
not readily available for the overall population of actively publishing scholars.
   In Table VIII we estimate a logit model of selection as ES Fellow conditional on nomination,
equivalent to the model in Table VI but adding characteristics of the institution of affiliation
(with non-top-17 US departments as the omitted category). As with gender gaps, we find a very
different pattern of effects associated with affiliation in earlier and later years. In the 1995-2005
period, economists in top-5 or top-6-to-17 US Departments had the highest likelihood of election,
conditional on publications and citations, while those in Asia, Australia, and Latin America appear
to have faced a higher bar for election. Since 2006, however, we observe very large election premiums
for economists from Asia or Australia and from Africa and Latin America in the order of 200 to


                                                  17
400 log points, 2-4 times larger than the parallel estimated premiums for gender.
         Thus, within the short span of a decade, the group with the highest chance of election (condi-
tional on publication and citations) changed from economists at top US universities to economists
in under-represented regions of the world.
         In the second panel of Table VIII, we pool all the under-represented regions and add a control
for the source of nomination. As in Table VI, we find that Committee nominees have received
significantly more support in the years since 2006.14 Even controlling for this factor, though,
nominees from underrepresented regions are significantly more likely to be elected.
         Importantly, adding information on institutional affiliation leads to an increase in the magnitude
of the gender effects in Fellow elections. Comparing the specifications in Table VI to those in Table
VIII, we find a female effect on the log odds of election in the 2012-2019 period of 1.16 (s.e.=26)
without controls for institutional affiliation and 1.28 (s.e.=39) with such controls. Female scholars
are less likely than males to come from under-represented areas (i.e., female and under-represented
region are negatively correlated). To the extent that the ES desires both to have gender diversity
and geographic diversity, the two objectives are therefore in conflict.
         In Figure V we present year-by-year evidence on the share of nominees and elected Fellows
from underrepresented regions. The figure shows a spike in such nominations from the Committee
starting in 2007-08, and a concomitant rise in the share of elected Fellows from under-represented
regions. This pattern parallels the one for the nomination and election of female economists, except
that it occurs a few years earlier. In addition, the figure shows that in the 1995-2001 period there
had been a relatively high share of Committee nominees from underrepresented regions, but few
were ultimately elected. It seems that the change in the ballot to explicitly identify Committee
nominees was crucial in raising their electoral success.


5         Peer Recognition in Other Societies: AAAS, NAS, AEA, Sloan
In this section we consider four other salient honorific Fellowships awarded to economists: AAAS,
NAS, AEA and the Sloan Foundation. Lacking data on nominees for these honors, we focus on
hazard-style models for the probabilities of selection as a Fellow, similar to the models in Table IV.
         The processes for selecting Fellows of the AAAS and NAS are broadly similar to that of the ES:
nominations are received from one or more existing Fellows, and then the Fellows vote for names on
the nominee list. The AAAS considers nominees from groups of at least two Fellows, one of whom
must be from the U.S. The NAS also collects nominations from existing Fellows: NAS Fellows must
be U.S. citizens, although a small number of "Foreign Associates" is also selected.
         In contrast to ES, AAAS, and NAS, the AEA Distinguished Fellows are nominated by a Nom-
inating Committee and voted on by a combination of the Nominating Committee and the AEA
Executive Committee. Past presidents of the AEA are automatically recognized as Distinguished
Fellows; up to four additional scholars are recognized each year for "lifetime research contributions."
    14
         In Appendix Table AXI we replicate the other specifications in Table VI, controlling for institutional affiliation.



                                                               18
The Sloan Foundation Fellowships are limited to economists up to 6 years from the PhD (up to
2019) or untenured (but tenure-track) scholars (since 2019) at U.S. and Canadian universities.
Nominations are submitted by department chairs, with a maximum of 3 nominees per department.
Fellows are selected by a committee of 3 senior scholars.
       Appendix Table AXIII(a)-(b) present summary statistics for the Fellows in the year of election.
The publications and citations for the AAAS, NAS, and AEA new Fellows are on average even
higher than for new ES Fellows, a gap that is unsurprising since these awards are typically given
later in life. The opposite is true of Sloan awards which are given to more junior scholars.
       Table IX presents parallel specifications to Table IV for these honors.15 Instead of estimating
separate models for each time period, we estimate a single model but fully interact the controls with
indicators for the time periods (pre-1980, 1980-1999, and 2000-2019), yielding identical estimates
to the approach in Table IV. (The coefficients are reported in Appendix Tables AXIV-AXV).
       Compared to their importance in predicting ES Fellows, EMA and REStud papers are less
predictive of selection as AAAS or NAS Fellows, with more weight on citations to papers in the
other top-5 journals. This could reflect different methological and field weights, or a larger US
focus, compared to the ES. Publications in some applied journals, such as the Journal of Economic
History and the Journal of Labor Economics carry higher weight for the AAAS and NAS models.
       Interestingly, the gender gaps in the models for selection into the AAAS and NAS (Columns
3-6) are quite similar to those we estimated for the ES. In all three cases we find evidence of a
higher bar for female candidates in the earlier period, conditional on publications and citations.
Indeed, in the case of NAS Fellows the female coefficient cannot be estimated since no women were
elected to the NAS until 1989. In the 1980s and 1990s the estimated gender gaps are positive, if
statistically insignificant, for both Societies, similar to the pattern for the ES. Finally, in the most
recent decades we estimate large positive effects of female gender on the probability of selection as
an AAAS or NAS Fellow, with a magnitude even larger than the one for the ES (+214 log points
for the AAAS in 2010-19, s.e.=39; +183 log points for NAS in 2010-19, s.e.=57).
       Turning to the selection as a Fellow of the AEA in Columns 7 and 8, the pattern is somewhat
different, with no evidence of a higher bar for female candidates prior to 1980. Similarly to the other
fellowship, we detect a large positive effect (+197 log points, s.e.=58 points) in the most recent
decade. Finally, the results for selection as an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow (which only started in 1981)
display a modest and consistent positive effect (around 50-70 log points) for female candidates.
       It is interesting that the three fellowships with a similar selection model -- nominations by
other Fellows and then voting by the full body of Fellows -- yield a similar pattern of gender gaps
over time, with a higher bar for female candidates in the pre-1980 period and a significantly lower
bar in the most recent decade. The two fellowships that rely on a committee for selecting new
  15
     We estimate in the odd-numbered columns a more parsimonious specification paralleling Column 8 of Table IX
and in the even-numbered columns a specification similar to Column 9 of Table IX, except that we omit some of the
control variables to avoid over-specifying the model, in light of the significantly smaller number of awardees, especially
for the NAS and AEA Fellows. See the list of variables in Appendix Tables AXIV-AXV. For the Sloan Fellows, to
mimic the eligibility restrictions, we limit the sample to individuals up to 8 years since their first publication, a proxy
for time of PhD. The results are insensitive to varying this time window.


                                                            19
Fellows display a more stable pattern of moderately positive female advantage over time.
         In Appendix Table AXVI we present models for the probability of election as President or Vice-
President of the American Economic Association (see Donald and Hamermesh (2006) for an earlier
analysis of these outcomes). The President is chosen by the Executive Committee of the AEA and
runs unopposed, while the two Vice-Presidents are chosen via ballot out of 4 candidates.16
         In the years 1933-79, selection to president or vice president of the AEA appears to have been
approximately gender-neutral, with a relatively small and statistically insignificant female effect.
Since 1980, however, there appears to have been a substantial premium for female candidates,
ranging from 270 log points (s.e.=59 points) in 1980-89 to 637 log points (s.e.=95 log points) in
the most recent decade. This substantial positive preference for female candidates predates the
preferences exhibited in the selection of ES, AAAS and NAS Fellows by at least two decades.


6         Discussion and Conclusion
How does gender affect peer recognition in economics? We take a comprehensive approach studying
not only the probability of election to the Econometric Society but also the two stages of the process
--nomination and election conditional on nomination. We compare the findings for gender to the
findings for geographic diversity, another relevant consideration for the Society. We then extend the
study of the role of gender to other important societies: AAAS, NAS, AEA and Sloan Foundation.
         Controlling for the effects of prior publications and citations, we find that gender exerts an
effect on selection rates that varies substantially over time, suggesting that the recognition given to
female scholars, conditional on their publications and citations, has changed over the last century.
In the first five decades of the Society (1933-79), we estimate a large negative coefficient of female
gender on the probability of selection. For the 1980s and 1990s, by comparison, we estimate a
smaller, positive, if statistically insignificant, effect of female gender on the probability of selection
as a Fellow. Finally, we estimate a modest positive effect for the 2000-2009 period, and a larger,
statistically significant positive effect for the 2010-2019 period. Thus, in the most recent decade,
the effect of female gender has switched from the historically negative pattern to a positive benefit.
We document an important role for the Nominating Committee which in the most recent period has
put forward a number of highly-qualified female candidates, and whose nominees tend to receive
more votes when they are easily identified on the ballot.
   We find some parallel patterns for geographic diversity. While in the 1990s the candidates most
likely to be elected (conditional on publications and citations) were economists in top US universi-
ties, since 2006 nominees from underrepresented regions have a substantially higher probability of
election, conditional on their contributions. We again find an important role for the Nominating
Committee in this shift, aided by changes in ballot design to emphasize regional diversity.
         Similar evolving patterns of gender are present in AAAS and NAS, the two institutions with
a similar election system, where existing Fellows vote for the new Fellows. In contrast, the Sloan
    16
         We do not analyze the election to ES President, a position that up until 2020 has been held only by men.



                                                            20
and AEA fellowships that rely on a committee mechanism for selecting new Fellows display a more
stable pattern of positive female advantages over time.
   Methodologically, we view these estimates as illustrating the benefit of our approach of estimat-
ing the selection of Fellows out of the underlying population of active economists while controlling
for a rich set of publication and citation measures. This allows us to obtain relatively precise esti-
mates of gender differences in peer recognition, and benchmark their magnitudes against the effects
of publications and citations, which are highly predictive of peer honors. In addition, our approach
has the benefit that it could help identify highly deserving candidates who are not currently Fellows.
   Our findings raise the question of what factors account for the changing gender gaps in peer
recognition in economics. Although an answer is beyond the scope of this paper, we believe that
the findings for the 1933-1980 period will not be too surprising to most readers. The "Matilda
Effect" hypothesized by Rossiter (1993) was in fact present in the election of Fellows to the ES (to
the AAAS and NAS) until the 1970s. In this era we estimate that women were about 4 times less
likely to be selected as ES Fellows as men with comparable records.
   More surprising is our finding that from 1980 to 2000 there were relatively small gender differ-
ences in the probability of selection as a Fellow of the ES, AAAS, and NAS, conditional on academic
achievements as measured by publications and citations. We caution that this finding has to be
interpreted carefully in light of evidence that female scholars may face somewhat higher barriers
to publishing. Specifically, recent studies by Ginther and Kahn (2004), Hengel (2018), Sarsons et
al. (2021), and Card et al. (2020) all point in this direction. If so, then women who succeed in
publishing in top journals may in fact be better scholars than males with the same record.
   Finally, our most surprising finding is that in the past two decades, and especially after 2010,
female economists are more likely to be selected as Fellows of ES, AAAS, and NAS than males
with similar publication records and citations. Such a positive preference for females was also
found by Donald and Hamermesh (2006) in their study of AEA officer elections. Holding constant
publications and citations, women were more than twice as likely as men to be selected as a Fellow
of the ES, AAAS or NAS in the last decade.
   There are at least three possible explanations for this positive preference for female candidates.
The first is that as economists have become more aware of the higher bar for publishing and career
success faced by female economists, they have lowered the bar for subsequent honors (consistent
with the "belief flipping" hypothesized by Fryer, 2007). A second possibility is that Fellows of
these Societies may have decided to try to redress the past under-recognition of female scholars.
If so, then we might expect the positive female effects in the selection process for new Fellows to
eventually disappear ­ though even after a decade or more of positive preferences, the fraction of
female Fellows in the ES is still relatively low at over 6 percent. A third possibility is that Fellows
may believe there is value in admitting a share of females that is approximately equal to the share
of females in the broader population of active publishers. Such a choice could have the benefit of
demonstrating that successful economists value the contributions of female scholars.




                                                  21
    References
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber 2005. "Selection on Observed and
  Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools." Journal of Political
  Economy 113(1): 151-184.

Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2016. "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New
  Attack on an Old Problem." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4): 221-42.

Bertrand, Marianne. 2018. "The Glass Ceiling." Economica, 85 (338): 205-231.

Bohren, J. Aislinn, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. 2019. "The dynamics of discrimination:
  Theory and evidence." American Economic Review 109 (10): 3395-3436.

Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. 2020. "What do Editors Maximize? Evidence from Four
  Economics Journals." Review of Economics and Statistics, 102.1: 195-217.

Card, David, DellaVigna Stefano, Funk, Patricia and Nagore Iriberri. 2020. "Are Referees and
  Editors in Economics Gender Neutral?" Quarterly Journal of Economic s, 135(1): 269-327.

Chan, Ho Fai and Benno Torgler. 2012. "Econometric Fellows and Nobel laureates in economics".
 Economics Bulletin 32(4): 3365-3377.

Chari, Anusha and Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham. 2017. "Gender Representation in Economics Across
 Topics and Time: Evidence from the NBER Summer Institute." NBER Working Paper No.
 23953.

Donald, Stephen G. and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2006. "What is discrimination? Gender in the
 American Economic Association, 1935-2004." American Economic Review 96(4): 1283-1292.

Econometric Society. 1952. "Constitution of the Econometric Society." Econometrica 20 (1): 115-
  119.

Efron, B. 1988. "Logistic regression, survival analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier curve." Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 83(402): 414-425.

Einav, Liran and Leeat Yariv. 2006. "What's in a Surname? The Effects of Surname Initials on
  Academic Success." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1): 175-187.

Ellinas, Elizabeth H. Elizabeth Rebello, Rekha Chandrabose, Sasha Shillcutt, Mike Hernandez, and
  Julie Silver. 2019. "Distinguished service awards in Anesthesiology specialty societies: Analysis
  of gender differences." Anesthesia and Analgesia 129(4): e130-e134.

Ellison, Glenn. 2013. "How Does the Market Use Citation Data? The Hirsch Index in Economics"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3):63-90.

Fryer, Roland G. 2007. "Believe flipping in a dynamic model of statistical discrimination." Journal
  of Public Economics 91: 1151-66.

Ginther, Donna K. and Shulamit Kahn. 2004. "Women in Economics: Moving up or falling off the
  academic career ladder?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(3): 193-214.

Gordon, Robert J. 1997. "What is the econometric society? History, organization, and basic pro-
 cedures." Econometrica 65(6): 1443-1451.

                                                22
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Peter Schmidt. 2003. "The determinants of Econometric Society Fellows
  elections." Econometrica 71(1): 399-407.

Hospido, Laura, and Carlos Sanz. 2019. "Gender gaps in the evaluation of research: evidence from
  submissions to economics conferences." Working paper.

Hengel, Erin. 2018. "Publishing while female. Are women held to higher standards? Evidence from
  peer review," Working paper.

Kahn, Shulamit. 2012. "Gender differences in academic promotion and mobility at a major Aus-
 tralian university." Economic Record, 88(282):407-424.

Lincoln, Anne E., Stephanie Pincus, Janet Bandows Koster and Phoebe S. Leboy. 2012. "The
  Matilda Effect in science: Awards and prizes in the US, 1990s and 2000s." Social Studies of
  Science 42(2): 307-320.

Lundberg, Shelly. 2017. "Report: Committee on the status of women in the Economics profession
  (CSWEP)." American Economic Review 107(5): 759-76.

Nielsen, Mathias W. 2015. "Limits to meritocracy? Gender in academic recruitment and promotion
  processes." Science and Public Policy 43(3): 386-399.

Roos, Charles F. 1933. "Constitution of the Econometric Society." Econometrica 1(1): 106-108.

Rossiter, Margaret W. 1993. "The Matthew Matilda effect in science." Social Studies of Science
  23(2): 325-341.

Sarsons, Heather, Klarita G¨erxhani, Ernesto Reuben, and Arthur Schram. Forthcoming. "Gender
  Differences in Recognition for Group Work." Journal of Political Economy.

Silver, Julie K., Saurabha Bhatnagar, Cheri A. Blauwet, Ross D. Zafonte, Nicole L. Mazwi, Chloe
   S. Slocum, Jeffrey C. Schneider, and Adam S. Tenforde. 2017. "Female physicians are underrep-
   resented in recognition awards from the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabili-
   tation." American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 9:976­984.

Silver, Julie K., Anna M. Bank, Chloe S. Slocum, Cheri A. Blauwet, Saurabha Bhatnagar, Julie
   A. Poorman, Richard Goldstein, Julia M. Reilly, and Ross D. Zafonte. 2018. "Women physi-
   cians underrepresented in American Academy of Neurology recognition awards." Neurology 91(7):
   e603-e614.

Uzzi, Brian. 2019. "Women are winning more scientific prizes, but men still win the most prestigious
  ones." Harvard Business Review February 14, 2019.

Wu, Alice H. 2018. "Gendered Language on the Economics Job Market Rumors Forum." AEA
 Papers and Proceedings, 108:175-79.




                                                23
                                                    Figure I. Female Share of Newly Elected Fellows, for Five Fellowships


                              0.40

                                                     Econometric Society
                                                     AAAS
                              0.30                   NAS
Female Share of New Fellows




                                                     AEA Fellows
                                                     Sloan Foundation


                              0.20




                              0.10




                              0.00
                                     1933 1938 1943 1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013 2018
                                                                                     Year
Notes. The figure presents a 10-year moving average of the fraction of female economists among the newly elected Fellows to 5 distinguished fellowships. In the calculations we
include also the small number of new Fellows that do not appear in our sample of actively-publishing economists (see online appendix for detail).


                                                                                     24
                      Figure II. Female Share of Active Scholars, Nominees, and Newly Elected Fellows to the Econometric Society

               0.25


                                        Active Publishers
               0.20                     At Least 1 QJE
                                        At Least 1 ECA/REStud
                                        At Least 3 Top-5's

               0.15                     Nominees
                                        Newly Elected Fellows
Female Share




               0.10



               0.05



               0.00
                      1960    1965      1970        1975         1980        1985          1990       1995         2000        2005         2010         2015
                                                                                        Year
Notes. The figure presents the fraction of female economists among the sample of active publishers (Table I), among a sample of economists with at least 1 Econometrica or Review
of Economic Studies publications, among economists with at least 1 Quarterly Journal of Economics publication, among economists with at least 3 "top-5" publications, among the
Econometric Society nominees, and among the newly elected Econometric Society Fellows. The female shares of nominees and elected Fellows are smoothed using a centered 9-
year moving average. The fraction female is computed excluding from the denominator economists with unknown gender. The information on nominees is only available from the
year 1990.

                                                                                      25
                                     Figure III. Election as ES Fellow by Gender, Decade, and Predicted Probability




Notes. We create an index of predicted probability of election as ES fellows running a logit model as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV except on the male sample only. Active
scholars who are not yet Fellows are then ranked based on the percentiles of this predicted probability into the bottom 90 percentile, the 90-95th percentile, the 95-97.5 percentile,
the 97.5-99 percentile and the top 99 percentile. For reference, in Figures IIIa-b we indicate the average number of top-5 publications for economists in these groups. In Figures IIIa-
b we then plot within each group the average probability of selection for male authors and female authors, by year group. For Figure IIIc, we report the coefficients from Columns 1
and 2 of Table AVII.


                                                                                          26
                                        Figure IV. Female Shares Among New Fellows and Nominees, by Year




Notes. The plot presents the female share by year among newly elected Fellows, among nominees, and separately for nominees by source of nomination. The information on source
of nomination is not available for 2003.



                                                                                     27
Figure V. Share from Underrepresented Regions among Nominees and New Fellows, by Year and by Source of Nomination




Notes. The plot presents the share from underrepresented regions (Asia, Australia, Latin America, Africa) by year among newly elected Fellows, among nominees, and separately
for nominees by source of nomination. The information on source of nomination is not available for 2003.




                                                                                     28
                                                                      TABLE I
                                         SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR DATA SET OF ACTIVELY PUBLISHING ECONOMISTS
                                                                          Economists with at Least One Paper Published in Set of Leading Journals
                                                                          1933-1979                     1980-1999                     2000-2019
                                                                 All          Male          Female              All          Male         Female               All          Male         Female
                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)                (7)           (8)           (9)
Percent Female                                                  5.23            0             100              8.31            0            100              17.23            0            100
Percent Unknown Gender                                         11.09            0              0               6.63            0             0                3.05            0             0
Percent Fellows (as of current year)
Current Fellow of ES Society (1933+)                            3.46           4.1            0.62             3.73           4.3            0.8              3.1            3.72          0.74
Current Fellow of AAAS (1933+)                                  1.11           1.32           0.08             1.49           1.72           0.33             1.27           1.52          0.35
Current Fellow of NAS (1968+)                                   0.11           0.14             0              0.43           0.5            0.06             0.38           0.45          0.13
Current Fellow of AEA (1965+)                                   0.16           0.19           0.01             0.38           0.44           0.14             0.32           0.38          0.11
Recipient of Sloan Fellowship (1981+)                             0              0              0              0.67           0.73           0.58             1.19           1.29          0.96
Cumulative publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                    0.21           0.23          0.06              0.28          0.31           0.07             0.22           0.26           0.05
REStud                                                          0.14           0.14          0.11              0.16          0.18           0.06             0.14           0.16           0.05
AER                                                             0.36           0.39          0.28              0.29          0.32           0.13             0.26           0.30           0.14
QJE                                                             0.35           0.38          0.23              0.17          0.19           0.08             0.14           0.16           0.07
JPE                                                             0.38           0.42          0.26              0.24          0.27           0.09             0.16           0.19           0.06
Cumulative citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                    1.20           1.36          0.29              6.67          7.66           0.99            18.03          21.88           3.21
REStud                                                          0.32           0.35          0.17              2.26          2.58           0.44            6.50           7.72            1.91
AER                                                             1.05           1.21          0.57              6.69          7.58           2.31            19.34          22.06           9.93
QJE                                                             0.53           0.60          0.35              2.36          2.64           1.04            13.11          15.10           6.17
JPE                                                             0.85           0.98          0.31              5.85          6.68           1.62            14.73          17.62           3.91
Cum. publ. in gen. interest journals
JEP+JEL                                                         0.00           0.01          0.01              0.05          0.05           0.03             0.11           0.12           0.07
AEA Papers&Proceedings                                          0.30           0.34          0.17              0.20          0.21           0.21             0.22           0.23           0.21
JEEA                                                            0.00           0.00          0.00              0.00          0.00           0.00             0.05           0.06           0.04
EJ                                                              0.29           0.28          0.28              0.17          0.18           0.08             0.20           0.23           0.12
REStat                                                          0.29           0.32          0.24              0.30          0.32           0.24             0.22           0.25           0.15
Economica+IER                                                   0.20           0.20          0.13              0.27          0.29           0.13             0.24           0.27           0.12
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE+TE)                                0.04           0.04          0.01              0.31          0.33           0.15             0.71           0.81           0.33
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                     0.21           0.23          0.18              0.31          0.34           0.13             0.45           0.51           0.18
Micro (AEJMicro)                                                0.00           0.00          0.00              0.00          0.00           0.00             0.01           0.01           0.01
Macro (AEJMacro+JME)                                            0.00           0.00          0.00              0.08          0.09           0.05             0.15           0.17           0.08
AEJ Applied                                                     0.00           0.00          0.00              0.00          0.00           0.00             0.01           0.01           0.03
Quantitative Economics                                          0.00           0.00          0.00              0.00          0.00           0.00             0.01           0.01           0.00
Development (JDE)                                               0.00           0.00          0.01              0.09          0.09           0.10             0.15           0.15           0.14
Finance (JF)                                                    0.21           0.23          0.11              0.29          0.33           0.11             0.23           0.27           0.11
Health (JHE)                                                    0.00           0.00          0.00              0.04          0.04           0.06             0.13           0.12           0.16
History (JEH)                                                   0.10           0.10          0.08              0.09          0.09           0.11             0.07           0.07           0.05
International (JIE)                                             0.01           0.01          0.00              0.09          0.09           0.06             0.14           0.15           0.11
Industrial Organization (RAND)                                  0.01           0.02          0.01              0.11          0.12           0.08             0.11           0.12           0.07
Labor (JoLE)                                                    0.00           0.00          0.00              0.03          0.03           0.05             0.07           0.07           0.07
Public (JPubE+AEJPolicy)                                        0.01           0.01          0.01              0.12          0.14           0.08             0.23           0.25           0.17
Number of years since first publication                        11.26          11.45          10.57            11.36          11.73          8.13            12.70          13.53           9.15
Number of Author-Year Observations                            145,079 121,408                7,588          210,440 178,997 17,491                         378,167 301,486 65,144
Number of Authors                                              10,654 8,870                   588            18,102 15,048 1,844                            33,594 25,980 6,334
Notes. Data set contains author-year observations on "actively publishing" economists. An economist becomes active upon publishing a paper in one of the journals listed in Appendix Table 1, and
remains active for 18 years after the last publication except if death is recorded in the Wiki pages. Gender is based on name or internet search -- see text. Citations in top-5 journals are measured
from Web of Science SSCI and are cumulative up to that year.




                                                                                                29
                                                                     TABLE II
                                        SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR ECONOMETRIC SOCIETY FELLOWS IN ELECTION YEAR
                                                                                      Newly Elected Fellows in Year of Election
                                                                       1933-1979                    1980-1999                      2000-2019
                                                                   All   Male    Female        All      Male    Female         All   Male    Female
                                                                   (1)    (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)          (7)    (8)      (9)
 Percent Female                                                   0.85     0       100        3.14        0       100        12.23     0       100
 Percent Unknown Gender                                             0      0        0           0         0        0            0      0        0
Percent Fellows (as of current year)
Current Fellow of ES Society (1933+)                              100            100             100              100            100             100              100     100      100
Current Fellow of AAAS (1933+)                                    1.99           2.01             0              1.26            1.3              0               6.9    5.36     17.95
Current Fellow of NAS (1968+)                                       0              0              0              0.31           0.32              0              0.63    0.71       0
Current Fellow of AEA (1965+)                                     0.57           0.57             0                0              0               0              0.63    0.36     2.56
Recipient of Sloan Fellowship (1981+)                               0              0              0              15.09          15.26             10             26.65   24.29    43.59
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                     1.29           1.30            0.33             2.23            2.25           1.50             1.94     2.04     1.21
REStud                                                           0.76           0.77            0.00             1.11            1.13           0.60             1.12     1.18     0.64
AER                                                              0.65           0.65            1.33             1.03            1.06           0.30             1.55     1.56     1.46
QJE                                                              0.69           0.69            0.67             0.80            0.80           0.80             1.11     1.03     1.67
JPE                                                              0.79           0.80            0.00             0.98            0.98           0.80             0.96     1.01     0.59
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                     6.59           6.60            4.67            51.58           52.80          14.00           102.87    102.08   108.59
REStud                                                           2.85           2.87            0.00            13.87           14.19           4.00           39.98     37.39    58.56
AER                                                              4.70           4.70            4.67            23.75           24.36           5.10           101.22    97.59    127.26
QJE                                                              2.40           2.41            2.33            12.20           12.38           6.90           114.86    94.43    261.56
JPE                                                              3.75           3.78            0.00            27.04           27.64           8.80           67.26     69.11    53.92
Cum. publ. in gen. interest journals
JEP+JEL                                                          0.02           0.02            0.00             0.19            0.19           0.10             0.50     0.47     0.72
AEA Papers&Proceedings                                           0.45           0.46            0.00             0.62            0.62           0.50             1.05     0.94     1.82
JEEA                                                             0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00           0.00             0.45     0.43     0.62
EJ                                                               0.63           0.63            0.33             0.41            0.42           0.10             0.54     0.52     0.69
REStat                                                           0.57           0.55            2.00             0.34            0.35           0.00             0.45     0.44     0.59
Economica+IER                                                    0.64           0.64            0.00             1.03            1.05           0.60             0.71     0.71     0.64
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE+TE)                                 0.45           0.46            0.00             2.13            2.13           2.20             3.22     3.46     1.51
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                      0.58           0.57            1.00             1.18            1.21           0.10             1.46     1.48     1.36
Micro (AEJMicro)                                                 0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00           0.00             0.09     0.08     0.15
Macro (AEJMacro+JME)                                             0.01           0.01            0.00             0.31            0.31           0.10             0.61     0.61     0.54
AEJ Applied                                                      0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00           0.00             0.12     0.09     0.31
Quantitative Economics (QE)                                      0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00           0.00             0.05     0.04     0.10
Development (JDE)                                                0.02           0.02            0.00             0.10            0.10           0.00             0.19     0.18     0.26
Finance (JF)                                                     0.10           0.10            0.00             0.27            0.28           0.00             0.25     0.26     0.21
Health (JHE)                                                     0.00           0.00            0.00             0.01            0.01           0.00             0.11     0.08     0.33
History (JEH)                                                    0.03           0.03            0.00             0.04            0.04           0.30             0.04     0.04     0.05
International (JIE)                                              0.05           0.05            0.00             0.29            0.30           0.00             0.24     0.24     0.28
Industrial Organization (RAND)                                   0.06           0.06            0.00             0.46            0.45           0.50             0.51     0.52     0.44
Labor (JoLE)                                                     0.00           0.00            0.00             0.19            0.19           0.20             0.18     0.18     0.23
Public (JPubE+AEJPolicy)                                         0.07           0.07            0.00             0.47            0.48           0.10             0.69     0.64     1.08

Number of years since first publication                          9.89           9.86           12.33            12.55           12.63          10.20            17.67    17.81    16.72
Number of Authors                                                351            348              3               318             308            10               319      280      39
Notes: Table presents characteristics of economists who were elected as Fellows of the Econometric Society, as of the year of their election. See notes to Table I.




                                                                                                   30
                                                                                 TABLE III
                                                           SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR NOMINEES AND ELECTED FELLOWS

                                                                                  Nominated Fellows                                                        Elected Fellows
                                                                            1990-2005           2006-2019                                         1990-2005               2006-2019
                                                                          Male    Female     Male     Female                                   Male     Female         Male     Female
                                                                           (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)                                     (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)
Nomination
Percent Nominated by Fellows (1995-)                                      73.36           70.37             78.86           62.50              63.70            66.67               45.69            34.38
Percent Nominated by Committee (1995-)                                    26.64           29.63             21.14           37.50              36.30            33.33               54.31            65.62
Number of Votes (2006-)                                                                                     80.55           92.12                                                  120.14           127.91
Number of Endorsements (if nom. By Fellows)                               13.72           13.06             10.89           10.51              19.55             18.5               12.36            18.08
Institutional Affiliation
 Percent Top-5 US University                                              7.09            18.42             17.42           29.81              14.86            25.00               22.84            34.38
 Percent Top-6-17 US University                                           21.56           21.05             20.81           20.19              28.51            25.00               20.30            21.88
 Percent non-Top17 US University                                          33.97           23.68             24.53           29.81              26.91            8.33                14.72            18.75
 Percent Europe                                                           28.24           26.32             26.73           17.31              23.69            33.33               22.34            21.88
 Percent Asia or Australia                                                7.64              *               7.34              *                4.02             0.00                11.68            3.12
 Percent Latin America or Africa                                          1.50              *               3.18              *                0.00             8.33                8.12             0.00
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                              1.94            1.24               1.96            0.98               2.10             2.00               2.05              1.03
REStud                                                                    1.11            0.55               0.93            0.54               1.37             0.58               1.05              0.62
AER                                                                       0.92            0.26               1.35            1.72               1.33             0.17               1.59              1.72
QJE                                                                       0.62            0.42               0.70            1.30               0.98             0.42               1.06              2.00
JPE                                                                       0.73            0.50               0.81            0.59               1.08             0.58               0.95              0.59
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                             48.80           27.68             120.08          73.51               67.98            38.17              118.86           120.94
REStud                                                                   15.92            5.45             38.05           37.97               22.01             9.25              40.32            68.53
AER                                                                      29.47           10.11             127.24          150.48              40.69             1.92              112.65           154.38
QJE                                                                      16.02            5.47             83.65           190.42              25.53             2.25              117.41           318.53
JPE                                                                      22.22            7.47             64.97           55.09               34.39             7.92              80.15            62.88
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)                                             3.03            2.82               3.98            1.03               2.90             4.17               3.37              0.66
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                               2.07            0.45               2.16            1.57               1.45             0.08               1.41              1.66
Empirical Micro
(AEJApplied/Policy+JoLE+JEH+JHE+JPube+JDE)                                0.72            0.79               1.11            1.94               0.97             0.67               1.35              2.66
Number of years since first publication                                  15.61           13.79              19.59           16.36              14.59            13.58              18.60             16.97
Number of Year-Author Observations                                         733              38                913            104                249                12                197               32
Number of Authors                                                          434              26                437            57                 249                12                197               32
Notes: Table presents characteristics of economists who were nominated (Columns 1-4) or elected (Columns 5-8) as Fellows of the Econometric Society, as of the year of their nomination/election. The percent with
unknown gender is 0 in these samples. See notes to Table I. We do not report the percent Asia or Australia or Latin America or Africa in Column 2 and 4 for confidentiality reasons.




                                                                                                      31
                                                                            TABLE IV
                                                     PREDICTORS OF SELECTION AS ECONOMETRIC SOCIETY FELLOW

                                                                         Logit Regression for Selection as Econometric Society Fellow in Year t:
                                                                      1933-79                            1980-99                           2000-19
                                                          (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)             (9)
Female × (pre-1980)                                    -2.220          -1.972          -1.457                 --              --              --                 --              --              --
                                                       (0.734)         (0.733)         (0.606)
Female × (1980-89)                                        --              --              --              -0.139          -0.062           0.628                 --              --              --
                                                                                                          (0.529)         (0.523)         (0.473)
Female × (1990-99)                                         --              --               --            -0.595           0.048           0.028                 --              --              --
                                                                                                          (0.455)         (0.472)         (0.483)
Female × (2000-09)                                         --              --               --               --              --              --              0.342            0.408           0.544
                                                                                                                                                            (0.326)          (0.320)         (0.341)
Female × (2010-19)                                         --              --               --                --              --              --             0.801            1.127           0.932
                                                                                                                                                            (0.219)          (0.227)         (0.239)
# Papers in Econometrica                                1.006           0.570           0.259              0.827           0.384           0.236             0.998            0.693           0.317
                                                       (0.069)         (0.101)         (0.177)            (0.065)         (0.064)         (0.076)           (0.056)          (0.077)         (0.119)
Asinh citations in Econometrica                                         0.491           0.026                              0.483           0.110                              0.255          -0.090
                                                                       (0.084)         (0.094)                            (0.053)         (0.086)                            (0.051)         (0.070)

# Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies                       0.644           0.400          -0.382              0.453           0.060          -0.054             0.524            0.278           0.311
                                                       (0.070)         (0.113)         (0.242)            (0.079)         (0.108)         (0.180)           (0.083)          (0.107)         (0.178)
Asinh citations in REStud                                               0.196           0.007                              0.172           0.032                              0.120          -0.000
                                                                       (0.133)         (0.104)                            (0.078)         (0.077)                            (0.062)         (0.072)
# Papers in Am. Econ. Review                            0.114          -0.149           0.022              0.153           0.056           0.115             0.291            0.061           0.042
                                                       (0.054)         (0.096)         (0.161)            (0.079)         (0.106)         (0.134)           (0.063)          (0.091)         (0.129)
Asinh citations in AER                                                  0.175           0.060                              0.011          -0.083                              0.154          -0.047
                                                                       (0.109)         (0.102)                            (0.070)         (0.081)                            (0.052)         (0.064)
# Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.                       0.053          -0.013          -0.063              0.342           0.156           0.053             0.479            0.255           0.225
                                                       (0.020)         (0.049)         (0.167)            (0.087)         (0.139)         (0.182)           (0.065)          (0.110)         (0.118)
Asinh citations in QJE                                                  0.302           0.133                              0.108           0.059                              0.015           0.015
                                                                       (0.101)         (0.113)                            (0.084)         (0.093)                            (0.060)         (0.088)
# Papers in J. of Political Economy                     0.055          -0.017          -0.000              0.133          -0.172          -0.179             0.215            0.090          -0.029
                                                       (0.033)         (0.068)         (0.082)            (0.068)         (0.098)         (0.120)           (0.088)          (0.107)         (0.169)
Asinh citations in JPE                                                  0.240           0.012                              0.265           0.157                              0.162           0.047
                                                                       (0.106)         (0.110)                            (0.062)         (0.085)                            (0.051)         (0.074)
Indicator for 1 top-5 publication                                                      -0.075                                              1.960                                              1.213
                                                                                       (0.274)                                            (0.593)                                            (0.681)
Indicator for 2 top-5 publications                                                      0.605                                              3.340                                              2.889
                                                                                       (0.336)                                            (0.589)                                            (0.649)

Controls for publications in                              No              Yes             Yes                No              Yes             Yes                No             Yes             Yes
general interest/field journals
Additional controls for levels of                         No              No              Yes                No              No              Yes                No              No             Yes
top-5 publications, citations,
and years since first publication
N                                                     112,369          112,369         112,369           188,966         188,966         188,966            355,238         355,238         355,238
Pseudo R-squared                                        0.188           0.238            0.290             0.249           0.345           0.407              0.295           0.361           0.424
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients: models are fit to set of active economists in a given year who are not yet Fellows of the
Econometric Society. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample. Measures of publications and citations represent numbers of papers published, and citations received, up to current
year. All models include year fixed effects. The full list of controls in in Appendix Table AV.




                                                                                                  32
                                                   TABLE V
                        SUMMARY STATISTICS ON NOMINATION AND ELECTION RATES, BY GENDER

                                                                                                               Time Interval:
                                                                                                     1995-2005
                                                                                                   (except 2003) 2006-2011 2012-2019
                                                                                                        (1)           (2)     (3)

  Fraction of Females Among New Fellows: P[F|E]                                                          6.21                  5.62              19.29
   (x100)
Characteristics of Nominees
  Fraction of Females Among Nominees: P[F|N]                                                             5.40                  6.00              12.59
   (x100)
  Fraction of Females Among Committee Nominees: P[F|Nc]                                                  5.97                  6.10              22.67
   (x100)
  Fraction of Females Among Fellow's Nominees: P[F|Nf]                                                   5.19                  5.97              9.67
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Nominees from Committee: P[Nc|N]                                                       26.80                23.43              22.49
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Female Nominees from Committee: P[Nc|N,F]                                              29.63                23.81              40.48
   (x100)

Measures of Election Success, Conditional on Nomination
  Fraction of All Nominees Elected: P[E|N]                                                               28.80                25.43              20.99
  (x100)
  Fraction of All Committee Nominees Elected: P[E|Nc]                                                    38.81                63.41              50.67
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Fellow's Nominees Elected: P[E|Nf]                                                     25.14                13.81              12.38
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Female Nominees Elected: P[E|N,F]                                                      28.66                28.03              29.39
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Female Committee Nominees Elected: P[E|Nc,F]                                           37.50                60.00              52.94
   (x100)
  Fraction of All Female Fellow's Nominees Elected: P[E|Nf,F]                                            31.58                12.50              18.00
   (x100)
Notes: Table presents means for years indicated by column heading of fractions indicated by row heading. In the probability statements, E denotes the event of
election as a new Fellow, N denotes the event of nomination as a Fellow, Nc denotes nomination by the Nominating Commmittee, Nf denotes nomination by
existing Fellows, and F denotes female gender.




                                                                             33
                                              TABLE VI
            GENDER DIFFERENCES IN NOMINATION AND ELECTION AS ECONOMETRIC SOCIETY FELLOW
                                                                                                   Various Models on ES Nomination/Election
                                                                                                       1995-2005
                                                                                                     (except 2003)              2006-2011             2012-2019
                                                                                                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)
Panel A: Sample of Actively Publishing Economists
 Logit Model for Selection as Fellow (N=400,235)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.873                   -0.309                   1.160
                                                                                                        (0.352)                  (0.489)                 (0.257)
 Logit Model for Nomination as Fellow (N=400,235)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.482                   -0.112                   0.605
                                                                                                        (0.260)                  (0.259)                 (0.228)
 Logit Model for Nomination by Committee (N=400,235)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.597                   -0.053                   1.219
                                                                                                        (0.387)                  (0.551)                 (0.252)
 Logit Model for Nomination by Fellows (N=400,235)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.412                   -0.131                   0.290
                                                                                                        (0.289)                  (0.312)                 (0.286)
Panel B: Sample of Nominees for Econometric Society Fellowship

 Logit Model for Selection as Fellow, Cond. On Nom. (N=1,517)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.744                   -0.409                   0.796
                                                                                                        (0.374)                  (0.591)                 (0.370)

 Logit Model for Selection as Fellow, Cond. On Nom. (N=1,517)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.927                   -0.274                   0.594
                                                                                                        (0.499)                  (0.694)                 (0.482)
 Committee Nominee                                                                                       0.423                    3.304                   2.703
                                                                                                        (0.252)                  (0.444)                 (0.294)
 Committee Nominee × Female                                                                             -0.402                   -0.402                  -0.294
                                                                                                        (0.919)                  (1.339)                 (0.678)
 Poisson Model for Number of Votes (N=1,017)
 Female Economist                                                                                            --                  -0.026                   0.154
                                                                                                                                 (0.092)                 (0.044)
 Poisson Model for Number of Votes (N=1,017)
 Female Economist                                                                                            --                  -0.077                   0.094
                                                                                                                                 (0.074)                 (0.052)
 Committee Nominee                                                                                           --                   0.437                   0.346
                                                                                                                                 (0.037)                 (0.031)
 Committee Nominee × Female                                                                                  --                   0.174                   0.010
                                                                                                                                 (0.096)                 (0.069)
 Poisson Model for No. of Endorsements (if Nom. By Fellows)
 (N=1,057)
 Female Economist                                                                                        0.001                   -0.274                   0.120
                                                                                                        (0.139)                  (0.180)                 (0.143)
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are either logistic or poisson regression coefficients. Models are estimated over all
observations of actively publishing economists (Panel A) and economists nominated for Econometric Society Fellow (Panel B). The estimates in Columns 1, 2, and
3 come from one regression covering the time period 1995-2019 (except for year 2003), allowing the coefficient reported (e.g., the female economist coefficient)
to differ for the 1995-2005 (except 2003) period, the 2006-2011 period and the 2012-2019 period. Columns 1, 2, and 3 report those respective coefficients. The
models include the full set of controls as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV --top-5 publication/citations, publications in field journals, citation percentiles, years
from first publication, and year fixed effects-- which are assumed to have the same coefficient over the time period 1995-2019. Economists with unknown gender
are excluded from the sample.



                                                                                 34
                                                                TABLE VII
                      EFFECT OF VISIBILITY AND CONNECTIONS ON PROBABILITY OF SELECTION AND NOMINATION AS FELLOW
                                                                          Logit Regression for Selection/Nomination as Econometric Society Fellow in Year t
                                                                                                              Nomination as                    Nomination by                   Nomination by
                                                                         Selection as Fellow                      Fellow                           Fellows                      Committee
                                                                           (1)        (2)                     (3)        (4)                   (5)         (6)                 (7)       (8)
Authors' Gender (Omitted: Male Author)
Female × (1990-99)                                                       0.391            0.417              0.503           0.472            0.495           0.442           0.788            0.786
                                                                        (0.466)          (0.482)            (0.278)         (0.267)          (0.393)         (0.381)         (0.609)          (0.605)
Female × (2000-09)                                                       0.380            0.428              0.200           0.158            0.099           0.186           0.369           -0.149
                                                                        (0.345)          (0.409)            (0.236)         (0.269)          (0.262)         (0.320)         (0.472)          (0.600)
Female × (2010-19)                                                       0.873            0.937              0.479           0.448            0.236           0.299           1.058            0.775
                                                                        (0.233)          (0.343)            (0.213)         (0.230)          (0.266)         (0.304)         (0.243)          (0.299)
Measure of Academic Visibility:
Associate Editor at Econometrica                                                          1.049                              1.257                            1.246                            0.796
                                                                                         (0.232)                            (0.205)                          (0.219)                          (0.340)
Measure of Ballot Visibility:
Quantile of First Letter of Last Name                                                    -0.582                             -0.157                           -0.205                           -0.145
(A=0, Z=1)                                                                               (0.188)                            (0.155)                          (0.191)                          (0.225)
Measures of Connections:
# Connections with ES Fellows                                                             0.242                              0.204                            0.209                            0.115
                                                                                         (0.034)                            (0.030)                          (0.034)                          (0.039)
Impact of Nominating Committee:
# Connections with ES Nominating Committee                                                0.269                              0.557                            0.090                            1.221
                                                                                         (0.252)                            (0.160)                          (0.215)                          (0.247)
Share Women in Nominating Committee                                                      -0.122                              0.201                           -0.527                            2.059
×Female                                                                                  (1.566)                            (0.846)                          (1.333)                          (1.362)
Years Included                                                                                  1990-2019                                               1995-2019 (except 2003)

N                                                                       465,081         465,081            465,081         465,081          400,235         400,235         400,235          400,235
Pseudo R-squared                                                         0.419           0.433              0.428           0.439            0.418           0.429           0.390            0.400
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients in models for selection as a Fellow of the Econometric Society (columns 1-2) and as nominee
for Fellow (columns 3-4), also separately by nomination source (columns 5-8). See notes to Table IV. The models include the full set of controls as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV --top-5
publication/citations, publications in field journals, citation percentiles, years from first publication, and year fixed effects. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.


                                                                                                   35
                                                   TABLE VIII
                     GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY AND ECONOMETRIC SOCIETY ELECTION AND NOMINATION
                                                                                                      Models for Selection as Econometric Society
                                                                                                                    Fellow in Year t
                                                                                                         1995-2005
                                                                                                       (except 2003)     2006-2011 2012-2019
                                                                                                           (1)              (2)           (3)
Sample of Nominees for Econometric Society Fellowship
 Logit Model for Selection as Fellow, Cond. On Nomin. (N=1,506)
 Female                                                                                                      0.958                   -0.216                   1.285
                                                                                                            (0.391)                  (0.583)                 (0.390)
 Top-5 US University                                                                                         0.731                    2.057                   0.653
                                                                                                            (0.484)                  (0.649)                 (0.420)
 Top-6-17 US University                                                                                      0.868                    0.666                   0.384
                                                                                                            (0.282)                  (0.463)                 (0.401)
 University in Europe                                                                                        0.442                    0.958                   0.985
                                                                                                            (0.301)                  (0.502)                 (0.398)
 University in Asia or Australia                                                                            -0.410                    3.890                   2.599
                                                                                                            (0.549)                  (0.643)                 (0.555)
 University in Latin America or Africa                                                                       0.000                    3.854                   4.633
                                                                                                               (.)                   (0.644)                 (0.890)
 Logit Model for Selection as Fellow, Cond. On Nomin. (N=1,517)
 Female                                                                                                      0.967                   -0.362                   0.879
                                                                                                            (0.404)                  (0.560)                 (0.401)
 University in Underrepresented Regions                                                                     -1.032                    2.336                   3.150
 (Asia, Australia, Latin America, Africa)                                                                   (0.685)                  (0.702)                 (0.549)
 Committee Nominee                                                                                           0.367                    3.091                   2.564
                                                                                                            (0.259)                  (0.487)                 (0.273)
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients. Models are estimated for economists nominated for
Econometric Society Fellow. The estimates in Columns 1, 2, and 3 come from one regression covering the time period 1995-2019 (except for year 2003), allowing the
coefficient reported (e.g., the female economist coefficient) to differ for the 1995-2005 (except 2003) period, the 2006-2011 period and the 2012-2019 period.
Columns 1, 2, and 3 report those respective coefficients. The omitted category for institutional affiliation is non-top-17 US university. The models include the full set of
controls as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV, which are assumed to have the same coefficient over the whole time period. The percent with unknown gender is 0 in
the sample.




                                                                                   36
                                                                                    TABLE IX
                                                                   MODELS FOR ELECTION TO OTHER FELLOWSHIPS
                                                                                            Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                      Econ. Society                         AAAS                             NAS                             AEA                     Alfred P. Sloan
                                                      (1)       (2)                   (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)               (7)           (8)              (9)       (10)
Authors' Gender (Omitted: Male Author)
 Female × (pre-1980)             -1.972                           -1.457           -1.567         -1.376               --             --            1.065          1.763                --            --
                                (0.733)                           (0.606)          (0.987)        (0.968)                                          (1.047)        (1.074)
  Female × (1980-89)                               -0.062          0.628           -0.206          0.195            0.449          1.036            0.233          1.409            0.282          0.426
                                                   (0.523)        (0.473)          (0.991)        (1.083)          (1.118)        (1.295)          (1.096)        (1.113)          (0.537)        (0.560)
  Female × (1990-99)                                0.048          0.028            0.538          1.115            0.208          0.801            0.677          1.378            0.634          0.741
                                                   (0.472)        (0.483)          (0.704)        (0.672)          (1.073)        (0.704)          (0.704)        (0.836)          (0.323)        (0.335)
  Female × (2000-09)                                0.408          0.544            0.897          1.282            1.148          1.940           -0.116          1.640            0.398          0.447
                                                   (0.320)        (0.341)          (0.441)        (0.459)          (0.666)        (0.762)          (1.060)        (1.004)          (0.335)        (0.335)
  Female × (2010-19)                                1.127          0.932            2.021          2.043            1.388          1.774            1.050          2.167            0.545          0.534
                                                   (0.227)        (0.239)          (0.338)        (0.347)          (0.492)        (0.549)          (0.508)        (0.541)          (0.311)        (0.288)
Restrict to 8 yrs. since 1st pub.      No      No                                     No             No               No             No               No             No               Yes            Yes
Controls for publications in 36        Yes     Yes                                    Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
journals and citation in top-5 Jrls.
   x 3 Time Periods
Controls for levels of                 No      Yes                                    No             Yes              No             Yes              No             Yes               No            Yes
 top 5 and top 5 citations
   x 3 Time Periods
N                                    656,573 656,573                              658,477 658,477                 601,000 598,795                  612,011 608,850                 234,903 234,903
Pseudo R-squared                      0.328   0.386                                0.355   0.394                   0.355   0.398                    0.357   0.466                   0.306   0.366
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients: see note to Table IV. The sample excludes economists with unknown gender. All models include
controls for the number of publications in each of the top-5 journals, interacted with indicators for the periods (pre-1980), (1980-99) and (2000-19), and year fixed effects. The controls in the odd-numbered
columns are as in Columns 2, 5, and 8 of Table IV, while the controls in even-numbered columns are similar to the ones in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV (except that the indicators for top-5s span a longer
number of publications for NAS, AAAS, and AEAF, and that we drop some controls to avoid over-specifying these models). See Table AXIV and AXV for the exact list of controls. Sample periods vary by
fellowship: see text. Models for Sloan Fellowships are restricted to up to 8 years from the first publication in the sample.




                                                                                                     37
A     Online appendix
A.1    Additional Data Details
      Journal Selection. To help identify the set of journals most relevant in the Fellow selection
process, we collected information from an annual article in EMA listing the most important contri-
butions of each newly elected Fellow, selecting a maximum of six publications for each Fellow. Out
of this pool of 6,086 publications, more than 20% were published in EMA. We consider a journal
relevant to the Fellow selection process if papers in that journal account for more than 1% of the
6,086 mentioned contributions (i.e. 61 publications) over the whole sample period, or more than
2% of the mentioned contributions for Fellows selected in any of 4 sub-samples (1933-59, 1960-79,
1980-99, 2000-2019). We complemented this list with any remaining general interest or top field
journals, resulting in the list in Appendix Table AI.
      Article Selection. In a first step, we downloaded all articles in each journal from its earliest
publication date until 2019. In a second step, we eliminated notes and comments by filtering out
articles containing specific words such as "note on" and "review" and "comment" in their title.
      Fellows. The 30 unmatched ES Fellows are: Abel Gesevich Aganbegyan, Oskar N. Ander-
son, Maria Augustinovics, Albert Aupetit, Pasquale Boninsegni, Constantino Bresciani-Turroni,
Bernard Chait, Clement Colson, Harold T. Davis, Nikolay P. Fedorenko, Bruno De Finetti, Er-
aldo Fossati, Robert Gibrat, Georges-Theodule Guilbaud, Arthur Hanau, William C. Hood, Heinz
Konig, Wilhelm E. Krelle, Sten Malmquist, Kazuo Midutani, Egon S. Pearson, Hans Peter, Krysztof
Porwit, Howard Raiffa, Calyampudi R. Rao, Wieslaw Sadowski, Leonid Tornqvist, Witold Trze-
ciakowski, Gustavo Del Vecchio, and Sewall Wright. Most of these Fellows were elected in the
early years of the Society and published books or articles in their native country, rather than in
the English language economics journals (e.g., Leonid Tornqvist). Only one unmatched Fellow was
elected since 1980 (Heinz Konig, elected in 1986). A few others, including Sewall Wright (sociology)
and Bruno De Finetti (statistics), worked in other fields. We also dropped 4 Fellows who published
in the Journal of the American Statistical Association but never in any economic journals in our
dataset: Egon S. Pearson, Howard Raiffa, Calyampudi R. Rao, and Sewall Wright. Finally, only
2 Fellows are elected to ES more than 18 years after their last publication--Alexander A. Konus
(elected in 1975) and Giorgio Mortara (elected in 1937).
      Nominees. There are 3 nominees as ES Fellows that do not match to the database of actively
publishing economists and 3 nominees who are nominated more than 18 years after their last
publication. We do not name them to protect this confidential information.
      Other Fellowships. We extract all members of NAS and AAAS from their online membership
directories. For AAAS, we proceed to identify 434 fellows listed under the field of Social and
Behavioral Sciences and the subfield of Economics since 1942. For NAS, we include 119 fellows
with a primary field in Economic Sciences, and 27 fellows who list the subject as a secondary
field. Most of the fellows with a secondary field in economics have a related primary field such as
Human Environmental Sciences (e.g., William D. Nordhaus) or Social and Political Sciences (e.g.,
Greg J. Duncan), and publish in the set of journals in our dataset. There are 6 unmatched AAAS
Fellows in the database: Lloyd D. Brace (elected in 1949), Harold A. Freeman (elected in 1956),
Edgar C. Brown (elected in 1966), Hans H. Landsberg (elected in 1974), Carlo M. Cipolla (elected
in 1978), and Harold G. Lewis (elected in 1986), and 4 Fellows elected more than 18 years after
their last publication: William Draper Lewis (elected in 1962), Emery N. Castle and Eli Ginzberg
(both elected in 1977), and Robert J. Lampman (elected in 1991). Amogn the NAS Fellows, 7
are unmatched: Brian Berry (elected in 1975), Calestous Juma (elected in 2005), Prabhu Pingali
(elected in 2007), Yu Xie (elected in 2009), Kathleen Harris (elected in 2014), Helen Milner (elected


                                                 38
in 2019), and Rashid Hassan (elected in 2019). Among them, all but Brian Berry list economics
as a secondary field. Among the NAS Fellows, 3 are elected more than 18 years after their last
publication ­ Allan Gibbard (elected in 2009), Walter Isard (elected in 1985) and Hirofumi Uzawa
(elected in 1995).
      Among the AEA Fellows, only 1 Fellow is umatched ­ P. N. Rosenstein-Rodan (elected in
1986), and 7 Fellows are elected more than 18 years after their last publication: Ludwig E. Mises
(elected in 1969), William Draper Lewis (elected in 1970), Solomon Fabricant (elected in 1980),
Geoffrey H. Moore (elected in 1995), Armen A. Alchian (elected in 1996), William C. Brainard
(elected in 2011), and Isabel V. Sawhill (elected in 2016).
      Disambiguating Names. A note on the procedure that we use to uniform the author names
is that some of the changes introduce a spelling that is not the person's correct name; for example,
we transform "N. Gregory Mankiw" into "Gregory N. Mankiw". This change is necessary to create
a unique record for a person, as author names that do not follow the typical naming ­ first name,
middle initial, last name ­ often appear with multiple spellings across their publications, which
would introduce errors in the data set without the disambiguation procedure.17
      We had to deal with two main complications: 1. (alternate spelling and name formats) an
author's name may appear in slightly different ways in different articles (e.g., "Ted Bergstrom"
versus "Theodore Bergstrom"); 2. (incomplete names) some journals, especially before 1980, iden-
tify authors only by their first initial(s) and last name (e.g., "K. Binmore" versus "Kenneth G.
Binmore"). Both issues create multiple "names" for the same economist, leading to duplicate, and
thus incomplete, publication records. They also complicate our gender coding procedure (described
below) which relies in part on first names.
      We assume that the combination of first, middle, and last names uniquely identifies an economist.
We then follow three approaches to link all the records for the same person. First, if there are two
records with the same last name and a matching first initial, and no other names in the list with
the same surname, we assume the two names are the same person. Thus, "S. Afriat" and "Sydney
Afriat" are assumed to be the same person. Similarly, we assume that two records with the same
first and last name are the same person regardless of middle initial if there is only one name with
that combination of first and last names. Thus "Henry Aaron" and "Henry J. Aaron" are assumed
to be the same person if there is no other name "Henry x. Aaron" with x = J in our data base.18
      Second, a team of undergraduate research assistants checked the list of author names, looking
for common short forms of names (e.g., "Larry" versus "Lawrence") and likely spelling mistakes or
errors in the journal metadata.
      Third, the research assistants looked up online all names that could not be assigned a gender
based on the first name. This provided a full first name for many listed authors with only a first
initial, and allowed us to correct many misspelled first names. After merging and correcting records,
the database of actively publishing economists includes over 40,000 unique names.
      Further checks on gender coding and death using Wikidata. We query all records on
Wikidata with "economist" or "econometrician" as a descriptor, and collect the year of death and
gender if said properties exist. We match the records to authors in the dataset using a process
  17
     In particular, we began by replacing all non-English characters and accented characters with corresponding
English characters. (For example, "´  a" is replaced with "a" and "~  n" is replaced with "n"). We then translated all
names into a standardized format, capitalizing the first letter of first, middle, and last names, adding a dot after first
or middle initials, and dropping all suffixes (including "Jr."). For example, "Trent W Appelbe" is changed to "Trent
W. Appelbe". We also interchange the middle name and a leading first initial if the middle name is not an initial,
e.g., "J. Bradford DeLong" is converted to "Bradford J. DeLong".
  18
     There are some rare cases where there are multiple researchers with the same last name and different first names
(e.g. Masahiko Aoki and Masanao Aoki), and there are articles written by a combination of a first initial and last
name (e.g. M. Aoki). These latter articles are assigned to one of the authors by a random procedure.


                                                           39
identical to that of author publication matching. Matched records are further reviewed by hand,
and misassociated records cleaned. For the remaining matches, results from the gendering process
are verified against genders provided by Wikidata, and year of death is added to the author's profile
in the dataset. Since not every author is matched to a Wikidata page, an additional round of year
of death lookups is done manually to fill in potential gaps. We identified 1498 authors who died
within the sample period, and exclude 6652 author-year observations from the sample (i.e. years
after death).
     Citations. We measure citations using SSCI citations for the papers published in the tradi-
tional top-5 jorunals. Ideally we would have liked to have citations to all published papers by a
researcher, not just those the top-5 journals. This proved infeasible, however, for two reasons: (i)
the citation record on SSCI for the years before 1998 are stored with first initial only; (ii) even in
cases in which the full name is used, there often are non-economists sharing the same first and last
name, conflating the citations of separate researchers. Thus, we elected to create a citation record
for each paper in the top-5 journals and link each author to papers he or she has published on these
journals. Since this is very time-consuming, we do it only for the top-5 journals. For around 80%
of the top-5 papers we are able to download the citation records of a paper from SSCI using the doi
number. The remaining papers, however, use a different format of doi number from SSCI. We thus
downloaded citations to these papers using their journal, volume, issue and pages information.
     Measure of Connection. We measure the number of connections with any ES Fellow in year
t, defined as having coauthored with that Fellow at least one paper (up to year t) in our data set
of 36 journals. This variable will increment when an economist publishes a new paper coauthored
with an existing Fellow (to whom the economist is not yet connected), or when a coauthor of a
previously published paper is elected as a Fellow. For example, suppose that author A becomes
"active" by publishing her first paper in 2001, then publishes a paper in 2003 coauthored with B
(who had been made a Fellow in 1990) and a third in 2005 with coauthor C, who is made a Fellow
in 2007. Then A's connections with ES Fellows will be 0 in 2001 to 2002, rising to 1 in 2003 when
her paper with B is published, and then rising to 2 in 2007 when C is made a Fellow.
     Nomination Process. A possibility which can occur in the nomination process is that a
candidate is nominate by both the nominating committee and by a group of fellows. In this
case, "If one or more members and the FNC independently nominate a candidate, the nomination
statement of the members will prevail but the ballot form will also explicitly include "Nominated by
the FNC"." (from the official ES rules: https://www.econometricsociety.org/society/organization-
and-governance/rules-and-procedures#50).
A.2    Changes from Analysis Plan
This paper largely follows the proposed analysis in a plan (PAP) submitted to Econometrica in
January 2020. The plan contained analysis on the election of ES Fellows using publicly-available
data, as well as analysis of the election to other Fellowships. In addition, the plan specified intended
analyses for the confidential nomination data, in case we were approved to receive it (as we did).
We detail here the main sources of deviation from the plan.
     First, some of the analyses in the ultimate paper focus on variables which at the PAP stage
we did not focus on. The main example is the analysis of geographic diversity (Figure V and
Table VIII); we did not appreciate that university affiliation was systematically recorded in the
nomination data, and that geographic diversity was an important component for the ES, and thus
worth analyzing. Second, we had not planned to study the wording of the nomination statements,
but turned to it following an editorial suggestion (Appendix Figure AIV-AV). The analyses of these
two dimensions are important additions to the plan in the PAP.
     Second, when we wrote the PAP we were unsure whether we would receive nomination data

                                                  40
for the years before 2006, and if so with what level of detail. Since ultimately we were able to piece
together most of the nomination data back to 1990, the analysis of the nomination results differs
from the planned one due to the longer time span.
      Third, for our main analysis we envisioned and pre-specified using as benchmark set of controls
the variables used, for example, in Columns 2, 5, and 8 of Table IV, including counts of publications
in the 36 journals, as well as asinh of citations in each of the top-5 journals (and year fixed effects).
As we examined this specification more, we realized though that this relatively sparse specification
led to a mis-specification in the logit model. This is most clear in Appendix Table AVII in Column 8,
in which we run a logit regression using the index built based on this specification (estimated on the
sample of men). We also add in the specification indicators for the different quantiles of the index.
If the model were well-specified, the coefficient in the index should be close to 1 and the coefficients
on the quantile indicators should be zero. Instead, we estimate the coefficient on the index to be
0.571 (s.e.=0.075), and the coefficients on the quantiles are highly significant, both statistically and
economically. Intuitively, the under-specified model is not able to reproduce enough of the correct
slope of the probability of honors with respect to publications and citations. Importantly, this bias
was also introducing potential bias in the estimates of the female coefficient, for example suggesting
that the estimated female coefficient was different at the very top of the index distribution than in
other parts of the distribution, whereas this was just a result of a mis-specified model for men (the
"control" group).
      To solve this issue, it turned out that it was enough to include additional controls that were
in fact suggested to us by both audience members and referees. It made sense to have more non-
parametric controls for the impact of some of the publications, e.g., allowing the first or second
EMA paper to have a larger effect than the fourth EMA paper, or allowing a discrete impact of
the first, second, or third top-5 publication. Further, we wanted to allow for an impact of citations
which did not follow the asinh form which we imposed. Finally, we wanted to allow for some role
for the the "academic age" of the authors, which is measured with years since first publication.
When we add all these variables, not only do we get a sizable improvement in predictive power,
as measured by the R squared, but now we pass the test of correct specification as apparent in
Column 3 of Table AVII which shows that for this specification we get a coefficient on the index
of 0.895 (s.e.=0.073) and we thus cannot reject the value of 1. Also, the coefficients on the index
quantiles are not far from 0 (and not statistically significant from 0). This is also visible comparing
the empirical patters in Figure IIIa-b to the predicted ones under the model in Appendix Figure
AI, which shows are very good fit.
      In light of this, we use the expanded specification as the new benchmark model. We do however
still show the old benchmark for all of the key results, such as Table IV and Table IX. We added
footnote 10 to the table to stress the limitation of the "old benchmark": "In contrast, Column 8 of
Table AVII shows that the specification with fewer controls used in Column 2, 5, and 8 of Table IV
does not pass the test, as the percentile indicators for men are highly significant and we confidently
reject a coefficient of 1 on the index."
      The other changes to the figures are as follows: (i) we envisioned a graphical way to display
the results of the logit specifications in Figure III which we had not thought of before hand; (ii)
Figures IV and V are raw year-by-year graphs of the gender and geographic diversity break-down
of the data.
      The other changes to the tables are as follows: (i) (Summary statistics ) The changes to the
summary statistics Tables I-III are minor; the main addition is in Table III on nominations, given
the (unexpected) fact that we received data going back to 1990, we break down the summary
statistics for the first 15 years, versus the next ones, and thus structure the table differently than
envisioned initially (when the table was structured around the 2006-19 data); (ii) (ES Election)

                                                   41
the main table on the ES election results, Table IV, follows the specification in the first two out of
3 columns for each time period, with column 3 presenting a new benchmark (see above), with just
slight improvements in the underlying data; (iii) (ES nomination and election) The results in Table
V and Table VI which use the confidential nomination and election data are closely related to the
initial proposal, but with some changes ­ most importantly, the fact that with a longer 30-year
data sample it becomes especially important to allow the gender effect to differs by sub-periods;
the mostly descriptive Table V, which we had not envisioned, aims to illustrate the raw findings in
the data, motivating the logit analysis in Table VI; (iv) (Channels) The table on channels, Table
VII, has some of the same material as in the proposed Table VIII (e.g., the control for associate
editor and for connection with Fellows), but it also adds additional variables which we had not
thought of, such as the alphabetical order and the connections to the committee, in addition to the
Fellows; also, the connection variables are defined in terms of whether there is a connection to a
particular economist, not in terms of number of papers co-written; ex post, the former strikes us
as a better way to capture connections, given that writing 15 papers with one coauthor is unlikely
to have 15 times the impact as writing one paper with a coauthor; (v) (Coauthorship) The table
on connections is very similar to the proposed one, except that, to build more closely on Sarsons
et al. (2020) we add a measure of publications in non-top-5, as well as a measure of publications
in top-5 journals (formerly publications in EMA and REStud ).




                                                 42
  Appendix Figure AI. Selection as ES Fellow by Gender, Decade, and Predicted Probability --
                                          Model Fit




Notes. For the x axis, we create an index of predicted probability of election as ES fellows running a logit model as in Columns 3,
6, and 9 of Table IV except on the male sample only. Active scholars who are not yet Fellows are then ranked based on the
percentiles of this predicted probability. We then plot the average within each percentile of the predicted probability of selection,
as implied by the benchmark model (Table IV, columns 3, 6, and 9).



                                                                43
     Appendix Figure AII. Election as ES Fellow (Log of Probability) by Gender, Decade, and
                                      Predicted Probability




Notes. For the x axis, we create an index of predicted probability of election as ES fellows running a logit model as in Columns 3,
6, and 9 of Table IV except on the male sample only. Active scholars who are not yet Fellows are then ranked based on the
percentiles of this predicted probability. We then run logistic regressions as in Columns 4 and 5 of Table AVII.




                                                               44
 Appendix Figure AIII. Nomination as ES Fellow by Gender, Decade, and Predicted Probability




Notes. We create an index of predicted probability of nomination as ES fellows by running a logit model of nomination as Fellow
as in Table VI except on the male sample only. Active scholars who are not yet nominees are then ranked based on the percentiles
of this predicted probability into the bottom 90 percentile, the 90-95th percentile, the 95-97.5 percentile, the 97.5-99 percentile and
the top 99 percentile. We then plot within each group the average probability of nomination for male authors and female authors,
by year group.




                                                                 45
                          Appendix Figure AIV. Words in Nomination Statements Most predictive of Outlined Outcome
Panel A. Female Economist                                                                            Panel B. Male economist




Panel C. Election, conditional on Nomination                                                         Panel D. Not elected, conditional on Nomination




Notes: The sample used is all 1,017 nominations from 2006 to 2019, as the nominating statements are not available for earlier years. We identify all word lemmas used in at least
20 nominating statements, resulting in 567 words after dropping stop words (such as "she" and "the"). For each outcome variable (e.g., female economist in Panel A) we plot all
words with an odds ratio above 2 for predicting the outcome. The words are scaled proportionally to the magnitude of their log odds ratio, capping the value at 3 for those that are
perfectly predictive. The variables predicted are female gender (Panel A), male gender (Panel B), election (Panel C), not election (Panel D).



                                                                                         46
Appendix Figure AV. Scatterplot of Words in Nomination Statement predictive of Female Gender versus of Election




Notes: The sample used is all 1,017 nominations from 2006 to 2019, as the nominating statements are not available for earlier years. We identify all word lemmas used in at least 20
nominating statements, resulting in 567 words after dropping stop words (such as "she" and "the"). For each of these 567 words, we run a logit regression of the relevant dependent
variable (election or female gender) on an indicator for whether the word is used in the nomination, as well as controls for cumulative number of publications in each of the top-5
journals, asinh of cumulative citations in each of the top-5 journals, and year fixed effects. We keep the 50 words that are most predictive of election, ranking by the pseudo R-
squared values, including words that are perfectly predictive of the outcome. We plot the logit coefficient for the election logit, as well as the logit coefficient on a parallel logit with
the same controls but predicting female gender as an outcome. The words in red represent words whose original coordinates were outside the (-2, 2) x (-2, 2) region and are displayed
with values capped at the relevant boundary value.

                                                                                            47
                                                         TABLE AI
                                           JOURNALS USED FOR PUBLICATION COUNTS


American Economic Journal: Applied Economics                        Journal of Econometrics

American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics                           Journal of Economic History

American Economic Journal: Microeconomics                           Journal of Economic Literature

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy                          Journal of Economic Perspectives

American Economic Review                                            Journal of Economic Theory

AER (AEA) Papers and Proceedings                                    Journal of Finance

Econometrica                                                        Journal of Health Economics

Econometric Theory                                                  Journal of International Economics

Economica                                                           Journal of Labor Economics

Economic Journal                                                    Journal of Mathematical Economics

Economic Theory                                                     Journal of Monetary Economics

Games and Economic Behavior                                         Journal of Political Economy

International Economic Review                                       Journal of Public Economics

International Journal of Game Theory                                Quarterly Journal of Economics

Journal of American Statistical Association                         Review of Economics and Statistics

Journal of Development Economics                                    Review of Economic Studies

Journal of the European Economic Association                        The RAND Journal of Economics

Quantitative Economics                                              Theoretical Economics
Notes: Top 5 journals are shown in bold.




                                                           48
                                                                        TABLE AII
                                                 CHECK OF ACCURACY OF CODING OF GENDER AND PUBLICATIONS
                    (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)   (5)                   (6)                             (7)
                  Gender                     Number of Actual
                  Coding         CVs          Papers in No. of Error                                    Papers Incorrectly Attributed to
                  Correct       found         our Data Papers Rate         Paper Missing in Database         Author in Database

Coded as           100%            48             620             629         1.8%          10 (from 4 different authors)                      1
 Female                                                                                   name change: 2 (from 2 authors)         two authors with same name
 (n=50)                                                                            different first names used: 8 (from 2 authors)

                   100%            97            1676             1676        0.4%             3 (from 3 different authors)                                         3
Coded as
                                                                                         1 (from 1 author) name spelling error                      1 (two authors with same name)
  Male
                                                                                        2 (from 2 authors) missing issue/paper                          1 (not a research paper)
 (n=100)
                                                                                                                                                  1 (wrong disambiguation of a name)
Notes: the sample consists of 50 female and 100 male economists, randomly selected from our actively publishing economists database, who had their first publication after 1979, and had accumulated at
least 2 top-5 until the end of the sample period (2019).




                                                                                                 49
   Table AIII: Timeline of Rules and Procedures regarding Nomination and Elections of Econometric Fellows (Part 1)
                                                      Nomination Stage                                                                                                 Election Stage

1933                                                                                                                                      First round of fellows elected by council (EMA, 1933, 1 (4), p. 445)

1935   Fellows and members propose candidates and the council selects the nominees (EMA, 1934, 2 (2), p. 204 ).                           Fellows vote by mail (EMA, 1934, 2,(2), p. 204 )

1947   The council determines the number of fellows to be elected N (N is the median number voted by the council). Fellows (and
       members) then propose candidates for nominees (among members of the Econometric society). The secretary sends the list             The number of newly elected Fellows shall not exceed 12 (or 15 percent of the
       of nominees to the council and also includes the names of candidates nominated by the council in the previous year but not         number of members). Each Fellow shall give N marks to the candidate whom he
       elected to Fellowship. The members of the council shall vote to nominate candidates: Given N, each council member in               most favors, N-1 marks to the second most favored candidate, and so on. The N
       voting should assign to the candidate whom he most favors 2N marks, to the second most favored 2N-1 marks, and so on               nominees receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. In case
       down to 1 mark; to a candidate who is not approved, 0 marks. The total of marks thus assigned by the voters to a candidate         of a tie for last place, all the candidates so tied shall be declared elected if that
       shall determine his order. Absence of marks or negative marks shall be treated as zero. The 2N candidates receiving the            does not increase the total beyond N+1; otherwise none of the tied candidates
       highest totals shall be declared nominated. In case of a tie for last place all the candidates so tied shall be declared           shall be declared elected (EMA, 1948, 16 (1), p. 116 ).
       nominated (EMA, 1948, 16 (1), p. 116).

1951   Fellows and members propose candidates for nominees (among members of the Econometric society). The Presentation-of-
       Candidacy form shall require the following information: (a) a list of the candidate's publications; (b) indication as to whether
       the candidate is an economist, whether he is a statistician, and whether he has some knowledge of higher, mathematics; (c)         The number of newly elected Fellows shall not exceed 6 (or 10 percent of the
       indication as to the nature of the candidate's original contribution "to economic theory or to such statistical, mathematical,     number of members). Each Fellow shall vote to elect new Fellows by assigning N
       or accounting analyses as have a definite bearing on problems in economic theory" (a requirement of Fellows contained in           marks to the nominee whom he most favors, N - 1 marks to the second most
       the Constitution), including references to the passages in the candidate's listed publications wherein this contribution           favored, and so on, down to 1 mark. Absence of marks or negative marks shall be
       appears. Since the Constitution does not require that a candidate possess all of the qualifications referred to in (b) above,      treated as zero. Then the N nominees receiving the highest totals shall be
       space shall be provided on the form for a statement of other qualifications of the candidate. The form shall in addition           declared elected. In case of a tie for last place, all the nominees so tied shall be
       provide space for a summary of the candidate's scientific and professional curriculum vitae. The council selects the nominees      declared elected if that does not increase the total beyond the lesser of N + 1 and
       through voting. If the number of candidates C is not greater than 12, all such candidates shall be declared nominated. If the      6; otherwise none of the tied candidates shall be declared elected (EMA; 1952,
       number is greater than 12, each member of the committee shall vote to nominate candidates by assigning to the candidate            20(1), p. 125) .
       whom he most favors C marks, to the second most favored C - 1 marks, and so one, down to 1 mark. With N fellows to be
       elected, the 2N candidates receiving the highest totals shall be nominated (EMA; 1952, 20(1), p. 124 ).

1960   Fellows nomination committee (FNC) mentioned for the first time (EMA, 1963 31 (1/2), p. 290 ). The nominating committee
       shall examine the Presentation-of-Candidacy forms submitted and vote as to the number of Fellows to be elected in the
       given year. The number to be elected shall be the median number voted by the committee (or the next smaller number in
       case the median is a fraction). If the number of candidates C is not greater than 12, all such candidates shall be declared
       nominated. If the number is greater than 12, each member of the committee shall vote to nominate candidates by assigning
       to the candidate whom he most favors C marks, to the second most favored C - 1 marks, and so one, down to 1 mark.
       Absence of marks or negative marks shall be treated as zero. With N fellows to be elected, the 2N candidates receiving the
       highest totals shall be nominated.


1975   The nominating committee has been encouraged to propose more names of applied economists. Up to 60 names were
       proposed (EMA, 1976, 44(1), p. 208) .

1978   Information on the nomination form: no more than six bibliographical entries, and a nomination statement not exceeding 10
       lines (EMA , 1978, 46(2), p. 484)




                                                                                                         50
        Table AIII: Timeline of Rules and Procedures regarding Nomination and Elections of Econometric Fellows (Part 2)
                                                           Nomination Stage                                                                                                 Election Stage
1979        The nominating committee for Fellows will conduct a ranking of all nominees in order to determine the candidates to appear
            on the ballot. Longer nominating statements of several pages will be accepted for nominees whose principal scientific writing
                                                                                                                                               New voting system: Each voter will vote "yes" for candidates up to the number
                                                                                                                                               she wants to be elected (the number of "yes" votes can be smaller than this but
            has been in languages other than English. Nominating committee has been asked to propose no more than 40 candidates                not larger), and blanks left for the remaining candidates. Threshold for election:
            (EMA, 1979, 47(1), p.213 and p.220). In contrast to previous years, where the FNC proposed the number of fellows to be             the median vote of the electorate (EMA, 1980, 48(1), p.255) .
            elected, voting fellows were free to chose the number of candidates to be elected (EMA, 1981, 49 (1), p. 232).

1982        If three or more Fellows endorse a candidate, then the candidate's name will automatically appear on the ballot (EMA , 1982,
            50 (1), p. 235).

1983        Call Nomination for Fellows: "Members or Fellows supplying completed nomination forms should also include written
            evidence supporting any endorsements of each nomination by additional Fellows" (EMA , 1982, 50(6), p. 1591)

1984                                                                                                                                           Introduction of an automatic election threshold (instead of a separate vote on the
                                                                                                                                               fellow-number to be elected): newly, a candidate is elected if his/her number of
                                                                                                                                               approval votes equals at least one-third the number of all eligible ballots received.
                                                                                                                                               Furthermore, a voter may give "double approval" to one candidate (EMA , 1986,
                                                                                                                                               54(1), p. 235).

1989        Number of nominees capped at around 50 and candidates who failed to win in an election are no longer carried over to the
            next year (EMA , 1990, 58 (1), p. 195). The Fellows also approved a recommendation that the nominating committee have
                                                                                                                                               Elimination of "double-yes" vote. Threshold for election lowered to 30% of votes
                                                                                                                                               (EMA , 1990, 58 (1), p. 211).
            the optional right to recommend selected candidates as specially worthy of nomination, and to indicate this
            recommendation on individual nominating statements (EMA , 1990, 58 (1), p. 214).

1994        The FNC should normally nominate at least 10 members itself over and above whatever number of candidates is endorsed by
            three or more Fellows (EMA ; 1994, 62(3), p. 717). Nomination statement was limited to 125 words (EMA , 1993, 61(6), p.

2001        It was agreed that no more than 10 endorsements will be listed on the nomination form (EMA , 2001, 69(3), p. 800).

2006                                                                                                                                           Electronic voting introduced (EMA , 2006, 74 (6), p.1736).

2007                                                                                                                                           Single-click button for candidates who are nominated by the FNC (EMA , 2009,
                                                                                                                                               77(1), p. 328).

2009        Awareness for regional diversity: (1) the ballot should list the candidates by region in reverse order of the number of existing
            Fellows, quoting the number of Fellows in each region and (2) the ballot should remind voters to carefully consider
            candidates outside of North America, and 3) the FNC should normally try to include at least one person from each region in
            the list of candidates (EMA , 2011, 79( 1), p. 314).

2011                                                                                                                                           Single-click buttom disappears but all the candidates from the FNC appear with an
                                                                                                                                               "N" next to their names (EMA , 2013, 81(1), p. 416) .

2016        The FNC is suggested by the chair to nominate at least six women, and at least six members from outside Europe and North
            America (with information from the regional committees; EMA , 2018, 87 (1), 356).
                                                                                                                                               "Rollover Rule": any candidate nominated in one of the previous three elections
                                                                                                                                               receiving at last 20% of the vote in that year will automatically appear on the
                                                                                                                                               ballot (EMA , 2016, 84(1), 379-380). These candidate will be listed as "nominated
                                                                                                                                               by X in year Y" if the last nomination (s)he received was from X in year Y (EMA
                                                                                                                                               2018, 86(1), p.361).

2017         The FNC is instructed by the chair to nominate at least six women, and at least six members from outside Europe and North
             America (with information from the regional committees; EMA , 2018, 87 (1), 356).
Notes: This table builds on documentation found in the EMA issues (mostly reports of the presidents, reports of the secretary and announcements of fellow elections). The year refers to the election year of the fellows. We
observe that in starting in the year 1965, more than 6 fellows got elected - without any documentation on changing rules in the Econometrica issues.




                                                                                                              51
                                                                   TABLE AIV (a)
                                          SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR NOMINEES AND ELECTED FELLOWS, 1990-2005

                                                   Characteristics of Nominated/Elected Fellows in Year of Election
                                                  Nominated                   Elected               Nomin. by Committee    Nominated by Fellow
                                              All   Male Female          All   Male Female           All     Male Female    All  Male Female
                                              (1)    (2)      (3)        (4)     (5)     (6)        (7)       (8)   (9)    (10)   (11)     (12)
Percent Female                               4.93      0      100       4.6      0      100       5.97     0      100      5.19      0      100
Percent Fellows (as of current year)
Current Fellow of AAAS (1933+)                0.13    0.14     0        0.38    0.4      0        0.75    0.79      0        0       0       0
Current Fellow of NAS (1968+)                 0.13    0.14     0        0.38    0.4      0          0      0        0        0       0       0
Current Fellow of AEA (1965+)                   0       0      0          0      0       0          0      0        0        0       0       0
Recipient of Sloan Fellowship (1981+)        10.77   10.37   18.42     20.31   19.68   33.33     16.42   15.87     25      10.11   9.22    26.32
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                 1.90    1.94    1.24      2.10    2.10    2.00      2.11     2.14    1.63     1.74    1.76    1.26
REStud                                       1.08    1.11    0.55      1.33    1.37    0.58      1.13     1.14    0.88     1.08    1.11    0.53
AER                                          0.89    0.92    0.26      1.27    1.33    0.17      1.10     1.17    0.00     0.88    0.91    0.42
QJE                                          0.61    0.62    0.42      0.96    0.98    0.42      0.76     0.79    0.38     0.60    0.61    0.53
JPE                                          0.72    0.73    0.50      1.06    1.08    0.58      0.84     0.87    0.38     0.71    0.72    0.53
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                 47.76   48.80   27.68    66.61    67.98   38.17     49.56   50.40   36.25     43.58   43.97   36.42
REStud                                       15.41   15.92   5.45     21.42    22.01   9.25      15.66   15.59   16.75     15.29   16.03   1.79
AER                                          28.51   29.47   10.11    38.91    40.69   1.92      44.17   46.98   0.00      29.78   30.73   12.42
QJE                                          15.50   16.02   5.47     24.46    25.53   2.25      31.19   33.10   1.25      13.75   13.98   9.47
JPE                                          21.49   22.22   7.47     33.17    34.39   7.92      24.72   25.84   7.00      19.42   20.00   8.79
Cum. publ. in general interest journals
JEP+JEL                                      0.19    0.20    0.13      0.30    0.31    0.08      0.28     0.29    0.00     0.23    0.23    0.21
AEA Papers&Proceedings                       0.34    0.34    0.34      0.56    0.57    0.25      0.38     0.40    0.13     0.33    0.31    0.53
JEEA                                         0.03    0.03    0.00      0.05    0.06    0.00      0.04     0.04    0.00     0.04    0.04    0.00
EJ                                           0.45    0.45    0.32      0.48    0.50    0.00      0.34     0.34    0.38     0.46    0.47    0.32
REStat                                       0.37    0.38    0.24      0.41    0.43    0.00      0.31     0.32    0.25     0.38    0.39    0.11
Economica+IER                                1.02    1.04    0.53      0.96    0.99    0.33      0.63     0.66    0.25     0.96    0.98    0.68
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)                3.02    3.03    2.82      2.96    2.90    4.17      4.05     4.10    3.38     3.02    3.04    2.74
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                  1.99    2.07    0.45      1.38    1.45    0.08      1.37     1.41    0.75     2.17    2.27    0.42
Micro (AEJMicro)                             0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
Macro (AEJMacro+JME)                         0.42    0.44    0.21      0.46    0.48    0.00      0.67     0.69    0.38     0.42    0.44    0.00
AEJApplied                                   0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
Quantitative Economics (QE)                  0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00    0.00
Development (JDE)                            0.13    0.12    0.21      0.15    0.15    0.17      0.09     0.10    0.00     0.12    0.12    0.21
Finance (JF)                                 0.23    0.21    0.45      0.25    0.25    0.17      0.15     0.14    0.25     0.22    0.23    0.00
Health (JHE)                                 0.02    0.02    0.05      0.01    0.01    0.00      0.01     0.01    0.00     0.02    0.02    0.11
History (JEH)                                0.02    0.02    0.11      0.03    0.02    0.25      0.02     0.02    0.00     0.01    0.01    0.00
International (JIE)                          0.21    0.22    0.05      0.32    0.33    0.08      0.14     0.15    0.00     0.20    0.20    0.11
Industrial Organization (RAND)               0.38    0.38    0.37      0.55    0.55    0.50      0.46     0.48    0.13     0.40    0.39    0.58
Labor (JoLE)                                 0.16    0.15    0.21      0.24    0.24    0.17      0.13     0.14    0.00     0.20    0.20    0.16
Public (JPubE+AEJPolicy)                     0.41    0.42    0.21      0.52    0.54    0.08      0.30     0.32    0.00     0.47    0.48    0.26
Number of years since first publication      15.52   15.61   13.79    14.54    14.59   13.58     15.63   15.75   13.75     15.60   15.73   13.32
Number of Year-Author Observations            771     733     38       261      249     12        134     126      8        366     347     19




                                                                         52
                                                                                 TABLE AIV (b)
                                                        SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR NOMINEES AND ELECTED FELLOWS, 2006-2019

                                                                     Characteristics of Nominated/Elected Fellows in Year of Election
                                                                    Nominated                   Elected               Nomin. by Committee                                                  Nominated by Fellow
                                                                All   Male Female          All   Male Female           All     Male Female                                                  All  Male Female
                                                                (1)    (2)      (3)        (4)     (5)     (6)        (7)       (8)   (9)                                                  (10)   (11)     (12)
Percent Female                                                10.23           0          100           13.97           0          100           16.81           0          100            8.28            0          100
Percent Fellows (as of current year)
Current Fellow of AAAS (1933+)                                 2.26         1.75         6.73           9.17         7.11        21.88           4.31         3.11        10.26           1.66         1.39         4.62
Current Fellow of NAS (1968+)                                  0.29         0.33           0            0.87         1.02           0            0.43         0.52          0             0.25         0.28           0
Current Fellow of AEA (1965+)                                  0.29         0.11         1.92           0.87         0.51         3.13           0.43           0          2.56           0.25         0.14         1.54
Recipient of Sloan Fellowship (1981+)                         19.76         18.4        31.73          27.51        25.38        40.63          22.41        19.69         35.9          18.98        18.06        29.23
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                  1.86         1.96         0.98           1.90         2.05         1.03            1.74         1.93         0.82           1.90         1.97         1.08
REStud                                                        0.89         0.93         0.54           0.99         1.05         0.63            0.78         0.85         0.41           0.93         0.96         0.62
AER                                                           1.39         1.35         1.72           1.61         1.59         1.72            1.38         1.33         1.64           1.39         1.36         1.77
QJE                                                           0.76         0.70         1.30           1.19         1.06         2.00            0.94         0.85         1.33           0.71         0.66         1.28
JPE                                                           0.79         0.81         0.59           0.90         0.95         0.59            0.87         0.95         0.44           0.77         0.78         0.68
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                115.32 120.08 73.51                       119.15 118.86 120.94                      95.00 108.03 30.49                      121.32 123.31 99.32
REStud                                                       38.04 38.05 37.97                         44.27 40.32 68.53                        28.88 30.47 21.03                        40.75 40.09 48.14
AER                                                         129.62 127.24 150.48                      118.48 112.65 154.38                     134.07 137.34 117.90                     128.30 124.53 170.03
QJE                                                          94.56 83.65 190.42                       145.51 117.41 318.53                     129.21 105.87 244.69                      84.33 77.69 157.86
JPE                                                          63.96 64.97 55.09                         77.73 80.15 62.88                        65.84 70.35 43.51                        63.40 63.53 62.03
Cum. publ. in general interest journals
JEP+JEL                                                       0.36         0.33         0.65           0.57         0.52         0.84            0.38         0.35         0.56           0.36         0.32         0.71
AEA Papers&Proceedings                                        0.82         0.76         1.30           1.24         1.10         2.16            0.97         0.88         1.44           0.77         0.73         1.22
JEEA                                                          0.44         0.42         0.57           0.57         0.54         0.75            0.47         0.39         0.90           0.43         0.43         0.37
EJ                                                            0.53         0.53         0.47           0.54         0.49         0.84            0.34         0.31         0.51           0.58         0.59         0.45
REStat                                                        0.45         0.44         0.54           0.46         0.42         0.72            0.38         0.39         0.31           0.47         0.46         0.68
Economica+IER                                                 0.74         0.77         0.49           0.69         0.70         0.66            0.61         0.60         0.64           0.78         0.82         0.40
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)                                 3.68         3.98         1.03           2.99         3.37         0.66            2.98         3.47         0.56           3.88         4.11         1.31
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                   2.10         2.16         1.57           1.45         1.41         1.66            1.35         1.38         1.21           2.32         2.37         1.78
Micro (AEJMicro)                                              0.15         0.15         0.18           0.12         0.11         0.19            0.06         0.08         0.00           0.18         0.17         0.29
Macro (AEJMacro+JME)                                          0.48         0.48         0.50           0.64         0.64         0.66            0.66         0.73         0.36           0.43         0.41         0.58
AEJApplied                                                    0.11         0.09         0.25           0.17         0.13         0.38            0.23         0.18         0.46           0.07         0.07         0.12
Quantitative Economics (QE)                                   0.05         0.04         0.13           0.07         0.06         0.13            0.08         0.07         0.13           0.04         0.03         0.12
Development (JDE)                                             0.21         0.20         0.32           0.22         0.21         0.25            0.33         0.30         0.51           0.17         0.17         0.20
Finance (JF)                                                  0.25         0.25         0.26           0.27         0.28         0.19            0.19         0.18         0.23           0.27         0.27         0.28
Health (JHE)                                                  0.09         0.09         0.13           0.14         0.10         0.41            0.07         0.09         0.00           0.10         0.09         0.20
History (JEH)                                                 0.03         0.03         0.02           0.05         0.05         0.06            0.01         0.02         0.00           0.03         0.03         0.03
International (JIE)                                           0.22         0.23         0.15           0.25         0.24         0.31            0.33         0.34         0.28           0.19         0.20         0.08
Industrial Organization (RAND)                                0.41         0.43         0.20           0.48         0.49         0.38            0.29         0.28         0.31           0.44         0.47         0.14
Labor (JoLE)                                                  0.21         0.22         0.16           0.19         0.18         0.28            0.13         0.12         0.18           0.24         0.24         0.15
Public (JPubE+AEJPolicy)                                      0.54         0.48         1.07           0.76         0.67         1.28            0.69         0.57         1.31           0.50         0.46         0.92
Number of years since first publication                      19.26        19.59        16.36           18.37       18.60        16.97           17.41        17.68        16.08          19.80        20.10        16.52
Number of Year-Author Observations                           1,017         913          104             229         197          32              232          193          39             785          720          65
Notes : Table presents characteristics of economists who were nominated (Columns 1-3), elected (Columns 4-6), and nominated by different sources (Columns 7-12) as Fellows of the Econometric Society, as of the year of their
nomination/election. We do not have information on the source of nomination for the year 2003. The percent with unknown gender is 0 in these samples. See notes to Table I.




                                                                                                            53
                                                                    TABLE AV
                                                      PREDICTORS OF SELECTION AS ES FELLOWS
                                                                           Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                                         Econometric Society
                                                       1933-79                                  1980-99                                    2000-19
                                              (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)                   (5)                 (6)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
  Female × (pre-1980)                       -1.972               -1.457
                                            (0.733)              (0.606)
  Female × (1980-89)                                                                  -0.062               0.628
                                                                                      (0.523)             (0.473)
  Female × (1990-99)                                                                   0.048               0.028
                                                                                      (0.472)             (0.483)
  Female × (2000-09)                                                                                                              0.408               0.544
                                                                                                                                 (0.320)             (0.341)
  Female × (2010-19)                                                                                                              1.127               0.932
                                                                                                                                 (0.227)             (0.239)
Cum. publ. and cites in top-5 journals
  # Papers in Econometrica                   0.570                0.259                0.384               0.236                  0.693               0.317
                                            (0.101)              (0.177)              (0.064)             (0.076)                (0.077)             (0.119)
  Asinh citations in Econometrica            0.491                0.026                0.483               0.110                  0.255              -0.090
                                            (0.084)              (0.094)              (0.053)             (0.086)                (0.051)             (0.070)

  # Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies          0.400               -0.382                0.060              -0.054                  0.278               0.311
                                            (0.113)              (0.242)              (0.108)             (0.180)                (0.107)             (0.178)
  Asinh citations in REStud                  0.196                0.007                0.172               0.032                  0.120              -0.000
                                            (0.133)              (0.104)              (0.078)             (0.077)                (0.062)             (0.072)
  # Papers in Am. Econ. Review              -0.149                0.022                0.056               0.115                  0.061               0.042
                                            (0.096)              (0.161)              (0.106)             (0.134)                (0.091)             (0.129)
  Asinh citations in AER                     0.175                0.060                0.011              -0.083                  0.154              -0.047
                                            (0.109)              (0.102)              (0.070)             (0.081)                (0.052)             (0.064)
  # Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.         -0.013               -0.063                0.156               0.053                  0.255               0.225
                                            (0.049)              (0.167)              (0.139)             (0.182)                (0.110)             (0.118)
  Asinh citations in QJE                     0.302                0.133                0.108               0.059                  0.015               0.015
                                            (0.101)              (0.113)              (0.084)             (0.093)                (0.060)             (0.088)
  # Papers in J. of Political Economy       -0.017               -0.000               -0.172              -0.179                  0.090              -0.029
                                            (0.068)              (0.082)              (0.098)             (0.120)                (0.107)             (0.169)
  Asinh citations in JPE                     0.240                0.012                0.265               0.157                  0.162               0.047
                                            (0.106)              (0.110)              (0.062)             (0.085)                (0.051)             (0.074)

Cumulative Publications in other Journals
  Papers in AEA/AER P&P                      0.051                0.226                0.389               0.424                  0.161               0.099
                                            (0.078)              (0.076)              (0.068)             (0.068)                (0.070)             (0.058)
  Papers in Economic Theory                 0.000                0.000                 0.112               0.068                  0.022              -0.042
                                              (.)                  (.)                (0.211)             (0.187)                (0.089)             (0.075)
  Papers in Econometric Theory              0.000                0.000                 0.228               0.236                  0.145               0.132
                                              (.)                  (.)                (0.075)             (0.079)                (0.050)             (0.054)
  Papers in J. of Econometrics               0.192                0.166                0.188               0.108                  0.102               0.054
                                            (0.307)              (0.237)              (0.051)             (0.050)                (0.034)             (0.037)
  Papers in J. of Econ. Theory               0.609                0.518                0.180               0.160                  0.150               0.103
                                            (0.149)              (0.100)              (0.067)             (0.054)                (0.051)             (0.043)
  Papers in J. of Math. Econ.                0.771                0.490                0.269               0.195                 -0.052               0.082
                                            (0.199)              (0.213)              (0.105)             (0.097)                (0.130)             (0.116)
  Papers in Rand J. of Econ.                 0.522                0.412                0.242               0.123                  0.079               0.105
                                            (0.365)              (0.291)              (0.072)             (0.066)                (0.066)             (0.049)
  Papers in Int. J. of Game Theory          -0.193               -0.134                0.221               0.223                  0.104               0.156
                                            (0.443)              (0.393)              (0.077)             (0.105)                (0.143)             (0.139)
  Papers in AEJ: Applied Econ.              0.000                0.000                 0.000               0.000                  0.630               0.391
                                              (.)                  (.)                   (.)                 (.)                 (0.189)             (0.143)
  Papers in AEJ: Econ. Policy               0.000                0.000                 0.000               0.000                 -0.117              -0.201
                                              (.)                  (.)                   (.)                 (.)                 (0.295)             (0.238)
  Papers in AEJ: Micro                      0.000                0.000                 0.000               0.000                 -0.077              -0.096
                                              (.)                  (.)                   (.)                 (.)                 (0.348)             (0.245)
  Papers in AEJ: Macro                      0.000                0.000                 0.000               0.000                  0.714               0.244
                                              (.)                  (.)                   (.)                 (.)                 (0.182)             (0.172)
  Papers in J. of Econ. Perspectives        0.000                0.000                 0.179               0.044                 -0.018               0.068
                                              (.)                  (.)                (0.083)             (0.091)                (0.207)             (0.137)
  Papers in J. of Econ. Literature          -0.762                0.053               -0.154               0.106                 -0.085               0.093
                                            (0.426)              (0.377)              (0.327)             (0.226)                (0.255)             (0.209)
  Papers in Games and Econ. Behavior        0.000                0.000                 0.310               0.228                  0.053               0.014
                                              (.)                  (.)                (0.132)             (0.119)                (0.064)             (0.056)
  Papers in Int. Econ. Review                0.063                0.080                0.021               0.050                 -0.229              -0.064
                                            (0.134)              (0.098)              (0.069)             (0.058)                (0.080)             (0.063)
  Papers in Review of Econ. and Stat.        0.045                0.089               -0.472              -0.280                 -0.232              -0.099
                                            (0.055)              (0.052)              (0.110)             (0.083)                (0.100)             (0.081)
  Papers in Economica                        0.005               -0.029               -0.037              -0.013                 -0.110               0.028
                                            (0.073)              (0.071)              (0.100)             (0.101)                (0.223)             (0.203)
  Papers in Economic J.                      0.018                0.099                0.121               0.177                 -0.023               0.007
                                            (0.041)              (0.028)              (0.052)             (0.048)                (0.087)             (0.067)
  Papers in J. of Development Econ.          1.225                1.058               -0.006              -0.037                 -0.039               0.006
                                            (0.323)              (0.277)              (0.152)             (0.134)                (0.157)             (0.133)
  Papers in J. of European Econ. Assoc      0.000                0.000                 0.000               0.000                  0.546               0.342
                                              (.)                  (.)                   (.)                 (.)                 (0.091)             (0.080)
  Papers in J. of Finance                   -0.299               -0.242                0.013               0.037                 -0.134              -0.107
                                            (0.232)              (0.183)              (0.082)             (0.077)                (0.097)             (0.078)
  Papers in J. of Health Econ.              0.000                0.000                -0.625              -0.514                 -0.089              -0.090
                                              (.)                  (.)                (0.471)             (0.516)                (0.112)             (0.105)
  Papers in J. of Inter. Econ.               0.255                0.327                0.200               0.118                  0.097               0.052
                                            (0.394)              (0.285)              (0.083)             (0.078)                (0.077)             (0.084)
  Papers in J. of Monetary Econ.             0.639                0.442                0.146               0.066                  0.072               0.074
                                            (0.329)              (0.298)              (0.080)             (0.066)                (0.069)             (0.056)
NOTE: table continues




                                                                           54
                                                                         PREDICTORS OF SELECTION AS ES FELLOWS -- CONTINUED

                                                                                                                Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                                                                                    Econometric Society
                                                                                      1933-79                                                1980-99                                                 2000-19
                                                                            (1)                         (2)                        (3)                         (4)                         (5)                         (6)


   Papers in J. of Labor Econ.                                            0.000                       0.000                      0.669                       0.567                      -0.124                      -0.018
                                                                            (.)                         (.)                     (0.170)                     (0.101)                     (0.150)                     (0.109)
   Papers in J. of Public Econ.                                          -0.091                      0.043                       0.154                       0.131                       0.001                      -0.013
                                                                         (0.459)                    (0.245)                     (0.082)                     (0.065)                     (0.062)                     (0.054)
   Papers in J. of Econ. History                                         -0.269                     -0.072                       0.061                       0.146                       0.012                       0.006
                                                                         (0.281)                    (0.286)                     (0.126)                     (0.120)                     (0.166)                     (0.186)
   Papers in J. of Am. Stat. Assoc.                                       0.129                      0.181                      -0.058                       0.060                      -0.209                      -0.030
                                                                         (0.032)                    (0.034)                     (0.088)                     (0.059)                     (0.133)                     (0.078)
   Papers in Quantitative Economics.                                      0.000                       0.000                      0.000                       0.000                       1.179                       0.596
                                                                            (.)                         (.)                        (.)                         (.)                      (0.201)                     (0.216)
   Papers in Theoretical Economics.                                       0.000                       0.000                      0.000                       0.000                       0.259                       0.002
                                                                            (.)                         (.)                        (.)                         (.)                      (0.210)                     (0.164)
Levels of Top 5s
  1 Top 5                                                                                           -0.075                                                   1.960                                                   1.213
                                                                                                    (0.274)                                                 (0.593)                                                 (0.681)
   2 Top 5s                                                                                          0.605                                                   3.340                                                   2.889
                                                                                                    (0.336)                                                 (0.589)                                                 (0.649)
   3 Top 5s                                                                                          0.814                                                   3.857                                                   3.079
                                                                                                    (0.398)                                                 (0.612)                                                 (0.674)
   4 Top 5s                                                                                          1.035                                                   3.845                                                   3.721
                                                                                                    (0.469)                                                 (0.655)                                                 (0.709)
   5 Top 5s                                                                                          1.151                                                   4.162                                                   3.792
                                                                                                    (0.530)                                                 (0.677)                                                 (0.724)
   6 Top 5s                                                                                          1.608                                                   4.302                                                   3.863
                                                                                                    (0.573)                                                 (0.712)                                                 (0.770)
   7 or More Top 5s                                                                                  0.838                                                   4.104                                                   4.275
                                                                                                    (0.712)                                                 (0.784)                                                 (0.815)
   1 Cumulative Econometricas                                                                        1.237                                                   0.471                                                   1.073
                                                                                                    (0.248)                                                 (0.299)                                                 (0.329)
   2 Cumulative Econometricas                                                                        1.203                                                   0.856                                                   1.761
                                                                                                    (0.419)                                                 (0.368)                                                 (0.413)
   3+ Cumulative Econometricas                                                                       0.972                                                   0.884                                                   1.586
                                                                                                    (0.680)                                                 (0.474)                                                 (0.567)
   1 Cumulative REStuds                                                                              0.755                                                   0.492                                                  -0.146
                                                                                                    (0.307)                                                 (0.303)                                                 (0.329)
   2 Cumulative REStuds                                                                              1.858                                                   0.500                                                  -0.198
                                                                                                    (0.542)                                                 (0.452)                                                 (0.491)
   3+ Cumulative REStuds                                                                             2.841                                                   0.575                                                  -0.429
                                                                                                    (0.890)                                                 (0.710)                                                 (0.754)
   1 Cumulative AER                                                                                 -0.603                                                  -0.002                                                   0.027
                                                                                                    (0.279)                                                 (0.292)                                                 (0.301)
   2 Cumulative AERs                                                                                -0.945                                                  -0.635                                                   0.105
                                                                                                    (0.499)                                                 (0.439)                                                 (0.447)
   3+ Cumulative AERs                                                                               -1.034                                                  -0.273                                                   0.157
                                                                                                    (0.718)                                                 (0.619)                                                 (0.616)
   1 Cumulative QJE                                                                                  0.006                                                  -0.284                                                  -0.491
                                                                                                    (0.275)                                                 (0.325)                                                 (0.373)
   2 Cumulative QJEs                                                                                 0.047                                                   0.298                                                  -0.966
                                                                                                    (0.494)                                                 (0.479)                                                 (0.543)
   3+ Cumulative QJEs                                                                               -0.029                                                   0.121                                                  -1.022
                                                                                                    (0.792)                                                 (0.731)                                                 (0.677)
   1 Cumulative JPE                                                                                 -0.297                                                  -0.478                                                   0.048
                                                                                                    (0.231)                                                 (0.337)                                                 (0.352)
   2 Cumulative JPEs                                                                                -0.395                                                  -0.094                                                   0.080
                                                                                                    (0.383)                                                 (0.456)                                                 (0.550)
   3+ Cumulative JPEs                                                                               -0.023                                                   0.125                                                   0.647
                                                                                                    (0.535)                                                 (0.639)                                                 (0.786)
Levels of Top 5 Citations (Omitted: < 50 Percentile)
  50-70 Percentile                                                                                   0.342                                                  -0.267                                                   1.118
                                                                                                    (0.295)                                                 (0.291)                                                 (0.367)
   70-80 Percentile                                                                                  0.735                                                   0.387                                                   1.657
                                                                                                    (0.348)                                                 (0.326)                                                 (0.389)
   80-90 Percentile                                                                                  1.235                                                   0.696                                                   1.833
                                                                                                    (0.377)                                                 (0.339)                                                 (0.426)
   90-95 Percentile                                                                                  1.616                                                   0.793                                                   1.948
                                                                                                    (0.447)                                                 (0.400)                                                 (0.479)
   95-97.5 Percentile                                                                                1.929                                                   1.209                                                   2.243
                                                                                                    (0.516)                                                 (0.454)                                                 (0.536)
   97.5-99 Percentile                                                                                2.408                                                   1.523                                                   2.425
                                                                                                    (0.549)                                                 (0.530)                                                 (0.582)
   99+ Percentile                                                                                    2.677                                                   1.932                                                   1.951
                                                                                                    (0.610)                                                 (0.585)                                                 (0.678)
Years since first publication (Omitted: 0-9 Years)
  10-19                                                                                             -0.760                                                  -0.814                                                   0.019
                                                                                                    (0.142)                                                 (0.159)                                                 (0.221)
   20-29                                                                                            -1.338                                                  -1.998                                                  -0.854
                                                                                                    (0.251)                                                 (0.257)                                                 (0.265)
   30+                                                                                              -2.451                                                  -3.513                                                  -2.058
                                                                                                    (0.467)                                                 (0.678)                                                 (0.326)

N                                                                       112,369                     112,369                     188,966                    188,966                     355,238                     355,238
Pseudo R-squared                                                         0.238                       0.290                       0.345                      0.407                       0.361                       0.424
Notes : Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. See notes to Table IV. The table entries are coefficients from the models summarized in columns 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 9 of that Table. All models include year fixed effects.
Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                               55
                                                                                 TABLE AVI
                                                   ROBUSTNESS TABLE FOR SELECTION AS FELLOWS, PARSIMONIOUS SPECIFICATION
                                                                                                                 Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                                (1)                        (2)                         (3)                       (4)                          (5)                       (6)
Authors' Gender (Omitted: Male Author)
 Female × (pre-1980)                                                          -1.457                   -1.648
                                                                             (0.606)                   (0.585)
  Female × (1980-89)                                                                                                                 0.628                     0.564
                                                                                                                                    (0.473)                   (0.463)
  Female × (1990-99)                                                                                                                 0.028                     0.101
                                                                                                                                    (0.483)                   (0.467)
  Female × (2000-09)                                                                                                                                                                       0.544                     0.568
                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.341)                   (0.329)
  Female × (2010-19)                                                                                                                                                                       0.932                     0.956
                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.239)                   (0.204)
  Full set of Controls                                                          Yes                        No                          Yes                       No                         Yes                       No

  Parsimonious set of controls                                                  No                        Yes                          No                        Yes                          No                       Yes
  (Top 5 Publications and Top-5 Citations)
N                                                                           112,369                   112,369                      188,966                   188,966                      355,238                   355,238
Pseudo R-squared                                                              0.290                     0.161                        0.407                     0.272                        0.424                     0.323
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients -- see note to Table VI. Models are estimated over all observations in the sample of actively-publishing
economists eligible for selection as a Fellow. Columns 1, 3, and 5 include the full set of controls as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV. Columns 2, 4, and 6 contain a parsimonious specification including only indicators for 1, 2,
3,,... 7+ top 5, number of top-5s, and citations percentiles. All models include year fixed effects. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                 56
                                                                                                   TABLE AVII
                                                              ELECTION AS FELLOW, GENDER DIFFERENCES BY PERCENTILE OF THE CITATION-PUBLICATION INDEX
                                                                                                                      Logit Regression for Selection as Econometric Society Fellow in Year t
                                                                                          2000-2019 Pooled                                            2000-2009                2010-2019                  2000-2019 Pooled (Pre-specified Specification)
                                                                            (1)                       (2)                      (3)                          (4)                      (5)                          (6)                      (7)                      (8)
Predicted log odds of index                                               0.996                     0.994                    0.895                       1.076                     0.928                       1.034                     0.996                    0.571
(Index from full set of controls)                                        (0.029)                   (0.032)                  (0.073)                     (0.047)                   (0.039)                     (0.026)                   (0.026)                  (0.075)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
Female                                                                    0.689                                                                                                                                0.827
                                                                         (0.191)                                                                                                                              (0.176)
Female × Levels of Percentiles of Index
Female × (0-90 Percentile of Index)                                                                -0.733                   -0.664                        0.000                   -0.599                                                -0.456                    0.704
                                                                                                   (1.001)                  (1.051)                         (.)                   (1.002)                                               (0.419)                  (0.493)
Female × (90-95 Percentile of Index)                                                                1.195                    0.995                        1.309                    0.811                                                -0.552                    -0.483
                                                                                                   (0.428)                  (0.476)                     (0.736)                   (0.598)                                               (1.001)                  (1.036)
Female × (95-97.5 Percentile of Index)                                                              0.853                    1.066                       0.787                     0.924                                                 1.536                    1.143
                                                                                                   (0.414)                  (0.459)                     (0.725)                   (0.508)                                               (0.385)                  (0.424)
Female × (97.5-99 Percentile of Index)                                                              1.121                    1.230                       0.435                     1.203                                                 1.437                    0.856
                                                                                                   (0.314)                  (0.342)                     (0.696)                   (0.392)                                               (0.367)                  (0.385)
Female × (99+ Percentile of Index)                                                                  0.443                    0.391                       0.427                     0.684                                                 1.567                    1.353
                                                                                                   (0.301)                  (0.292)                     (0.544)                   (0.365)                                               (0.306)                  (0.274)
Levels of Percentiles of Index
90-95 Percentile                                                                                                             0.560                                                                                                                                1.793
                                                                                                                            (0.464)                                                                                                                              (0.418)
95-97.5 Percentile                                                                                                           0.271                                                                                                                                2.663
                                                                                                                            (0.504)                                                                                                                              (0.398)
97.5-99 Percentile                                                                                                           0.480                                                                                                                                3.311
                                                                                                                            (0.533)                                                                                                                              (0.422)
99+ Percentile                                                                                                               0.840                                                                                                                                3.689
                                                                                                                            (0.632)                                                                                                                              (0.538)
Index formed using full set of controls,                                    Yes                      Yes                      Yes                          Yes                       Yes                          No                       No                      No
 estimated only on males
Index formed using shortened set of contro                                  No                        No                       No                           No                       No                          Yes                      Yes                       Yes
 estimated only on males
N                                                                       355,238                   355,238                  355,238                      125,934                  207,656                      355,238                  355,238                  355,238
Pseudo R-squared                                                         0.420                     0.422                    0.423                        0.441                    0.398                        0.357                    0.363                    0.380
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients. The index is obtained from a full regression as in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV run only on males (and thus excluding the female coefficient). We then use this
index to form percentiles of this publication-citation index by placing people in the 0-90th percentile, 90-95th percentile, 95-97.5, 97.5-99, and 99th percentile. The regression in Columns 1 and 6 include just the index and the female coefficient dummy. The regressions in
Columns 2, 4, 5, and 7 include also the female indicator interact with the various percentile indicators, so as to estimate the impact by gender for the various percentiles. Columns 3 and 8 include also the percentiles themselves as a test of correct specification, as the
percentile indicators should not be significant if the index is well specified. This is the case in Column 3 using the full set of controls, but not in Column 8 which uses the shorter set of controls used in Columns 2, 5, and 8 of Table IV. Models are estimated over all
observations in the sample of actively-publishing economists eligible for selection as a Fellow. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.


                                                                                                                                       57
                                               TABLE AVIII: Annual Nomination and Election Success Data, 1990-2019
                  Female Share                New Fellows          All Nominees     Committee Nominees Fellow Nominees         Election Success Rate of Nominees
        Active                                        Share                Share                 Share              Share                    Female by Female by
       Scholars   w/ ECA/RES     3+ Top 5   Number Female       Number Female        Number Female          Number Female   Male Female Committee           Fellows

1990    0.087        0.047        0.021       22      0.000        42     0.024                                             0.537   0.000
1991    0.091        0.048        0.022       23      0.087        49     0.061                                             0.457   0.667
1992    0.095        0.050        0.023       15      0.000        39     0.026                                             0.395   0.000
1993    0.099        0.050        0.028       18      0.000        47     0.043                                             0.400   0.000
1994    0.101        0.052        0.032       18      0.000        42     0.000                                             0.429     --
1995    0.106        0.050        0.031       16      0.063        52     0.038       10      0.000         42     0.048    0.300   0.500                  0.500
1996    0.110        0.055        0.033       16      0.000        50     0.060       12      0.083         38     0.053    0.340   0.000     0.000        0.000
1997    0.114        0.057        0.034       14      0.071        51     0.059       10      0.100         41     0.049    0.271   0.333     1.000        0.000
1998    0.122        0.059        0.037       16      0.063        39     0.077       9       0.111         30     0.067    0.417   0.333     1.000        0.000
1999    0.127        0.061        0.039       13      0.000        48     0.021       13      0.000         35     0.029    0.277   0.000                  0.000
2000    0.131        0.064        0.041       14      0.071        59     0.068       11      0.091         48     0.063    0.236   0.250     0.000        0.333
2001    0.136        0.067        0.046       10      0.100        55     0.073       12      0.083         43     0.070    0.176   0.250     0.000        0.333
2002    0.139        0.067        0.048       17      0.059        45     0.022       19      0.000         26     0.038    0.364   1.000                  1.000
2003    0.144        0.071        0.049       20      0.050        52     0.077       0                     0               0.396   0.250
2004    0.151        0.073        0.050       15      0.200        51     0.098       24      0.125         27     0.074    0.261   0.600     0.333        1.000
2005    0.156        0.073        0.053       14      0.000        50     0.020       14      0.000         36     0.028    0.286   0.000                  0.000
2006    0.160        0.077        0.057       5       0.000        55     0.055       13      0.077         42     0.048    0.096   0.000     0.000        0.000
2007    0.165        0.081        0.061       16      0.063        50     0.040       10      0.100         40     0.025    0.313   0.500     1.000        0.000
2008    0.171        0.088        0.063       15      0.067        61     0.098       18      0.111         43     0.093    0.255   0.167     0.500        0.000
2009    0.177        0.092        0.071       21      0.095        56     0.036       15      0.000         41     0.049    0.352   1.000                  1.000
2010    0.181        0.098        0.075       16      0.063        54     0.056       15      0.067         39     0.051    0.294   0.333     1.000        0.000
2011    0.184        0.102        0.079       16      0.000        74     0.054       11      0.000         63     0.063    0.229   0.000                  0.000
2012    0.190        0.103        0.082       22      0.182        77     0.130       18      0.222         59     0.102    0.269   0.400     0.500        0.333
2013    0.196        0.107        0.082       19      0.211        60     0.150       13      0.308         47     0.106    0.294   0.444     0.750        0.200
2014    0.200        0.112        0.083       14      0.143        50     0.080       10      0.300         40     0.025    0.261   0.500     0.667        0.000
2015    0.204        0.118        0.085       13      0.077        69     0.087       10      0.000         59     0.102    0.190   0.167                  0.167
2016    0.208        0.118        0.090       16      0.313        74     0.149       18      0.444         56     0.054    0.175   0.455     0.500        0.333
2017    0.211        0.121        0.087       20      0.200        78     0.090       13      0.231         65     0.062    0.225   0.571     0.667        0.500
2018    0.216        0.123        0.088       22      0.182       103     0.146       21      0.238         82     0.122    0.205   0.267     0.400        0.200
2019    0.219        0.128        0.092       14      0.214       156     0.141       47      0.149        109     0.138    0.082   0.136     0.429        0.000




                                                                              58
                                                                  TABLE AIX
                                                      NOMINATION AND ELECTION AS FELLOW
                                                                    Logit Regression for Selection/Nomination as Econometric Society
                                                                                              Fellow in Year t
                                                                   Selection as             Nomination as              Nomination by               Nomination by
                                                                      Fellow                   Fellow                   Committee                    Fellows
                                                                         (1)                         (2)                        (3)                         (4)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
Female × (1995-2005, except 2003)                                      0.873                       0.482                      0.597                       0.412
                                                                      (0.352)                     (0.260)                    (0.387)                     (0.289)
Female × (2006-11)                                                    -0.309                      -0.112                     -0.053                      -0.131
                                                                      (0.489)                     (0.259)                    (0.551)                     (0.312)
Female × (2012-19)                                                     1.160                       0.605                      1.219                       0.290
                                                                      (0.257)                     (0.228)                    (0.252)                     (0.286)
Cum. publ. and citations in top-5 journals
# Papers in Econometrica                                               0.363                       0.322                      0.401                       0.219
                                                                      (0.110)                     (0.105)                    (0.114)                     (0.119)
Asinh citations in Econometrica                                       -0.048                       0.053                      -0.031                      0.084
                                                                      (0.069)                     (0.052)                    (0.075)                     (0.059)

# Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies                                      0.525                       0.124                      0.390                       0.036
                                                                      (0.163)                     (0.146)                    (0.186)                     (0.172)
Asinh citations in REStud                                             -0.044                       0.032                      -0.098                      0.079
                                                                      (0.063)                     (0.049)                    (0.066)                     (0.055)
# Papers in Am. Econ. Review                                          -0.022                       0.067                      -0.131                      0.122
                                                                      (0.121)                     (0.077)                    (0.124)                     (0.079)
Asinh citations in AER                                                 0.005                       0.139                      0.089                       0.152
                                                                      (0.064)                     (0.054)                    (0.078)                     (0.064)
# Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.                                      0.233                       0.109                      0.241                       0.037
                                                                      (0.113)                     (0.103)                    (0.126)                     (0.118)
Asinh citations in QJE                                                -0.020                       0.049                      0.174                       0.008
                                                                      (0.081)                     (0.072)                    (0.117)                     (0.080)
# Papers in J. of Pol. Economy                                        -0.148                      -0.235                      -0.117                     -0.260
                                                                      (0.167)                     (0.146)                    (0.167)                     (0.169)
Asinh citations in JPE                                                 0.016                       0.059                      0.022                       0.076
                                                                      (0.067)                     (0.052)                    (0.077)                     (0.061)
Controls for publications in                                            Yes                         Yes                         Yes                        Yes
general interest/field journals
Controls for levels of                                                   Yes                         Yes                        Yes                        Yes
Top 5 and Top 5 Citations
Controls for years since first publication                               Yes                         Yes                        Yes                        Yes
N                                                                    400,235                     400,235                    400,235                     400,235
Pseudo R-squared                                                       0.433                       0.439                      0.391                       0.418
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients -- see note to Table VI. Models are estimated over all
observations in the sample of actively-publishing economists eligible for nomination/selection as a Fellow. All models include year fixed effects. Economists with unknown
gender are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                  59
                                                          TABLE AX
                                   NOMINATION AND ELECTION TO FELLOWS, ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE

                                                                      Logit Model                            Poisson Model                          Poisson Model
                                                                  Selection as Fellow,                     Number of Votes for                        Number of
                                                                 Cond. on Nomination                           Nominees                             Endorsements
                                                                    (1)          (2)                         (3)        (4)                          (5)      (6)
Authors' gender (Omitted: Male Author)
 Female × (1995-2005, except 2003)                                 0.742                0.869                    --                --              0.001           0.007
                                                                  (0.372)              (0.427)                                                    (0.139)         (0.143)
  Female × (2006-11)                                              -0.395               -0.134               -0.029              0.047              -0.274          -0.256
                                                                  (0.592)              (0.587)              (0.093)            (0.086)            (0.180)         (0.172)
  Female × (2012-19)                                               0.800                1.048                0.149              0.209              0.120           0.121
                                                                  (0.371)              (0.374)              (0.044)            (0.048)            (0.143)         (0.141)
Cumulative pubs. in top-5 journals
 # Papers in Econometrica                                          0.153                0.151                0.047              0.049              -0.014          -0.012
                                                                  (0.151)              (0.156)              (0.022)            (0.021)            (0.061)         (0.060)
  Asinh citation in Econometrica                                  -0.107               -0.126                0.005             -0.002              -0.058          -0.059
                                                                  (0.079)              (0.083)              (0.014)            (0.014)            (0.023)         (0.024)
  # Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies                                0.422                0.476                0.019              0.033              0.061           0.070
                                                                  (0.183)              (0.185)              (0.033)            (0.032)            (0.068)         (0.067)
  Asinh citation in REStud                                        -0.075               -0.100               -0.009             -0.010              0.022           0.021
                                                                  (0.071)              (0.072)              (0.014)            (0.013)            (0.028)         (0.029)
  # Papers in Am. Econ. Review                                    -0.094               -0.073               -0.021             -0.017              -0.029          -0.022
                                                                  (0.148)              (0.163)              (0.022)            (0.023)            (0.037)         (0.036)
  Asinh citation in AER                                           -0.133               -0.166               -0.011             -0.021              0.009           0.006
                                                                  (0.078)              (0.086)              (0.014)            (0.013)            (0.029)         (0.029)
  # Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.                                0.491                0.484                0.091              0.083              0.040           0.035
                                                                  (0.163)              (0.180)              (0.022)            (0.021)            (0.067)         (0.067)
  Asinh citation in QJE                                           -0.009               -0.025               -0.004             -0.012              -0.097          -0.099
                                                                  (0.086)              (0.089)              (0.016)            (0.015)            (0.037)         (0.037)
  # Papers in J. of Pol. Economy                                   0.174                0.199               -0.041             -0.049              -0.065          -0.070
                                                                  (0.211)              (0.228)              (0.049)            (0.051)            (0.073)         (0.074)
  Asinh citation in JPE                                           -0.010               -0.006                0.011              0.017              -0.028          -0.024
                                                                  (0.083)              (0.091)              (0.012)            (0.011)            (0.040)         (0.039)
Controls for Institutional Affiliation                                                    X                                       X                                   X
× 3 Time Periods
N                                                                  1,517                1,517                 1,017             1,017               1,057           1,057
Pseudo R-squared                                                   0.151                0.179                 0.194             0.260               0.129           0.131
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic or Poisson regression coefficients -- see note to Table VI. All models include
controls for publications in general interest/field journals, year fixed effects, and additional control variables obtained from the nomination forms. The models in
Columns 2, 4, and 6 also include controls for institutional affiliation, interacted with indicators for the 3 time periods, as in Table IX. Models are estimated over the set of
individuals nominated as an Econometric Society fellow only. The percent with unknown gender is 0 in the sample.




                                                                                     60
                                               TABLE AXI
                 WORDS PREDICTIVE OF ELECTION AND OF ECONOMIST GENDER, NOMINATION STATEMENTS
 Logit of Election to ES Fellow, Conditional on Nomination                                   Logit of Female Gender, Conditional on Nomination
                      Logit Standard Pseudo R- No. of                                                       Logit Standard Pseudo R- No. of
                      Coeff.    Error    squared Mentions                                                   Coeff.   Error squared Mentions
                       (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)                                                      (5)     (6)      (7)       (8)
 Positive Predictors                                                                        Positive Predictors
 competition          1.374     0.323     0.089      46                                     present         2.187   0.584     0.199      48
 control              1.519     0.376     0.085      23                                     measurement 2.847       0.944     0.196      21
 source               1.335     0.395     0.084      28                                     error           2.280   0.725     0.194      36
 quantitative         1.301     0.501     0.083      28                                     method          1.130   0.387     0.187     237
 influential          0.618     0.235     0.082      144                                    experiment      1.626   0.424     0.187      62
 repeat               0.964     0.277     0.082      46                                     approach        1.247   0.477     0.182     122
 imperfect            1.094     0.422     0.081      29                                     identification 1.501    0.628     0.180      70
 condition            0.813     0.334     0.081      57                                     factor          1.544   0.643     0.180      58
 derive               1.090     0.387     0.081      29                                     parameter       1.704   0.775     0.177      54
 context              0.961     0.349     0.081      37                                     application     0.952   0.446     0.177     181
 efficient            0.831     0.321     0.081      50                                     expect          1.865   0.867     0.176      22
 macroeconomic 0.536            0.225     0.081      137                                    multiple        1.414   0.756     0.176      56
 restriction          0.979     0.385     0.080      32                                     important       0.702   0.305     0.175     390
 public               0.599     0.290     0.080      99                                     experimental 1.118      0.617     0.174      68
 bound                0.961     0.405     0.080      27                                     random          1.672   1.037     0.173      32
 Negative Predictors                                                                        Negative Predictors
 panel              -1.204   0.453                          0.083            66             financial     -1.578 0.677                         0.180            135
 alternative        -1.241   0.524                          0.083            54             highly        -1.675 0.918                         0.172            68
 climate            -2.209   0.899                          0.082            20             foundation    -1.569 0.784                         0.171            76
 test               -0.700   0.310                          0.081            120            matching      -1.324 0.923                         0.171            84
 unique             -1.792   0.839                          0.081            20             society          .        .                        0.170            53
 nonlinear          -1.102   0.460                          0.081            58             dynamic       -0.704 0.481                         0.170            266
 deep               -1.202   0.615                          0.081            45             analyze       -1.064 0.535                         0.170            116
 theoretically      -1.544   0.711                          0.081            28             pioneer       -0.985 0.540                         0.169            118
 history            -1.924   1.143                          0.081            23             rule          -1.831 1.073                         0.169            58
 experimental       -0.852   0.383                          0.080            68             incentive     -1.060 0.718                         0.169            78
 trading            -1.206   0.559                          0.080            38             minimum          .        .                        0.169            21
 set                -0.747   0.359                          0.080            89             hold             .        .                        0.168            27
 evaluation         -1.112   0.502                          0.080            41             agent         -1.024 0.649                         0.168            95
 understand         -1.007   0.538                          0.080            54             government -1.812 1.117                            0.168            36
 change             -0.602   0.309                          0.080            114            form          -1.356 0.746                         0.168            65
 Pseudo R-2 w/o word controls                               0.075                           Pseudo R-2 w/o word controls                       0.161
 Number of Positive Samples                                                  229            Number of Positive Samples                                          105
 Number of Negative Samples                                                  788            Number of Negative Samples                                          912
Notes: The sample used is all 1,017 nominations from 2006 to 2019, as the nominating statements are not available for earlier years. We identify all word lemmas used in at
least 20 nominating statements, resulting in 567 words after dropping stop words (such as "she" and "the"). For each of these 567 words, we run a logit regression of the
relevant dependent variable on an indicator for whether the word is used, as well as controls for cumulative number of publications in each of the top-5 journals, asinh of
cumulative citations in each of the top-5 journals, and year fixed effects. We report the 15 most predictive words, in a positive and negative direction, of the dependent
variable, sorted by pseudo R-squared. Standard errors are clustered by author.




                                                                                   61
                                                                                         TABLE AXII
                                                       EFFECT OF COAUTHORSHIP ON PROBABILITY OF SELECTION AND NOMINATION AS ES FELLOW
                                                                             Logit Regression for Selection/Nomination as Econometric Society Fellow in Year Logit Regression for Selection as
                                                                                                                      t                                          AAAS/NAS Fellow in Year t
                                                                                                            Nomination as Nomination by Nomination by          Selection as     Selection as
                                                                              Selection as Fellow of ES:     Fellow of ES:     Fellow:        Committee:     Fellow of AAAS: Fellow of NAS
                                                                                   (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)
Authors' Gender (Omitted: Male Author)
  Female × (1990-99)                                                               0.376                0.473                     0.864                     0.816                     1.054                       1.344                     0.465
                                                                                  (0.461)              (0.445)                   (0.334)                   (0.448)                   (0.639)                     (0.610)                   (1.658)
  Female × (2000-09)                                                               0.374                0.611                     0.450                     0.300                     0.509                       1.337                     1.821
                                                                                  (0.328)              (0.364)                   (0.284)                   (0.315)                   (0.508)                     (0.414)                   (1.122)
  Female × (2010-19)                                                               0.869                1.105                     0.644                     0.364                     1.061                       1.991                     0.899
                                                                                  (0.220)              (0.285)                   (0.276)                   (0.336)                   (0.269)                     (0.345)                   (1.887)

Measures of Coauthorhip
 All Journals Papers Index                                                         0.976                0.965                     0.998                     1.025                     0.947                       0.966                     0.929
                                                                                  (0.073)              (0.075)                   (0.058)                   (0.058)                   (0.073)                     (0.040)                   (0.076)
  All Journals Papers Index, Single-Authored Papers                                0.082                0.047                    -0.054                    -0.153                     0.088                       0.098                     0.067
                                                                                  (0.123)              (0.125)                   (0.097)                   (0.110)                   (0.130)                     (0.066)                   (0.079)
  Remaining Index                                                                  1.003                1.000                     0.989                     0.987                     0.992                       0.983                     0.970
                                                                                  (0.050)              (0.054)                   (0.043)                   (0.047)                   (0.053)                     (0.061)                   (0.105)
Measures of Coauthorship interacted with Female
 All Journals Papers Index*Female                                                                       0.230                     0.251                     0.207                     0.281                       0.000                     0.315
                                                                                                       (0.284)                   (0.196)                   (0.213)                   (0.178)                     (0.101)                   (0.213)
  All Journals Papers Index, Single-Authored Papers                                                     1.032                     0.007                    -0.146                    -0.262                       0.095                     0.380
  * Female                                                                                             (0.490)                   (0.348)                   (0.358)                   (0.374)                     (0.195)                   (0.231)
  Remaining Index*Female                                                                                -0.022                    0.067                     0.127                     0.048                       0.171                     0.026
                                                                                                       (0.172)                   (0.121)                   (0.139)                   (0.129)                     (0.157)                   (0.484)

N                                                                                465,085              465,085                    465,081                  400,235                   400,235                     474,485                   463,706
Pseudo R-squared                                                                  0.420                0.421                      0.428                    0.418                     0.391                       0.455                     0.390
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients in models for selection as a Fellow of the Econometric Society. We generate an index running a logistic regression only on the male sample
including all the controls as in Columns 9 of Table IV, except running it over the sample 1990-2019. We decompose the index into a journal-related portion (the controls used in Column 8 of Table IV) and the additional controls. For the first part of the
index, we recompute it only for single-authored papers. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                            62
                                                      TABLE AXIII (a)
                                          SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR ELECTED FELLOWS

                                                            Characteristics of Elected Fellows in Year of Election
                                                  1933-1979                       1980-2000                        2000-2019
                                           All      Male     Female        All       Male    Female         All      Male    Female
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)      (9)
Panel A: AAAS (1933-2019)
 Fraction Female                          0.79        0        100        2.96       0        100        15.57      0        100
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                              1.70      1.70      1.00        2.88      2.96     0.25        2.99      3.27      1.50
REStud                                    0.83      0.84      0.00        1.73      1.76     0.75        1.57      1.77      0.46
AER                                       1.39      1.37      4.00        1.96      2.00     0.75        2.30      2.39      1.81
QJE                                       1.06      1.06      2.00        1.47      1.46     1.75        2.47      2.51      2.23
JPE                                       1.34      1.35      0.00        2.06      2.08     1.50        1.85      1.99      1.08
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                              16.86     16.82     21.00     143.99    147.98     13.00      278.32   308.57    114.27
REStud                                     4.01      4.04      0.00     41.19     42.40       1.75      106.62   122.48    20.62
AER                                       11.13     10.73     61.00     85.11     87.17      17.75      210.45   207.91    224.23
QJE                                        4.82      4.59     33.00     35.42     35.62      29.00      268.20   270.40    256.27
JPE                                        7.02      7.08      0.00     97.61     99.53      34.75      212.69   228.45    127.27
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)             0.28      0.28      0.00        2.17      2.22     0.50        3.56      4.01      1.12
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)               0.61      0.60      2.00        1.64      1.69     0.00        1.29      1.29      1.27
Empirical Micro
(AEJApplied/Policy+JoLE+JEH+JHE+JPu       0.33      0.32      1.00        1.67      1.66     2.00        2.10      1.95      2.92
Number of years since first publication   19.40     19.41     18.00      22.19     22.26     19.75      22.74     23.11     20.69
Number of Observations                     126       125        1         135       131        4         167       141        26
Panel B: NAS (1968-2019)
 Fraction Female                            0         0         --        4.76       0        100        14.06      0        100
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                              4.37      4.37        --        3.07      3.23     0.00        3.20      3.51      1.33
REStud                                    1.70      1.70        --        1.95      2.02     0.50        2.50      2.78      0.78
AER                                       2.50      2.50        --        2.45      2.52     1.00        3.30      3.36      2.89
QJE                                       1.43      1.43        --        1.45      1.48     1.00        2.80      2.69      3.44
JPE                                       3.13      3.13        --        2.10      2.12     1.50        2.64      2.82      1.56
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                              84.33     84.33       --      183.43    192.60     0.00       465.38   518.13    143.00
REStud                                    14.20     14.20       --      52.12     54.73      0.00       261.77   298.91    34.78
AER                                       32.77     32.77       --      141.38    138.28    203.50      447.75   472.75    295.00
QJE                                       11.10     11.10       --      48.05     49.60     17.00       506.45   484.76    639.00
JPE                                       44.70     44.70       --      124.36    128.93    33.00       488.33   547.49    126.78
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)             0.67      0.67        --        3.24      3.40     0.00        4.02      4.58      0.56
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)               1.20      1.20        --        0.79      0.82     0.00        1.52      1.76      0.00
Empirical Micro
(AEJApplied/Policy+JoLE+JEH+JHE+JPu       0.33      0.33                  1.26      1.27     1.00        3.14      2.47      7.22
Number of years since first publication   26.40     26.40       --       29.57     29.88     23.50      32.31     33.84     23.00
Number of Authors                          30         30        --         42        40        2          64        55        9




                                                                63
                                                                           TABLE AXIII (b)
                                                                SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR ELECTED FELLOWS

                                                                                   Characteristics of Elected Fellows in Year of Election
                                                                          1933-1979                      1980-2000                       2000-2019
                                                                 All        Male Female           All       Male Female            All     Male Female
                                                                 (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)      (8)    (9)
Panel C: AEAF (1965-2019)
 Fraction Female                                                2.86             0            100              6.38             0           100              7.32             0            100
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                    2.46          2.53           0.00             1.96           2.09           0.00             3.52          3.76           0.50
REStud                                                          0.86          0.88           0.00             1.06           1.11           0.33             1.72          1.79           0.83
AER                                                             3.74          3.82           1.00             2.74           2.80           2.00             3.73          3.92           1.33
QJE                                                             2.40          2.47           0.00             1.38           1.45           0.33             2.33          2.32           2.50
JPE                                                             3.51          3.56           2.00             2.68           2.77           1.33             3.30          3.45           1.50
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                   41.14          42.35          0.00           86.77          92.68           0.00            809.89        868.03         73.50
REStud                                                          6.94           7.15          0.00           26.21          27.98           0.33            178.17        190.16         26.33
AER                                                            36.31          37.15          8.00           95.19          90.84          159.00           534.37        569.51         89.17
QJE                                                            11.91          12.26          0.00           50.36          53.11          10.00            323.78        319.64         376.17
JPE                                                            23.49          23.94          8.00           130.13         137.43         23.00            593.50        623.76         210.17
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)                                   0.14          0.15           0.00             0.89           0.95           0.00             2.90          3.05           1.00
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                     0.94          0.91           2.00             0.47           0.50           0.00             2.38          2.49           1.00
Empirical Micro
(AEJApplied/Policy+JoLE+JEH+JHE+JPu                             0.40          0.41           0.00             0.74           0.70           1.33             2.82          2.75           3.67
Number of years since first publication                        33.69          34.00         23.00            36.85          37.59          26.00            41.99         42.37          37.17
Number of Observations                                            35            34              1               47             44             3               82             76              6
Panel D: Sloan (1981-2019)
 Fraction Female                                                  --             --             --            11.03             0           100               20              0            100
Cum. publications in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                      --             --             --            0.89           0.95           0.44             0.60          0.69           0.25
REStud                                                            --             --             --            0.44           0.47           0.19             0.25          0.27           0.16
AER                                                               --             --             --            0.71           0.73           0.56             0.96          0.96           0.97
QJE                                                               --             --             --            0.66           0.70           0.38             0.84          0.82           0.91
JPE                                                               --             --             --            0.63           0.64           0.62             0.47          0.42           0.66
Cum. citations in top-5 journals
Econometrica                                                      --             --             --            6.30           6.36           5.75             6.16          6.45           5.03
REStud                                                            --             --             --            2.10           2.32           0.38             2.64          2.89           1.66
AER                                                               --             --             --            4.91           5.03           3.94            10.87         10.62          11.88
QJE                                                               --             --             --            5.23           5.71           1.44            15.73         15.79          15.50
JPE                                                               --             --             --            6.06           6.25           4.56             6.33          6.04           7.47
Cum. publications in field journals
Theory (JET+ET+GEB+IJGT+JMaE)                                     --             --             --            0.81           0.85           0.44             0.55          0.69           0.00
Econometrics (EcT+JEc+JASA)                                       --             --             --            0.43           0.49           0.00             0.30          0.31           0.25
Empirical Micro
(AEJApplied/Policy+JoLE+JEH+JHE+JPu                               --             --             --            0.54           0.53           0.56             0.57          0.52           0.78
Number of years since first publication                           --             --             --            4.21           4.33           3.25             4.41          4.45           4.25
Number of Authors                                                 --             --             --             145            129            16               160           128             32
Notes : Table presents characteristics of economists who were elected as Fellows of the AAAS (panel A), NAS (panel B), AEA (panel C) and Sloan Foundation (panel D) as of the year of their election.
See notes to Table I.




                                                                                                64
                                                                                       TABLE AXIV
                                                                    PREDICTORS OF SELECTION AS AAAS AND NAS FELLOWS
                                                                                           Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                                AAAS                                                                            NAS
                                                    1933-79                    1980-99                     2000-19                    1933-79                 1980-99               2000-19
                                              (1)             (2)        (3)             (4)         (5)             (6)        (7)             (8)     (9)             (10)    (11)          (12)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
   Female × (pre-1980)                      -1.567       -1.376                                                                0.000        0.000
                                            (0.987)      (0.968)                                                                 (.)          (.)
   Female × (1980-89)                                                  -0.206        0.195                                                             0.449        1.036
                                                                       (0.991)      (1.083)                                                           (1.118)      (1.295)
   Female × (1990-99)                                                   0.538        1.115                                                             0.208        0.801
                                                                       (0.704)      (0.672)                                                           (1.073)      (0.704)
   Female × (2000-09)                                                                               0.897        1.282                                                          1.148     1.940
                                                                                                   (0.441)      (0.459)                                                        (0.666)   (0.762)
   Female × (2010-19)                                                                               2.021        2.043                                                          1.388     1.774
                                                                                                   (0.338)      (0.347)                                                        (0.492)   (0.549)
Cum. publ. and cites in top-5 journals
   # Papers in Econometrica                  0.124        0.046         0.002        0.012          0.266        0.207         0.008       -0.093     -0.053        0.036       0.023    -0.020
                                            (0.073)      (0.114)       (0.087)      (0.105)        (0.059)      (0.075)       (0.101)      (0.133)    (0.097)      (0.141)     (0.093)   (0.093)
   Asinh citations in Econometrica           0.345       -0.012         0.377        0.191          0.256        0.131         0.897        0.756      0.451        0.236       0.209     0.069
                                            (0.104)      (0.102)       (0.075)      (0.070)        (0.056)      (0.046)       (0.202)      (0.321)    (0.134)      (0.113)     (0.088)   (0.078)

   # Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies         0.175        0.036        -0.038       -0.067          0.025        0.059         0.011       -0.034     -0.073       -0.041      -0.019     0.004
                                            (0.110)      (0.114)       (0.147)      (0.117)        (0.102)      (0.099)       (0.158)      (0.185)    (0.140)      (0.102)     (0.100)   (0.085)
   Asinh citations in REStud                 0.085        0.018         0.287        0.233          0.160        0.044         0.318        0.255      0.192        0.138       0.299     0.171
                                            (0.159)      (0.121)       (0.101)      (0.079)        (0.074)      (0.064)       (0.181)      (0.196)    (0.136)      (0.120)     (0.117)   (0.107)
   # Papers in Am. Econ. Review             -0.060       -0.038         0.090        0.107          0.114        0.117        -0.138       -0.211      0.072        0.232       0.053     0.072
                                            (0.106)      (0.116)       (0.132)      (0.118)        (0.089)      (0.093)       (0.191)      (0.206)    (0.145)      (0.166)     (0.087)   (0.083)
   Asinh citations in AER                    0.321       -0.020        -0.050       -0.191          0.095       -0.051         0.263        0.204      0.153       -0.079       0.033    -0.158
                                            (0.120)      (0.094)       (0.095)      (0.084)        (0.067)      (0.054)       (0.238)      (0.221)    (0.181)      (0.132)     (0.112)   (0.108)
   # Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.        -0.191       -0.204        -0.035        0.003          0.293        0.197        -0.267       -0.161     -0.553       -0.324      -0.063    -0.026
                                            (0.138)      (0.123)       (0.149)      (0.142)        (0.082)      (0.101)       (0.231)      (0.213)    (0.319)      (0.296)     (0.110)   (0.105)
   Asinh citations in QJE                    0.263        0.067         0.267        0.126          0.196        0.036         0.227        0.067      0.381        0.174       0.142     0.001
                                            (0.151)      (0.117)       (0.103)      (0.088)        (0.066)      (0.056)       (0.212)      (0.245)    (0.183)      (0.168)     (0.099)   (0.085)
   # Papers in J. of Political Economy      -0.032       -0.031        -0.075       -0.058          0.056        0.055         0.248        0.200      0.091        0.160       0.023     0.018
                                            (0.057)      (0.061)       (0.069)      (0.074)        (0.053)      (0.060)       (0.065)      (0.071)    (0.098)      (0.140)     (0.085)   (0.081)
   Asinh citations in JPE                    0.120       -0.157         0.334        0.123          0.192        0.041        -0.067       -0.136      0.000       -0.108       0.197     0.033
                                            (0.115)      (0.088)       (0.072)      (0.068)        (0.060)      (0.051)       (0.187)      (0.184)    (0.142)      (0.111)     (0.112)   (0.085)

Cumulative publications in other Journals
   Papers in AEA P&P                         0.378        0.349         0.622        0.544          0.242        0.242         0.468        0.354      0.391        0.267       0.222     0.192
                                            (0.072)      (0.072)       (0.072)      (0.073)        (0.052)      (0.048)       (0.162)      (0.168)    (0.119)      (0.113)     (0.053)   (0.052)
   Papers in Economic Theory                0.000         0.000        -0.070       -0.220         -0.131       -0.142         0.000        0.000     -0.549       -0.435       0.136     0.094
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.349)      (0.348)        (0.144)      (0.120)          (.)          (.)     (0.698)      (0.589)     (0.146)   (0.136)
   Papers in Econometric Theory             0.000         0.000         0.054        0.032         -0.070       -0.147         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000      -1.026    -1.059
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.053)      (0.044)        (0.165)      (0.142)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.674)   (0.533)
   Papers in J. of Econometrics              0.127        0.034         0.195        0.112          0.021       -0.032         0.000        0.000     -0.129       -0.188       0.110     0.054
                                            (0.316)      (0.359)       (0.069)      (0.052)        (0.075)      (0.064)          (.)          (.)     (0.172)      (0.153)     (0.065)   (0.067)
   Papers in J. of Econ. Theory             -0.322       -0.281         0.089        0.098          0.043        0.043        -0.191       -0.162      0.093        0.122       0.099     0.061
                                            (0.233)      (0.193)       (0.065)      (0.055)        (0.048)      (0.039)       (0.258)      (0.252)    (0.075)      (0.067)     (0.059)   (0.058)
   Papers in J. of Math. Econ.               1.022        0.913         0.275        0.307         -0.013       -0.030         0.962        0.907      0.328        0.299       0.018     0.001
                                            (0.171)      (0.203)       (0.131)      (0.123)        (0.163)      (0.099)       (0.222)      (0.267)    (0.094)      (0.080)     (0.141)   (0.121)
   Papers in Rand J. of Econ.                0.357        0.387         0.143        0.118         -0.212       -0.151        -0.133        0.028      0.264        0.136      -0.024     0.003
                                            (0.303)      (0.258)       (0.118)      (0.121)        (0.110)      (0.079)       (0.649)      (0.539)    (0.136)      (0.134)     (0.058)   (0.059)
   Papers in Int. J. of Game Theory          0.093        0.108         0.195        0.117         -0.099       -0.077         0.460        0.401      0.055       -0.059       0.097     0.000
                                            (0.257)      (0.263)       (0.106)      (0.089)        (0.261)      (0.140)       (0.255)      (0.256)    (0.192)      (0.149)     (0.219)   (0.211)
   Papers in AEJ: Applied Econ.             0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000          0.481        0.391         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000      -0.033     0.110
                                              (.)           (.)          (.)           (.)         (0.198)      (0.201)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.268)   (0.249)
   Papers in AEJ: Econ. Policy              0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000          0.595        0.258         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000       0.635     0.440
                                              (.)           (.)          (.)           (.)         (0.397)      (0.443)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.275)   (0.257)
   Papers in AEJ: Micro                     0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000         -0.428       -0.405         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000       0.229     0.222
                                              (.)           (.)          (.)           (.)         (0.265)      (0.260)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.233)   (0.233)
   Papers in AEJ: Macro                     0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000          0.741        0.373         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000      -0.712    -0.561
                                              (.)           (.)          (.)           (.)         (0.281)      (0.264)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.633)   (0.666)
   Papers in J. of Econ. Perspectives       0.000         0.000        -0.076        0.037          0.349        0.333         0.000        0.000     -0.203        0.158       0.175     0.141
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.201)      (0.118)        (0.090)      (0.072)          (.)          (.)     (0.500)      (0.269)     (0.048)   (0.047)
   Papers in J. of Econ. Literature          1.001        1.079         0.353        0.187          0.115        0.118        -1.943       -2.196      0.765        0.552       0.398     0.383
                                            (0.398)      (0.391)       (0.247)      (0.232)        (0.210)      (0.172)       (0.749)      (0.766)    (0.380)      (0.295)     (0.247)   (0.217)
   Papers in Games and Econ. Behavior       0.000         0.000         0.174        0.163          0.198        0.135         0.000        0.000      0.246        0.292      -0.015     0.035
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.163)      (0.179)        (0.083)      (0.065)          (.)          (.)     (0.292)      (0.258)     (0.078)   (0.072)
   Papers in Int. Econ. Review               0.176        0.150        -0.147       -0.080         -0.473       -0.306         0.099        0.177      0.122        0.136      -0.185    -0.206
                                            (0.121)      (0.118)       (0.099)      (0.089)        (0.148)      (0.106)       (0.211)      (0.264)    (0.193)      (0.205)     (0.135)   (0.120)
   Papers in Review of Econ. and Stat.       0.007        0.003        -0.474       -0.414         -0.188       -0.158         0.103        0.114     -0.165       -0.215      -0.093    -0.060
                                            (0.061)      (0.053)       (0.143)      (0.127)        (0.092)      (0.086)       (0.074)      (0.077)    (0.149)      (0.150)     (0.178)   (0.147)
   Papers in Economica                       0.064        0.033         0.107       -0.008         -0.368       -0.343         0.088        0.028      0.125       -0.043       0.085     0.017
                                            (0.094)      (0.089)       (0.117)      (0.122)        (0.272)      (0.241)       (0.128)      (0.150)    (0.133)      (0.127)     (0.184)   (0.165)
   Papers in Economic J.                     0.040        0.043         0.071        0.061          0.095        0.104         0.089        0.053      0.186        0.141       0.027     0.005
                                            (0.037)      (0.036)       (0.078)      (0.072)        (0.096)      (0.066)       (0.095)      (0.092)    (0.091)      (0.108)     (0.075)   (0.060)
   Papers in J. of Development Econ.         0.247       -0.045         0.328        0.313         -0.071       -0.110         0.000        0.000     -0.167       -0.607       0.036    -0.024
                                            (0.654)      (0.571)       (0.170)      (0.183)        (0.111)      (0.126)          (.)          (.)     (0.449)      (0.409)     (0.158)   (0.156)
   Papers in J. of European Econ. Assoc     0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000          0.074        0.117         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000       0.048     0.109
                                              (.)           (.)          (.)           (.)         (0.083)      (0.068)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.123)   (0.116)
   Papers in J. of Finance                  -0.419       -0.321         0.110        0.072          0.149        0.113        -0.772       -0.974     -0.187       -0.234      -0.038    -0.080
                                            (0.294)      (0.224)       (0.070)      (0.078)        (0.038)      (0.041)       (0.670)      (0.706)    (0.248)      (0.278)     (0.074)   (0.074)
   Papers in J. of Health Econ.             0.000         0.000         0.316        0.298         -0.133       -0.149         0.000        0.000     0.000         0.000      -0.008    -0.028
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.110)      (0.117)        (0.121)      (0.118)          (.)          (.)       (.)           (.)      (0.104)   (0.096)
   Papers in J. of Inter. Econ.             -0.126        0.059         0.177        0.152          0.050        0.056         0.000        0.000     -0.433       -0.510       0.164     0.132
                                            (0.379)      (0.298)       (0.084)      (0.091)        (0.071)      (0.064)          (.)          (.)     (0.381)      (0.422)     (0.094)   (0.080)
   Papers in J. of Monetary Econ.           0.000         0.000         0.030        0.099          0.002        0.002         0.000        0.000     -0.109       -0.057      -0.169    -0.153
                                              (.)           (.)        (0.091)      (0.092)        (0.062)      (0.056)          (.)          (.)     (0.242)      (0.273)     (0.118)   (0.119)
NOTE: table continues




                                                                                                65
                                                                            PREDICTORS OF SELECTION AS AAAS AND NAS FELLOWS -- CONTINUED


                                                                                                               AAAS                                                                                                     NAS
                                                                           1933-79                            1980-99                           2000-19                             1933-79                           1980-99                          2000-19
                                                                     (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)             (11)           (12)


   Papers in J. of Labor Econ.                                     0.000            0.000            0.321             0.371            0.087            0.050              0.000            0.000            0.075            0.154            0.087            0.037
                                                                     (.)              (.)           (0.241)           (0.220)          (0.098)          (0.103)               (.)              (.)           (0.280)          (0.203)          (0.120)          (0.117)
   Papers in J. of Public Econ.                                    0.223            0.535            0.024             0.076           -0.110           -0.079              0.000            0.000           -0.033            0.049           -0.132           -0.110
                                                                  (0.202)          (0.188)          (0.111)           (0.085)          (0.088)          (0.074)               (.)              (.)           (0.135)          (0.141)          (0.080)          (0.073)
   Papers in J. of Econ. History                                   0.317            0.315            0.394             0.446            0.167            0.188              0.708            0.736            0.262            0.201            0.248            0.206
                                                                  (0.107)          (0.109)          (0.080)           (0.087)          (0.068)          (0.075)            (0.181)          (0.208)          (0.196)          (0.284)          (0.063)          (0.065)
   Papers in J. of Am. Stat. Assoc.                                0.028            0.009            0.162             0.108            0.103            0.113              0.143            0.092            0.157            0.046            0.166            0.151
                                                                  (0.072)          (0.067)          (0.046)           (0.061)          (0.097)          (0.131)            (0.101)          (0.121)          (0.056)          (0.096)          (0.039)          (0.049)
   Papers in Quantitative Economics.                               0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000           -0.314           -0.205              0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000            0.008            0.164
                                                                     (.)              (.)               (.)              (.)           (0.981)          (0.791)               (.)              (.)              (.)              (.)           (0.422)          (0.357)
   Papers in Theoretical Economics.                                0.000            0.000             0.000            0.000            0.490            0.463              0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000           -0.224           -0.186
                                                                     (.)              (.)               (.)              (.)           (0.219)          (0.185)               (.)              (.)              (.)              (.)           (0.376)          (0.391)
Levels of Top 5s
  4-5 Top 5s                                                                        0.610                             -0.085                             0.470                              -0.664                            -0.741                             0.964
                                                                                   (0.394)                            (0.497)                           (0.506)                             (1.239)                           (0.927)                           (0.664)
   6-7 Top 5s                                                                       1.268                             -0.287                             0.852                               0.399                             0.875                             0.636
                                                                                   (0.465)                            (0.619)                           (0.547)                             (0.863)                           (0.759)                           (0.878)
   8-9 Top 5s                                                                       0.803                              0.219                             1.001                              -0.081                            -0.619                             1.450
                                                                                   (0.643)                            (0.684)                           (0.654)                             (0.899)                           (1.087)                           (0.862)
   10-11 Top 5s                                                                     0.890                             -0.130                             1.304                               0.370                             0.038                             1.709
                                                                                   (0.783)                            (0.806)                           (0.732)                             (1.031)                           (1.031)                           (0.933)
   12-13 Top 5s                                                                     0.395                              0.413                             1.712                               0.489                            -0.805                             1.698
                                                                                   (0.931)                            (0.902)                           (0.851)                             (1.319)                           (1.144)                           (0.926)
   14-15 Top 5s                                                                     0.821                             -0.025                             1.290                               1.494                             0.174                             0.880
                                                                                   (1.176)                            (1.096)                           (0.962)                             (1.333)                           (1.418)                           (1.104)
   16 or More Top 5s                                                                0.785                             -0.490                             0.842                               1.337                            -2.285                             1.709
                                                                                   (1.485)                            (1.368)                           (1.207)                             (1.664)                           (2.178)                           (1.271)
Levels of Top 5 Citations (Omitted: < 50 Percentile)
  50-70 Percentile                                                                  0.675                              1.086                             3.018                              14.651                             1.666                             1.713
                                                                                   (0.440)                            (0.592)                           (1.264)                             (1.717)                           (1.053)                           (0.786)
   70-80 Percentile                                                                 1.161                              1.269                             3.212                               0.000                             1.921                             0.886
                                                                                   (0.521)                            (0.648)                           (1.319)                                (.)                            (1.088)                           (1.074)
   80-90 Percentile                                                                 1.522                             -0.331                             4.672                              13.447                             2.385                             1.887
                                                                                   (0.479)                            (1.111)                           (1.130)                             (1.838)                           (0.901)                           (0.824)
   90-95 Percentile                                                                 1.953                              2.110                             5.360                              14.157                             2.053                             1.693
                                                                                   (0.558)                            (0.637)                           (1.128)                             (1.642)                           (1.081)                           (0.862)
   95-97.5 Percentile                                                               2.764                              2.945                             5.318                              14.692                             2.167                             2.160
                                                                                   (0.543)                            (0.605)                           (1.167)                             (1.648)                           (1.128)                           (0.846)
   97.5-99 Percentile                                                               2.982                              2.968                             5.368                              13.149                             2.724                             3.126
                                                                                   (0.620)                            (0.640)                           (1.187)                             (2.100)                           (1.097)                           (0.836)
   99+ Percentile                                                                   3.572                              3.880                             5.888                              14.820                             4.203                             3.422
                                                                                   (0.671)                            (0.651)                           (1.217)                             (2.166)                           (1.059)                           (0.885)
Years since first publication
  20-29                                                                             0.733                              0.290                            -0.235
                                                                                   (0.233)                            (0.240)                           (0.222)
   30+                                                                             -0.253                              0.812                            -0.733                               0.449                             1.427                             1.051
                                                                                   (0.458)                            (0.348)                           (0.302)                             (0.761)                           (0.452)                           (0.336)

N                                                                 103,002          103,002          193,488          193,488          361,987          361,987             48,028           45,823           187,705          187,705          365,267          365,267
Pseudo R-squared                                                   0.178            0.224            0.378            0.411            0.443            0.481               0.464            0.490            0.288            0.361            0.339            0.370
Notes : Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. See notes to Table X. The table entries are coefficients from the models summarized in columns 4 and 6 of that Table. All models include year fixed effects. Economists with unknown gender are
excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                                   66
                                                                            TABLE AXV
                                                         PREDICTORS OF ELECTION TO AEA AND SLOAN FELLOW
                                                                                    Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                     American Economic Association                                         Sloan Fellow
                                                     1933-79                   1980-99                 2000-19                     1980-99                  2000-19
                                               (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)             (10)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
Female × (pre-1980)                           1.065        1.763
                                             (1.047)      (1.073)
Female × (1980-89)                                                          0.233      1.409                                 0.282       0.426
                                                                           (1.096)    (1.113)                               (0.537)     (0.560)
Female × (1990-99)                                                          0.677      1.378                                 0.634       0.741
                                                                           (0.704)    (0.836)                               (0.323)     (0.335)
Female × (2000-09)                                                                                -0.116       1.641                                 0.398        0.447
                                                                                                  (1.060)     (1.004)                               (0.335)      (0.335)
Female × (2010-19)                                                                                 1.050       2.167                                 0.545        0.534
                                                                                                  (0.508)     (0.541)                               (0.311)      (0.288)
Cum. publ. and citations in top-5 journals
# Papers in Econometrica                      0.174       -0.182            0.193     -0.018       0.010      -0.019         0.360       0.187       1.286        0.422
                                             (0.114)      (0.156)          (0.097)    (0.099)     (0.063)     (0.062)       (0.137)     (0.153)     (0.201)      (0.236)
Asinh citations in Econometrica               0.252        0.171            0.097     -0.011       0.297       0.127         0.346       0.155       0.176        0.087
                                             (0.181)      (0.185)          (0.128)    (0.096)     (0.077)     (0.063)       (0.108)     (0.106)     (0.108)      (0.092)

# Papers in Rev. of Econ. Studies            -0.449       -0.281           -0.178     -0.120      -0.409      -0.314         0.556       0.228       0.134       -0.141
                                             (0.360)      (0.282)          (0.168)    (0.146)     (0.136)     (0.101)       (0.278)     (0.249)     (0.473)      (0.323)
Asinh citations in REStud                     0.165        0.090            0.234      0.108       0.251       0.119        -0.049      -0.109       0.209       -0.018
                                             (0.292)      (0.302)          (0.106)    (0.133)     (0.093)     (0.075)       (0.202)     (0.155)     (0.173)      (0.131)
# Papers in Am. Econ. Review                  0.324        0.020            0.503      0.332       0.221       0.216         0.901       0.496       1.191        0.496
                                             (0.176)      (0.185)          (0.161)    (0.158)     (0.073)     (0.078)       (0.279)     (0.253)     (0.205)      (0.220)
Asinh citations in AER                       -0.093       -0.249           -0.095     -0.314       0.139      -0.072        -0.267      -0.266      -0.038       -0.149
                                             (0.229)      (0.240)          (0.203)    (0.130)     (0.103)     (0.081)       (0.170)     (0.122)     (0.095)      (0.066)
# Papers in Quarterly J. of Econ.            -0.434       -0.479           -0.830     -0.389      -0.160      -0.091         0.646       0.342       1.175        0.578
                                             (0.214)      (0.153)          (0.301)    (0.221)     (0.106)     (0.089)       (0.265)     (0.201)     (0.299)      (0.233)
Asinh citations in QJE                        0.520        0.317            0.598      0.203       0.239       0.081         0.185       0.099       0.087       -0.089
                                             (0.199)      (0.202)          (0.167)    (0.140)     (0.091)     (0.075)       (0.168)     (0.127)     (0.127)      (0.085)
# Papers in J. of Political Economy          -0.079       -0.206            0.179      0.134       0.221       0.151         0.514       0.243       1.173        0.406
                                             (0.062)      (0.075)          (0.063)    (0.073)     (0.082)     (0.071)       (0.230)     (0.223)     (0.367)      (0.282)
Asinh citations in JPE                        0.608        0.407            0.102     -0.223       0.061      -0.096         0.192       0.084       0.035       -0.036
                                             (0.175)      (0.203)          (0.153)    (0.124)     (0.104)     (0.078)       (0.137)     (0.107)     (0.147)      (0.104)
Cumulative publications in other Journals
Papers in AEA P&P                             0.644        0.447            0.460      0.205       0.145       0.131         0.242       0.400       0.446        0.438
                                             (0.132)      (0.112)          (0.116)    (0.111)     (0.054)     (0.046)       (0.317)     (0.190)     (0.160)      (0.114)
Papers in Economic Theory                     0.000        0.000            0.742      0.712       0.080       0.045         0.381       0.360      -0.743       -0.710
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.285)    (0.285)     (0.154)     (0.144)       (0.235)     (0.275)     (0.498)      (0.415)
Papers in Econometric Theory                  0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.447      -0.512         0.464       0.455       0.327        0.328
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.275)     (0.216)       (0.126)     (0.143)     (0.144)      (0.219)
Papers in J. of Econometrics                  0.000        0.000           -1.187     -0.795       0.169       0.115         0.031       0.047       0.057       -0.036
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.431)    (0.427)     (0.048)     (0.043)       (0.164)     (0.149)     (0.159)      (0.146)
Papers in J. of Econ. Theory                  0.410        0.342           -0.048     -0.084       0.137       0.092         0.245       0.163       0.130        0.015
                                             (0.300)      (0.335)          (0.176)    (0.131)     (0.058)     (0.052)       (0.125)     (0.104)     (0.154)      (0.135)
Papers in J. of Math. Econ.                   0.000        0.000            0.160      0.290       0.033       0.026         0.058      -0.010       0.110        0.202
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.258)    (0.140)     (0.112)     (0.072)       (0.224)     (0.197)     (0.330)      (0.324)
Papers in Rand J. of Econ.                   -0.847       -0.479           -0.361     -0.216       0.018      -0.001         0.140       0.167      -0.783       -0.527
                                             (0.539)      (0.488)          (0.169)    (0.171)     (0.076)     (0.078)       (0.156)     (0.121)     (0.556)      (0.377)
Papers in Int. J. of Game Theory              0.000        0.000            0.154      0.176       0.292       0.230         0.427       0.371      -1.515       -1.281
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.286)    (0.138)     (0.091)     (0.100)       (0.145)     (0.142)     (0.715)      (0.773)
Papers in AEJ: Applied Econ.                  0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.213       0.078         0.000       0.000       0.610        0.331
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.303)     (0.380)          (.)         (.)      (0.329)      (0.236)
Papers in AEJ: Econ. Policy                   0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.615      -0.846         0.000       0.000       0.802        0.508
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.856)     (1.307)          (.)         (.)      (0.459)      (0.344)
Papers in AEJ: Micro                          0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -1.870      -1.362         0.000       0.000       0.458        0.138
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.606)     (0.549)          (.)         (.)      (0.665)      (0.591)
Papers in AEJ: Macro                          0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.422      -0.495         0.000       0.000       0.827        0.671
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.546)     (0.580)          (.)         (.)      (0.333)      (0.273)
Papers in J. of Econ. Perspectives            0.000        0.000           -0.041      0.246       0.233       0.202         0.604       0.503       0.397        0.110
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.365)    (0.166)     (0.079)     (0.074)       (0.432)     (0.344)     (0.286)      (0.270)
Papers in J. of Econ. Literature              0.332        0.121           -0.011      0.122       0.408       0.236        -0.807      -0.657      -0.005        0.209
                                             (0.759)      (0.642)          (0.256)    (0.263)     (0.233)     (0.180)       (1.396)     (1.153)     (1.174)      (0.703)
Papers in Games and Econ. Behavior            0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.380      -0.371        -0.694      -0.541       0.073        0.004
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.150)     (0.144)       (0.516)     (0.395)     (0.212)      (0.178)
Papers in Int. Econ. Review                  -0.201        0.188            0.027     -0.106      -0.024      -0.066        -0.092      -0.117      -1.029       -0.611
                                             (0.273)      (0.243)          (0.272)    (0.244)     (0.120)     (0.106)       (0.249)     (0.207)     (0.687)      (0.390)
Papers in Review of Econ. and Stat.           0.043        0.032            0.017      0.001      -0.326      -0.214        -0.215      -0.174      -1.194       -0.431
                                             (0.080)      (0.083)          (0.135)    (0.096)     (0.123)     (0.081)       (0.248)     (0.191)     (0.444)      (0.280)
Papers in Economica                           0.374        0.336            0.044     -0.092       0.401       0.230        -2.179      -1.518       0.000        0.000
                                             (0.146)      (0.154)          (0.152)    (0.134)     (0.142)     (0.127)       (1.073)     (0.723)        (.)          (.)
Papers in Economic J.                        -0.154       -0.272            0.175     -0.009      -0.034      -0.024        -0.302      -0.229      -0.971       -0.571
                                             (0.222)      (0.237)          (0.108)    (0.106)     (0.080)     (0.061)       (0.412)     (0.316)     (0.517)      (0.359)
Papers in J. of Development Econ.             0.000        0.000            0.038     -0.163      -0.080      -0.077        -1.032      -0.846      -0.554       -0.416
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.280)    (0.288)     (0.175)     (0.153)       (0.461)     (0.450)     (0.446)      (0.350)
Papers in J. of European Econ. Assoc          0.000        0.000            0.000      0.000      -0.613      -0.265         0.000       0.000      -0.451       -0.329
                                                (.)          (.)              (.)        (.)      (0.247)     (0.209)          (.)         (.)      (0.337)      (0.222)
Papers in J. of Finance                       0.181        0.079            0.019     -0.130      -0.279      -0.332         0.059       0.148      -0.099       -0.010
                                             (0.192)      (0.242)          (0.123)    (0.168)     (0.186)     (0.179)       (0.208)     (0.157)     (0.248)      (0.173)
Papers in J. of Health Econ.                  0.000        0.000            0.262      0.101      -0.056      -0.101         0.185       0.321      -1.462       -1.335
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.198)    (0.197)     (0.116)     (0.103)       (0.263)     (0.189)     (0.723)      (0.692)
Papers in J. of Inter. Econ.                 -0.641        0.129           -0.243     -0.135       0.091       0.047         0.152       0.180      -0.119       -0.142
                                             (0.582)      (0.316)          (0.210)    (0.172)     (0.083)     (0.063)       (0.233)     (0.185)     (0.369)      (0.269)
Papers in J. of Monetary Econ.                0.000        0.000           -0.632     -0.154      -0.076      -0.028         0.069       0.072       0.219        0.086
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.457)    (0.225)     (0.079)     (0.058)       (0.179)     (0.130)     (0.213)      (0.181)
Papers in J. of Labor Econ.                   0.000        0.000           -0.208      0.069      -0.115      -0.083        -0.400      -0.289      -0.708       -0.496
                                                (.)          (.)           (0.238)    (0.216)     (0.163)     (0.094)       (0.371)     (0.288)     (0.746)      (0.434)
NOTE: table continues


                                                                                     67
                                                      PREDICTORS OF ELECTION TO AEA AND SLOAN FELLOW -- CONTINUED

                                                                                                                                 Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                                                               American Economic Association                                                                               Sloan Fellow
                                                                             1933-79                             1980-99                             2000-19                                  1980-99                              2000-19
                                                                       (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)                    (7)                (8)               (9)              (10)


 Papers in J. of Public Econ.                                      -0.141              0.153            -0.443            -0.183            -0.022            -0.043                  0.308             0.273            -0.221             -0.053
                                                                   (0.281)            (0.238)           (0.174)           (0.134)           (0.068)           (0.058)                (0.166)           (0.142)           (0.335)            (0.209)
 Papers in J. of Econ. History                                      0.330              0.321             0.156             0.085             0.313             0.259                  0.678             0.620             0.723              0.738
                                                                   (0.182)            (0.204)           (0.114)           (0.120)           (0.059)           (0.064)                (0.119)           (0.134)           (0.273)            (0.320)
 Papers in J. of Am. Stat. Assoc.                                   0.109              0.041             0.170            -0.024             0.114             0.030                  0.292             0.318            -0.525             -0.583
                                                                   (0.128)            (0.123)           (0.068)           (0.113)           (0.034)           (0.053)                (0.150)           (0.162)           (0.598)            (0.437)
 Papers in Quantitative Economics.                                   0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000             0.030             0.174                  0.000             0.000            -0.188             -0.322
                                                                       (.)               (.)               (.)               (.)            (0.718)           (0.461)                   (.)               (.)            (0.797)            (0.646)
 Papers in Theoretical Economics.                                    0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000            -0.131            -0.065                  0.000             0.000             0.507              0.397
                                                                       (.)               (.)               (.)               (.)            (0.485)           (0.501)                   (.)               (.)            (0.279)            (0.291)
Levels of Top 5s
 4-5 Top 5s                                                                            0.825                               1.046                               0.392
                                                                                      (0.998)                             (0.550)                             (0.653)
 6-7 Top 5s                                                                            0.321                               1.044                               0.176
                                                                                      (1.087)                             (0.755)                             (0.662)
 8-9 Top 5s                                                                            2.572                               0.669                              -0.082
                                                                                      (0.967)                             (0.741)                             (0.859)
 10-11 Top 5s                                                                          1.586                               1.076                               0.538
                                                                                      (1.178)                             (0.967)                             (0.761)
 12-13 Top 5s                                                                          2.590                               1.162                               0.619
                                                                                      (0.956)                             (0.895)                             (0.837)
 14-15 Top 5s                                                                          2.459                              -0.081                               0.193
                                                                                      (1.343)                             (1.650)                             (0.921)
 16 or More Top 5s                                                                     4.381                               1.485                               0.736
                                                                                      (1.490)                             (1.408)                             (1.033)
 2 Top 5s                                                                                                                                                                                               2.203                                4.289
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.405)                              (0.523)
 3 Top 5s                                                                                                                                                                                               3.061                                4.834
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.508)                              (0.683)
 4 Top 5s                                                                                                                                                                                               3.233                                5.471
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.628)                              (0.849)
 5+ Top 5s                                                                                                                                                                                              2.975                                5.038
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.910)                              (1.131)
Levels of Top 5 Citations (Omitted: < 50 Percentile)
 50-70 Percentile                                                                      1.258                               0.162                               0.231
                                                                                      (1.043)                             (1.230)                             (1.264)
 70-80 Percentile                                                                      0.000                               1.758                               1.148
                                                                                         (.)                              (0.767)                             (1.078)
 80-90 Percentile                                                                      0.716                               1.603                               1.849
                                                                                      (1.441)                             (0.835)                             (1.008)
 90-95 Percentile                                                                      1.831                               2.644                               2.471
                                                                                      (1.217)                             (0.901)                             (0.987)
 95-97.5 Percentile                                                                    2.438                               1.093                               1.330
                                                                                      (1.384)                             (1.167)                             (1.072)
 97.5-99 Percentile                                                                    2.202                               2.478                               3.600
                                                                                      (1.390)                             (1.164)                             (0.918)
 99+ Percentile                                                                        2.847                               4.601                               3.693
                                                                                      (1.470)                             (1.099)                             (0.989)
Years since first publication
30+                                                                                    2.375                               3.365                               0.000
                                                                                      (0.563)                             (0.673)                                (.)
Year Fixed Effects                                                    Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

N                                                                   65,141            61,980           181,379           181,379           365,491            31,343                 83,446             83,446           151,457           151,457
Pseudo R-squared                                                     0.388             0.466            0.275             0.426             0.383              0.300                  0.244              0.287            0.353             0.428

Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients. See notes to Table X. The table entries are coefficients from the models summarized in columns 8 and 10 of that Table. All models include
year fixed effects. Economists with unknown gender are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                         68
                                                                          TABLE AXVI
                                                MODELS FOR ELECTION TO OTHER FELLOWSHIPS, PARSIMONIOUS MODEL
                                                                                            Logit Regression for Selection as Fellow in Year t:
                                                      Econ. Society                         AAAS                             NAS                             AEA                     Alfred P. Sloan
                                                      (1)       (2)                   (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)               (7)           (8)              (9)       (10)
Authors' Gender (Omitted: Male Author)
 Female × (pre-1980)             -1.457                           -1.648           -1.376         -1.425               --             --            1.763          0.619                --            --
                                (0.606)                           (0.585)          (0.968)        (0.951)                                          (1.074)        (1.098)
  Female × (1980-89)                                0.628          0.564            0.195          0.315            1.036          1.057            1.409          0.935            0.426          0.407
                                                   (0.473)        (0.463)          (1.083)        (1.028)          (1.295)        (1.030)          (1.113)        (1.026)          (0.560)        (0.528)
  Female × (1990-99)                                0.028          0.101            1.115          0.861            0.801          0.851            1.378          1.483            0.741          0.710
                                                   (0.483)        (0.467)          (0.672)        (0.640)          (0.704)        (0.967)          (0.836)        (0.714)          (0.335)        (0.335)
  Female × (2000-09)                                0.544          0.568            1.282          1.638            1.940          1.800            1.640          0.316            0.447          0.576
                                                   (0.341)        (0.329)          (0.459)        (0.462)          (0.762)        (0.727)          (1.004)        (1.062)          (0.335)        (0.316)
  Female × (2010-19)                                0.932          0.956            2.043          2.371            1.774          1.478            2.167          1.070            0.534          0.465
                                                   (0.239)        (0.204)          (0.347)        (0.286)          (0.549)        (0.524)          (0.541)        (0.510)          (0.288)        (0.284)
Restrict to 8 yrs. since 1st pub.                     No             No               No             No               No             No               No             No               Yes            Yes
Model with Full Set of Controls                       Yes            No               Yes            No               Yes            No               Yes            No               Yes            No
Parsimonious set of controls         No                              Yes              No             Yes              No             Yes              No             Yes               No            Yes
(Top 5 Publications and Top-5 Citations)

N                                                 656,573 656,573                 658,477 658,949                 598,795 609,921                  608,850 617,221                 234,903 240,089
Pseudo R-squared                                   0.386   0.267                   0.394   0.329                   0.398   0.323                    0.466   0.317                   0.366   0.331
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients: see note to Table IV. The sample excludes economists with unknown gender. All models include
controls for the number of publications in each of the top-5 journals, interacted with indicators for the periods (pre-1980), (1980-99) and (2000-19), and year fixed effects. The controls in the odd-numbered
columns are as in Columns 2, 5, and 8 of Table IV, while the controls in even-numbered columns are similar to the ones in Columns 3, 6, and 9 of Table IV (except that the indicators for top-5s span a longer
number of publications for NAS, AAAS, and AEAF, and that we drop some controls to avoid over-specifying these models). See Table AXIV and AXV for the exact list of controls. Sample periods vary by
fellowship: see text. Models for Sloan Fellowships are restricted to up to 8 years from the first publication in the sample.




                                                                                                     69
                                                     TABLE AXVII
                              PREDICTORS OF ELECTION TO AEA PRESIDENT OR VICE-PRESIDENT
                                                                          Logit Regression for Selection in Year t as:
                                                                   American Economic Association President or Vice President
                                                                      1933-79              1980-99                2000-19
                                                                             (1)                            (2)                            (3)
Authors' genders (Omitted: Male Author)
   Female Economist*(pre-1980)                                             0.306
                                                                          (0.651)
   Female Economist*(1980-89)                                                                             2.435
                                                                                                         (0.582)
   Female Economist*(1990-99)                                                                             2.710
                                                                                                         (0.590)
   Female Economist*(2000-09)                                                                                                            4.763
                                                                                                                                        (0.911)
   Female Economist*(2010-19)                                                                                                            5.304
                                                                                                                                        (0.747)
Cum. publ. and citations in top-5 journals
   Papers in Econometrica                                                  -0.050                         -0.133                         -0.112
                                                                          (0.131)                        (0.235)                        (0.121)
   Asinh citations in Econometrica                                         -0.187                         0.083                          0.064
                                                                          (0.168)                        (0.150)                        (0.087)

   Papers in Review of Economic Studies                                    -0.274                         -0.073                         -0.131
                                                                          (0.149)                        (0.144)                        (0.183)
   Asinh citations in REStud                                               0.568                          0.169                          0.124
                                                                          (0.158)                        (0.131)                        (0.132)
   Papers in American Economic Review                                      -0.251                         0.219                          0.042
                                                                          (0.141)                        (0.161)                        (0.121)
   Asinh citations in AER                                                  0.243                          -0.098                         0.517
                                                                          (0.201)                        (0.136)                        (0.337)
   Papers in Quarterly Journal of Eco.                                     -0.244                         -0.311                         0.083
                                                                          (0.132)                        (0.263)                        (0.117)
   Asinh citations in QJE                                                  0.168                          0.182                          0.033
                                                                          (0.207)                        (0.137)                        (0.165)
   Papers in Journal of Political Economy                                  -0.107                         0.014                          -0.009
                                                                          (0.087)                        (0.159)                        (0.134)
   Asinh citations in JPE                                                  0.118                          0.089                          0.155
                                                                          (0.143)                        (0.145)                        (0.125)
Controls for publications in
general interest/field journals                                             Yes                             Yes                            Yes
Controls for levels of
Top 5 and Top 5 Citations                                                 Yes                             Yes                            Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                        Yes                             Yes                            Yes
N                                                                       125,465                         183,839                        315,718
Pseudo R-squared                                                         0.333                           0.339                          0.590
Notes: Standard errors, clustered by author, in parentheses. Table entries are logistic regression coefficients. Economists with unknown gender are excluded
from the sample.




                                                                            70
