                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DISSECTING GREEN RETURNS

                                        Lubos Pastor
                                     Robert F. Stambaugh
                                      Lucian A. Taylor

                                      Working Paper 28940
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28940


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




Pastor is at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Stambaugh and Taylor are at the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Pastor and Stambaugh are also at the NBER.
Pastor is additionally at the National Bank of Slovakia and the CEPR. The views in this paper are
the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated with. We thank Livia
Amato for excellent research assistance. This research was funded in part by the Fama-Miller
Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dissecting Green Returns
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 28940
June 2021
JEL No. G12,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

Green assets delivered high returns in recent years. This performance reflects unexpectedly strong
increases in environmental concerns, not high expected returns. German green bonds
outperformed their higher-yielding non-green twins as the "greenium" widened, and U.S. green
stocks outperformed brown as climate concerns strengthened. To show the latter, we construct a
theoretically motivated green factor--a return spread between environmentally friendly and
unfriendly stocks--and find that its positive performance disappears without climate-concern
shocks. The factor lags those shocks, curiously, by about a month. A theory-driven two-factor
model featuring the green factor explains much of the recent underperformance of value stocks.


Lubos Pastor                                    Lucian A. Taylor
University of Chicago                           Finance Department
Booth School of Business                        The Wharton School
5807 South Woodlawn Ave                         University of Pennsylvania
Chicago, IL 60637                               2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
and NBER                                        3620 Locust Walk
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
                                                luket@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28940
1. Introduction

The growth of sustainable investing is one of the most dramatic trends in the investment
industry over the past decade. Today, sustainable strategies comprise one third of pro-
fessionally managed U.S. assets (US SIF Foundation, 2020). Sustainable investing applies
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) criteria, with environmental concerns playing
the leading role. For example, 88% of the clients of BlackRock, the world's largest asset
manager, rank environment as "the priority most in focus" among ESG criteria (BlackRock,
2020). Investments considered environmentally friendly are often referred to as "green," with
"brown" denoting the opposite.

       Asset managers often market sustainable investment products as offering superior risk-
adjusted returns.1 Past performance is a popular marketing tool, and indeed a number
of studies report superior historical returns to sustainable strategies (e.g., Edmans, 2011,
Nagy, Kassam, and Lee, 2016, and In, Park, and Monk, 2019). Of course, as the SEC
generally requires of all marketed funds, managers must warn that past performance does
not necessarily predict future performance. In this study we show why investors would be
especially well advised to heed that warning when investing in green assets.

       What does the past performance of green assets imply about their future performance?
We address this question empirically, guided by the equilibrium model of P´
                                                                          astor, Stambaugh,
and Taylor (2021, henceforth PST). The PST model predicts that green assets have lower
expected returns than brown, due to investors' tastes for green assets, yet green assets can
have higher realized returns while agents' tastes shift unexpectedly in the green direction.
This wedge between expected and realized returns is central to our paper. As PST explain,
green tastes can shift in two ways. First, investors' preference for green assets can increase,
directly driving up green asset prices. Second, consumers' demands for green products can
strengthen--for example, due to environmental regulations--driving up green firms' profits
and thus their stock prices. Similarly, investors' preference for brown assets or consumers'
demand for brown products can decrease, again making green stocks outperform. We also
leverage PST's result that assets are priced by a two-factor model, where the factors are the
market portfolio and the ESG factor. The ESG factor is the return on a portfolio that goes
long green and short brown assets, where the assets are weighted by their greenness. The
ESG factor's expected return, as derived by PST, is negative.
   1
    For example, BlackRock believes that "integrating sustainability can help investors build more resilient
portfolios and achieve better long-term, risk-adjusted returns" (Fink, 2021). According to State Street,
"ESG is a source of alpha that leads to positive portfolio performance" (Lester and He, 2018).




                                                     1
      Our analysis focuses primarily on the U.S. stock market. We use individual stocks' envi-
ronmental ratings from MSCI, a leading provider of ESG ratings. We construct a monthly
"green factor," a return spread between green and brown stocks, following PST's procedure
for constructing the ESG factor. Our sample begins in November 2012, when MSCI's data
coverage increased sharply, and ends in December 2020. We find that the green factor earned
a cumulative return spread of 35% over this period. The factor's average return is 31 ba-
sis points (bps) per month, with a t-statistic of 2.91. In short, green stocks significantly
outperformed brown stocks in recent years.

   Should green stocks' recent outperformance lead one to expect high green returns going
forward? No, we argue. That outperformance likely reflects an unanticipated increase in
environmental concerns. To reach this conclusion, we compute a measure of concerns about
climate change, using the media index constructed by Ardia et al. (2021). We observe a
steady increase in climate concerns during the last decade, with the level of our measure
nearly doubling. We then isolate monthly shocks to climate concerns and find they exhibit
a significant positive relation to the green factor. In other words, green stocks tend to
outperform when there is bad news about climate change. If we set the climate shocks to
zero, the green factor's estimated counterfactual performance becomes flat. That is, green
stocks would not have outperformed brown without strengthened climate concerns.

      In fact, green stocks might have underperformed brown, absent strengthened climate
concerns. Such a possibility is suggested when we include capital flows into sustainable
mutual funds as another measure of changes in climate concerns. The relation between fund
flows and the green factor is more difficult to estimate reliably, due to endogeneity issues.
Nevertheless, given our point estimates, when we zero out sustainable fund flows as well
as the above climate-concern shocks, the resulting counterfactual performance of the green
factor becomes negative, consistent with the factor having a negative expected return.

  Our empirical explanation of green stocks' outperformance accords with the PST model.
During a period when climate concerns strengthen sufficiently, the green factor delivers a
positive return, as investors demand greener stocks or customers demand greener products.
Outperformance caused by the strengthening of investor concerns is followed by lower ex-
pected performance of the green factor going forward. That is, a shift in the green factor's
expected future performance relates inversely to its realized performance.

    An inverse relation between realized returns and shifts in expected returns is not new
in the stock return literature.2 With stocks, a challenge to documenting this relation is
  2
      For example, this inverse relation figures prominently in empirical analyses of the equity premium by



                                                     2
that expected stock returns are unobservable and generally hard to estimate. With bonds,
however, we can see the relation more clearly. The inverse relation between a bond's realized
return and the change in its yield to maturity is well understood, and the yield provides
direct information about expected return, especially for buy-and-hold investors.

  The case of German "twin" bonds illustrates this inverse relation in the context of cli-
mate concerns. Since 2020, the German government has issued green bonds, along with
virtually identical non-green twins. The green bonds trade at lower yields, indicating lower
expected returns compared to non-green bonds. The yield spread between the green and
non-green twins, known as the "greenium," reflects investors' willingness to accept a lower
return in exchange for holding assets more aligned with their environmental values. Since
issuance, the 10-year greenium experienced roughly a three-fold widening, presumably due
to growing climate concerns. As a result, the green bond outperformed its non-green twin
by a significant margin over the same period. However, this outperformance does not imply
green outperformance going forward. Rather the opposite is clearly true, given the now wider
greenium. This case study has a counterpart in the outperformance of the green factor in
stocks. A downward shift in the green factor's expected future return is simply less easily
documented, given that stocks offer no directly observable analog to the greenium.

   Our main results relating climate shocks to green stock returns rely on the time series
of the green factor. We also conduct a parallel analysis by running panel regressions on
individual stocks, leading to two findings. First, there is a significantly positive relation
between a stock's greenness and its average return. Second, that positive relation disappears
when we interact the stock's greenness with climate-concern shocks, revealing that these
shocks fully account for the superior performance of green stocks during the sample period.
Both results echo our time-series evidence: despite having lower expected returns, green
stocks outperform brown due to positive surprises over the sample period.

   Green stocks' recent outperformance helps us understand the poor performance of value
stocks in the 2010s, the worst decade on record for the HML factor of Fama and French
(1993). We examine this performance through the lens of PST's two-factor model, with our
green factor assuming the role of the ESG factor. We find that the two-factor model explains
much of HML's recent underperformance. From November 2012 through December 2020,
HML's monthly CAPM alpha is a marginally significant -71 bps, whereas HML's two-factor
alpha is an insignificant -15 bps. In contrast, the green factor's alpha with respect to the
Fama-French three-factor model is a significant 21 bps. The green factor and HML are
negatively correlated, as value stocks are more often brown than green. Insofar as recent
Fama and French (2002) and P´
                            astor and Stambaugh (2001, 2009).


                                                3
average performance, however, the two-factor model explains HML's underperformance bet-
ter than the three-factor model explains the green factor's outperformance. The two-factor
model can also explain the momentum strategy's positive performance over the same period:
momentum's monthly CAPM alpha is 66 bps, whereas its two-factor alpha is -6 bps.

   As noted earlier, the green factor has a significantly positive relation to climate-concern
shocks. Curiously, the factor reacts to those shocks with a nontrivial delay. While the
factor has only a weak and insignificant positive relation to the current month's climate
shock, it has a significantly positive relation to the previous month's shock. Consistent
with these monthly results, at a weekly frequency we find climate shocks enter positively at
lags of two to five weeks, most strongly at four weeks. It seems that stock prices are slow
to incorporate relevant climate news. Ardia et al. (2021) find a positive contemporaneous
daily relation between green stock returns and climate news. We confirm that result, but
we also find that the relation flips to negative at lags of one and two days, offsetting the
positive contemporaneous relation. This behavior is consistent with temporary price pressure
from trading on same-day climate news. The bulk of the positive relation between green
stock returns and climate-concern shocks evidently occurs with multi-week lags. Our results
complement those of Hong, Li, and Xu (2019). They also find that stock prices are slow
to react to climate-change risks, but they look at different assets (stocks in food industries
across countries) and different climate shocks (trends in the risks of drought).

   Our study relates to a large empirical literature investigating returns on green versus
brown assets. One set of studies examine returns on an ex ante basis, using proxies for
expected future returns. In the bond market, for example, Baker et al. (2018), Zerbib
(2019), and Larcker and Watts (2020) analyze yields on green bonds versus brown. In the
stock market, Chava (2014) and El Ghoul et al. (2011) compare implied costs of capital
estimated for green firms versus brown. Most of these studies find lower ex ante returns on
green assets, consistent with theory. A second, larger set of studies examine returns on an ex
post basis, measuring realized green-versus-brown returns, generally for stocks. Examples
include In, Park, and Monk (2019), Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020, 2021), G¨   orgen et al.
(2020), and Hsu, Li, and Tsou (2020). We depart from all of these studies by focusing on
the distinction between ex ante and ex post returns. In particular, we show why high green
returns realized in recent years are likely to be misleading predictors of the future.

   Our evidence on how climate shocks affect realized returns also relates to studies investi-
gating the pricing of climate risk. Recent work examines that pricing in equities (e.g., Bolton
and Kacperczyk, 2020, 2021, Hsu, Li, and Tsou, 2020, and Faccini, Matin, and Skiadopoulos,
2021), corporate bonds (Huynh and Xia, 2021, and Seltzer, Starks, and Zhu, 2021), munici-


                                               4
pal bonds (Painter, 2020, and Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2021), options (Ilhan, Sautner, and
Vilkov, 2021), and real estate (Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis, 2019, Baldauf, Garlappi,
and Yannelis, 2020, and Giglio et al., 2021). Engle et al. (2020) develop a procedure to
dynamically hedge climate risk with the help of mimicking portfolios and textual analysis
of news sources. Krueger, Sautner, and Starks (2020) document the importance of climate
risk in a survey of institutional investors. For a survey of the climate finance literature, see
Giglio, Kelly, and Stroebel (2020).

   Our empirical analysis is guided by the theoretical model of PST, in which investors'
tastes for green assets play a key role. Other models featuring tastes for green assets can be
found in Fama and French (2007), Baker et al. (2018), Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski
(2021), and Avramov et al. (2021). In some of these models, tastes are not the only force
determining green assets' expected returns. For example, in the model of Pedersen et al.,
green returns are boosted by the presence of ESG-unaware investors. Their mechanism offers
an alternative way to view positive green returns caused by increases in consumers' demands
for green products. While these returns are viewed as unexpected in the PST setting, in the
Pedersen et al. setting they are partly expected by investors who anticipate the taste shifts
before market prices respond. In the model of Avramov et al., expected returns depend not
only on green tastes but also on uncertainty about the firm's greenness. We rely on the PST
model because it analyzes the effects of taste shifts and provides guidance in constructing
the ESG factor.

   Our results have important implications for research and practice. They underline the
danger in using recent average returns to estimate expected returns. In particular, the recent
outperformance of green assets does not imply high green returns going forward. In fact, if
the outperformance resulted from increased demands by ESG investors, then green assets'
expected returns are lower today than a decade ago. In the same spirit, value stocks' recent
underperformance is less likely to continue, because value stocks tend to be brown and growth
stocks green. From the corporate finance perspective, our findings imply that greener firms
have lower costs of capital than their recent stock performance might suggest. This is good
news for ESG investors, because one way they exert social impact is by decreasing green
firms' cost of capital (e.g., Heinkel et al., 2001, PST).

   This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 highlights the gap between expected and
realized returns in the context of German twin bonds. Section 3 describes how we measure
greenness in our main analysis, which is based on U.S. stocks. Section 4 discusses how we
construct the green factor and measure its performance. Section 5 relates this performance
to proxies for shifts in green tastes, such as climate news and flows into sustainable funds.


                                                5
Section 6 analyzes the relation between returns and greenness at the stock level. Section 7
documents the delayed reaction of stock prices to climate news. Section 8 concludes.



2. German twin bonds

This paper emphasizes the difference between expected and realized returns on green as-
sets. Quantifying this difference for stocks is challenging because expected stock returns are
not directly observable. In this section, we illustrate this difference for bonds, whose ex-
pected returns are tightly linked to yields to maturity. Conveniently, bond yields are easily
observable.

   Since 2020, the government of Germany, the largest European economy, has been issuing
green securities to finance its transition towards a low-carbon, sustainable economy.3 The
first green security, a 10-year bond, was issued in September 2020 in the amount of 6.5 billion
euros. The second green security, a 5-year note, followed two months later in the amount
of 5 billion euros. Both securities have zero coupon rates. Germany plans to issue at least
one green security per year, including a 30-year bond in May 2021 and a 10-year bond in
September 2021. We refer to these securities as "green bonds."

      Each green bond is issued with the same characteristics as an existing conventional bond
issued by the German government. Besides having the same issuer, the two bonds have
the same maturity date, the same coupon rate, and the same coupon payment dates. This
pairing creates "twin" bonds, which offer identical streams of cash flows with identical credit
risk but different greenness. By comparing the prices of twin bonds, we can gain some insight
into the value assigned to greenness by bond market investors.

      Even though the twin bonds are paired very carefully, some differences between them
remain. First, the issuance date of the green bond always comes after the initial issuance
date of the conventional bond. For example, the green bond issued in September 2020 has
a conventional twin issued in June 2020. Second, conventional bonds tend to be issued at
larger volumes than their green twins. For example, in 2020, the issuance of conventional
bonds was almost five times larger than that of the corresponding green bonds. Conventional
bonds could thus in principle be more liquid than their green twins. However, the German
Finance Agency has committed to play an active role in the secondary market for green
bonds to make their liquidity comparable to that of conventional bonds.
  3
   For more details, see https://www.deutsche-finanzagentur.de/en/institutional-investors/
federal-securities/green-federal-securities/.


                                               6
       We obtain daily data on the first pair of twin bonds, downloading the end-of-day bond
prices and mid-yields to maturity for the 10-year green bond (ISIN DE0001030708) and the
10-year non-green bond (DE0001102507) from Bloomberg. We download all available data
since the first date of trading for the green bond, which is September 8, 2020, through the
present date of April 12, 2021. Over this 7-month period, the two bonds' annual yields
fluctuate between -67 and -27 bps. We plot these yields in the Appendix.4

       Panel A of Figure 1 plots the time series of the difference between the yields of green and
non-green bonds, also known as the green premium, or the "greenium" (e.g., Larcker and
Watts, 2020). The greenium is always negative, ranging mostly between -5 and -2 bps per
year.5 Therefore, for investors holding the bonds to maturity, the green bond always has a
lower expected return than the non-green bond. This evidence is consistent with theories
predicting that green assets offer lower expected returns than non-green assets (e.g., P´
                                                                                        astor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor, 2021).6

       Given the lower yield of the green bond, one would expect it to deliver a lower return
than its conventional twin. Instead the green bond delivered a higher return in our sample.
We calculate bond returns as daily percentage changes in bond prices. The full-sample
cumulative returns are negative, -1.47% for the green bond and -1.78% for the non-green
bond, due to a rise in yields between September 2020 and April 2021. More interesting, the
green bond outperforms its non-green twin. This outperformance accrues steadily through
the sample, as shown by Panel B of Figure 1. The figure plots cumulative returns on a long-
short portfolio, which goes long the green bond and short the non-green bond. The portfolio's
average daily return of 0.2 bps is statistically significant (t = 2.33), and its cumulative return
of 31 bps is substantial relative to German government bond yields.

       Importantly, the positive average return of the long-short portfolio does not imply that
the portfolio's expected return is positive. On the contrary, we know with certainty that the
portfolio's expected return is negative if the bonds are held to maturity. For example, on
September 8, 2020, the green bond's yield was -51.2 bps per year, whereas the non-green
   4
      The Appendix is available on the authors' websites. It reports the results also for the second pair of
twin bonds, which was first issued in November 2020. Those results are similar to those presented here. We
prioritize the first twin pair due to its longer history.
    5
      These greenium values are close to those estimated by prior studies in different settings. For example,
Baker et al. (2018) estimate a greenium of about -6 bps in a sample of over 2,000 U.S. municipal and
corporate green bonds, whereas Zerbib (2019) estimates -2 bps in a sample of over 1,000 supranational,
sub-sovereign and agency, municipal, corporate, financial, and covered green bonds.
    6
      This conclusion is reinforced by liquidity considerations. As noted earlier, the non-green bond has been
issued at larger volume than its green twin. If this volume difference makes the conventional bond more
liquid despite the aforementioned efforts of the German Finance Agency, then the resulting liquidity premium
pushes the greenium up, and the expected return penalty associated with greenness is even larger.



                                                      7
bond's yield was -49.6 bps. Therefore, if both bonds are held to maturity, the green bond
delivers a return 1.6 bps lower than the non-green bond. The green bond's expected return is
lower also if the bonds are not held to maturity under a variety of plausible conditions, such
as changes in the greenium being unpredictable. That condition is likely to hold, especially in
efficient, or near-efficient, markets. Under that condition, the green bond's expected return
is lower at the beginning of the sample, and the expected return of the long-short portfolio
is negative. The cumulative value of this expected return is plotted by the dashed line in
Panel B of Figure 1, which is gently downward-sloping.

   How can we reconcile the higher realized return of the green bond with its lower expected
return? The answer is that that the greenium in Panel A grows increasingly negative between
September 2020 and April 2021, deepening from -1.6 to -5.1 bps. This steady deepening
is responsible for the steady outperformance of the long-short portfolio in Panel B. In the
language of P´astor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2021), if investors' tastes shift toward green
assets, they push up the price of the green bond relative to the non-green bond. However,
the green bond's outperformance is temporary, as it comes entirely at the expense of the
bond's future return. Investors buying the bonds on September 8, 2020 and holding them
to maturity expected to earn 1.6 bps less from the green bond, but those buying on April
12, 2021 expected to earn 5.1 bps less.

      This example illustrates how time variation in expected returns drives a wedge between
returns expected ex ante and those realized ex post. Even though the green bond's realized
return is higher than that of the non-green bond, the green bond's expected long-term
return is demonstrably lower. In other words, the expected return of the long-short portfolio
is negative even though the portfolio's average realized return is positive (and significant at
the 5% confidence level). Unlikely events do happen sometimes, and the outperformance of
the German green bond in the first seven months of its existence is one of them.



3. Measuring stocks' greenness

We compute stock-level environmental scores based on MSCI ESG Ratings data, a successor
to the MSCI KLD data used in many academic studies. Our data have a number of advan-
tages. According to Eccles and Stroehle (2018), MSCI is the world's largest provider of ESG
ratings. The MSCI ESG Ratings data are used by more than 1,700 clients, including pen-
sion funds, asset managers, consultants, advisers, banks, and insurers.7 MSCI covers more
  7
    See https://www.msci.com/our-solutions/esg-investing, as of May 2021. In addition, MSCI has
been voted `Best firm for SRI research' in the Extel & SRI Connect Independent Research in Responsible


                                                  8
firms than other ESG raters, such as Asset4, KLD, RobescoSAM, Sustainalytics, and Vigeo
Eiris (Berg et al., 2020). MSCI generates its ratings from corporate documents, government
data, various journals, and news media. It updates those ratings at least annually. MSCI's
ESG research unit employs more than 200 analysts and incorporates artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and natural language processing into its methodology.

    The availability of industry-unadjusted granular data is another advantage of MSCI data
for our purposes. With industry adjustment, a heavily-polluting firm is classified as green if
it pollutes less than other firms in its heavily-polluting industry. That unappealing scenario
does not arise in PST's theory, in which there is no industry adjustment. We therefore use
MSCI's granular data to compute an environmental measure that is not industry adjusted.
In contrast, MSCI's composite ESG rating is industry-adjusted, as are ratings from other
leading providers.

    We use the MSCI variables "Environmental pillar score" (E score ) and "Environmental
pillar weight" (E weight ). E score is a number between 0 and 10 measuring the firm's
weighted-average score across 13 environmental issues related to climate change, natural
resources, pollution and waste, and environmental opportunities. These scores are designed
to measure a company's resilience to long-term environmental risks. E weight, which is
typically constant across firms in the same industry, is a number between 0 and 100 measuring
the importance of environmental issues relative to social and governance issues.8

    We compute the unadjusted greenness score of firm i at the beginning of month t as

                       Gi,t-1 = -(10 - E scorei,t-1 ) × E weighti,t-1 /100 ,                             (1)

where E scorei,t-1 and E weighti,t-1 are from company i's most recent MSCI ratings date
before month t, looking back no more than 12 months. The quantity 10 - E scorei,t-1
measures how far the company is from a perfect environment score of 10. The product
(10-E scorei,t-1 )×E weighti,t-1 measures how brown the firm is, specifically, the interaction
of how badly the firm scores on environmental issues and how large the environmental impacts
are for the industry's typical firm (i.e., E weighti,t-1 ). The initial minus sign converts the
measure from brownness to greenness.

    Including E weight in equation (1) is important for capturing a company's greenness.
For example, in 2019, Exxon Mobil and Best Buy had similar E score values: 4.2 and 4.1,
Investment Survey in each year from 2015 through 2019 (https://www.msci.com/zh/esg-ratings).
   8
     MSCI's E, S, and G weights sum to 100. According to MSCI, "The weightings take into account both
the contribution of the industry, relative to all other industries, to the negative or positive impact on the
environment or society; and the timeline within which we expect that risk or opportunity for companies in
the industry to materialize...." We follow MSCI in using the GICS sub-industry classification.


                                                     9
respectively. If we only used E score, we would judge these companies to be similarly green.
But E weight is 48 for Exxon and only 11 for Best Buy, reflecting that oil and gas companies
have larger environmental impacts than consumer retail companies. Exxon and Best Buy end
up with Gi,t = -2.78 and -0.65, respectively, indicating that Best Buy is much greener than
Exxon. Similar to us, MSCI uses the interaction of E score and E weight when computing
firms' composite ESG ratings.9

       The environmental score we use in our analysis is

                                           gi,t = Gi,t - Gt ,                                        (2)

where Gt is the value-weighted average of Gi,t across all firms i. Since we subtract Gt , gi,t
measures the company's greenness relative to the market portfolio, as in PST.

       We compute gi,t in the sample of stocks with non-missing MSCI data and CRSP share
codes of 10 or 11. We merge CRSP and MSCI by using a combination of CUSIP, ticker,
and company name. Our sample extends from November 2012 to December 2020. We begin
in November 2012 because MSCI's coverage increases dramatically in October 2012, when
MSCI began covering small U.S. stocks.10 Figure 2 plots the number of U.S. stocks with
non-missing lagged MSCI ratings. This number increases sharply in November 2012, from
roughly 500 to over 2,000. Our purchased MSCI data end in March 2020, but we extend our
sample through December 2020 by looking back up to 12 months when computing Gi,t-1 .

   Table 1 shows industries ranked by their equal-weighted average gi,t scores at the end of
2019. The lowest-ranked industries include chemicals, oil and gas exploration and produc-
tion, steel, mining (including coal), paper and forest products, and marine transport. It is
reassuring that these industries, which are generally viewed as having negative environmental
impacts, appear at the bottom of our ranking.
   9
      MSCI's composite ESG rating is based on their "Weighted Average Key Issue" score, which equals
[E score × E weight + S score × S weight + G score × G weight]/100, where S and G refer to social and
governance. So if MSCI used a formula like equation (1) to compute greenness not just on environmental
but also on social and governance dimensions, then we could express MSCI's composite ESG score as 10 plus
the sum of E, S, and G greenness.
   10
      Before October 2012, MSCI covered only the largest 1,500 companies in the MSCI World Index, plus
large companies in the UK and Australia MSCI indexes. In October 2012 MSCI added many smaller U.S.
firms when it began covering also the MSCI U.S. Investible Market Index.




                                                   10
4. The green factor

4.1. Constructing the green factor

We construct the green factor by following the ESG factor methodology derived by PST. The
factor is a return spread between environmentally friendly and unfriendly stocks. PST show
that the factor's realizations can be estimated month by month by running cross-sectional
regressions of market-adjusted excess stock returns on the stocks' greenness characteristics,
with no intercept. The slope from one such regression, which represents the green factor's
realization in month t, is given in equation (34) of PST as
                                                      e
                                        ^      gt-1 r
                                                    ~t
                                        fgt =           ,                                    (3)
                                              gt-1 gt-1
                                                                                      e
where gt-1 is the vector containing stocks' greenness characteristics, gi,t-1 , and r
                                                                                    ~t   r
                                                                                         ~t -
m,t-1 r
      ~mt is the vector of stocks' market-adjusted excess returns. Specifically, r
                                                                                 ~t is the vector
of stocks' returns in excess of the risk-free rate, r~mt is the market return in excess of the
risk-free rate, and m,t-1 is the vector of stocks' market betas, which we estimate from rolling
monthly regressions of individual stocks' excess returns on excess market returns using up
to 60 months (and no less than 36 months) of data ending in month t. Since r
                                                                           ~t and r
                                                                                  ~mt are
excess returns, the green factor is the return on a zero-cost portfolio.

   Zero-cost portfolios are commonly used as factors in the finance literature, but they are
generally empirically motivated, and their construction details are somewhat arbitrary (e.g.,
Fama and French, 1993, 2015). In contrast, our green factor is theoretically motivated, and
its construction methodology is derived analytically. The factor is essentially a portfolio of
market-adjusted stock positions where each stock is weighted by its greenness, with green
stocks receiving positive weights and brown stocks negative weights. PST show that when
factor weights are based on greenness rather than market capitalization, assets are priced in
equilibrium by two factors: the market portfolio and the green factor.


4.2. The green factor's performance

Figure 3 plots the green factor's cumulative return. Green stocks strongly outperformed
brown in the 2010s, with a cumulative return difference of nearly 40% over our 8.2-year
sample period. The factor averaged 31 bps per month (t-statistic: 2.91), as reported in
the first column of Table 2. The table's remaining columns report results of regressing the
green factor on various other return factors, including those in the three- and five-factor

                                               11
models of Fama and French (1993, 2015), the momentum factor (UMD) as constructed by
those authors, and the traded liquidity factor of P´
                                                   astor and Stambaugh (2003). In all cases
the green factor's alpha (regression constant) is economically and statistically significant,
ranging from 18 to 37 bps per month, with t-statistics between 2.42 and 3.38.

   Much of the above performance of green stocks stems from industry-level greenness. If we
construct the green factor as in equation (3) but instead use industry-adjusted gi,t-1 values,
the resulting factor's performance is substantially lower, by more than half. Details appear
in the Appendix.

   The green factor's lowest alpha in Table 2 occurs in column 4, where we adjust for the
three Fama-French factors and momentum. Its significant exposures to SMB, HML, and
UMD indicate that the green factor tilts toward large stocks, growth stocks, and recent
winners. Net of those exposures, the factor's alpha is 18 bps per month (t = 2.46).


4.3. Pricing value and momentum

During our sample period, the market-adjusted monthly alphas of HML and UMD are -71
bps and 66 bps, respectively, with t-statistics of -1.93 and 1.92, as shown in columns 1 and
3 of Table 3. The green factor's significant exposures to value and momentum, noted above,
prompt us to ask a performance question in the reverse direction: To what extent can the
green factor's strong performance account for the last decade's historic underperformance of
value, or for the positive performance of momentum?

   To address this question, we turn to the equilibrium setting of PST, in which expected
returns obey a two-factor model that includes the market and an ESG factor. Here we assign
the latter role to the green factor. HML's and UMD's alphas with respect to the two-factor
model, which are shown in columns 2 and 4 of Table 3, are much smaller in magnitude than
with just market adjustment. HML's alpha becomes -15 bps instead of -71 bps; UMD's
alpha becomes -6 bps instead of 66 bps. The t-statistics shrink to -0.50 and -0.22.

   While the green factor's significant performance survives controlling for HML and UMD
exposures, the reverse is not true. Nearly 80% of HML's negative alpha, and all of UMD's
positive alpha, disappear after controlling for the green factor's strong performance. Recog-
nizing the brown nature of value stocks, and the green nature of growth stocks, thus helps
us understand why the value strategy experienced its worst decade ever in the 2010s.




                                             12
5. Explaining the green factor's performance

What accounts for the green factor's strong performance over the last decade? After all,
the factor's expected performance is negative, according to PST's model. As those authors
explain, however, the green factor's realized performance can be positive in periods of unan-
ticipated increases in demands for green firms' products and stocks (or decreases in demands
for brown firms' products and stocks). These green demands can increase for various reasons,
but a likely leading source is increased concerns about climate change.

   In this section we investigate whether the green factor's positive performance can be
explained by increases in climate concerns and green demands. We first describe how we
proxy empirically for changes in (i) climate concerns, via media coverage, (ii) green-product
demand, via firms' earnings news, and (iii) green-investment demand, via flows into sustain-
able funds. We then estimate the extent to which these shocks explain the green factor's
realized performance. We find that climate concerns play the most important role, explaining
virtually all of the green factor's positive performance over the sample period.


5.1. Measuring climate concerns

We measure concerns about climate change by using the Media Climate Change Concerns
index (MCCC) of Ardia et al. (2021). This index, which is available from January 2003
through June 2018, is constructed by using data from eight major U.S. newspapers. It
captures the number of climate news stories each day as well as their negativity and focus
on risk. For each news article discussing climate change, Ardia et al. compute a "concern"
measure that interacts two quantities: the fraction of total words related to risk and the
scaled difference between negative and positive words. They aggregate this measure to
the newspaper-day level by adding the concern values across stories. Next, they aggregate
to the day level by averaging across newspapers, after adjusting for heterogeneity across
newspapers. Finally, they take the square root of this daily measure because, as they put
it, "One concerning article about climate change may increase concerns, but 20 concerning
articles are unlikely to increase concerns 20 times more."

   We measure the level of climate concern by using a distributed-lag model that assumes
individuals' memory of climate news stories decays gradually over time. Let M CCCt be the
MCCC index averaged across days in month t. We define the level of climate concerns at




                                             13
the end of month t as
                                           T
                                   Ct =           M CCCt- ,                                 (4)
                                            =0
where 0 <  < 1 measures how long climate news persists in investors' memories. We set
the half-life of news stories to one year, which implies  = 0.94. The Ct series looks very
similar for similar values of . We set T = 36 months, because the MCCC index is relatively
short-lived and its further lags have small effects on Ct (as 0.9436  0.1).

   Figure 4 plots the climate concern measure, Ct , between November 2012 and June 2018.
The level of Ct nearly doubles during this period. Over the same period, the green factor's
performance, also plotted in Figure 4, is strongly positive, cumulating to nearly 18%.

   Green factor returns should respond to unanticipated changes in climate concerns. The
change in climate concerns, defined as Ct  Ct - Ct-1 , follows from equation (4):
                                    T
             Ct = M CCCt -               M CCCt-  -1 (1 - ) - T M CCCt-1-T .                (5)
                                    =1

We treat this change as unanticipated, given that its autocorrelation is insignificantly differ-
ent from zero.

   Ardia et al. compute unexpected changes in climate concerns as the prediction errors
from rolling AR(1) models applied to the MCCC index. Our motivation for Ct is different,
but Ct has a 94% correlation with the AR(1) error series. While we prefer our approach,
we find very similar results if we use the latter series, as we report in the Appendix.


5.2. Other drivers of green demands

Increased climate concerns are likely to play a key role in boosting demands by consumers for
green firms' products as well as demands by investors for green firms' stocks. Nonetheless,
green demands can also arise from other sources. We allow for such sources by including
additional proxies for green demand shifts. We first focus on the product-demand channel
by constructing measures of firms' earnings news. We then turn to the investment-demand
channel by measuring flows of capital into sustainable funds. Of course, all of the above
forces driving green demands also drive brown demands, just in the opposite direction.

   News about firms' profits affects the green factor's performance. Positive performance can
reflect better earnings news for green firms than brown, due to effects not necessarily captured
by our climate-concern measure. To allow for such effects, we compute two earnings-news
measures using data from CRSP and I/B/E/S.

                                                  14
      The first measure is based on the idea that a large portion of earnings news occurs on days
when firms make earnings-related announcements (Beyer et al., 2010). We consider two types
of announcements: those of quarterly earnings and voluntary forward guidance regarding
future earnings. We compute stock returns in excess of the market during the three-trading-
day windows centered on these announcement dates. We add the excess returns across
unique events within a given stock-quarter. For about 70% of observations, no summation
is required because the forward-guidance date coincides with the earnings-announcement
date. Many firms never issue forward guidance, and some firms start or stop issuing forward
guidance. We find that our announcement-return measure explains about 20% of the variance
of quarterly stock-level returns (see the Appendix).

      Our second measure captures news about long-term earnings. Such news can arrive
gradually over time, in between the quarterly announcements. This second measure uses
data on analysts' forecasts of each firm's long-run earnings growth rate. For firm i and
quarter t, the measure equals the earliest mean analyst forecast in quarter t + 1 minus the
latest mean forecast in quarter t - 1. Using forecasts from quarters t - 1 and t + 1 helps
to capture all news arriving in quarter t. The measure may also include a small amount of
information that arrives in quarters t - 1 or t + 1, but those inclusions are innocuous since
they should not help explain returns in quarter t. We winsorize this measure at the 1%
level. We find that this measure is significantly related to quarterly stock-level returns but
explains less than 1% of their variance (see the Appendix).

      Measuring the part of returns coming from earnings news is known to be difficult, and our
measures surely miss important earnings news. Our first measure misses short-term news
that arrives outside the three-day announcement windows. Analysts' long-term forecasts are
only three- to five-year forecasts, so they exclude news about distant earnings. Any climate-
related news affecting earnings more than five years in the future would elude our measures.
Another limitation is that analysts' forecasts can differ from investors' forecasts.

      Since the green factor is an aggregate time-series variable, we need to convert our firm-
level earnings measures into aggregate ones. We do so by following the construction of our
green factor in equation (3). For earnings measure Xit , we compute its aggregate green-
minus-brown counterpart as gt Xt /(gt gt ), where Xt is the vector containing Xit .

      To proxy for shifts in investors' demand for green assets, we use flows into sustainable
funds. From Morningstar's 2021 Sustainable Funds U.S. Landscape Report, we obtain data
on quarterly total flows into U.S. sustainable funds.11 We scale these flows, which we refer
 11
      The data combine active and passive funds, equity and bond funds, open-end funds, and ETFs. Morn-



                                                   15
to as "ESG flows," by the average total market capitalization of CRSP stocks during the
quarter. ESG flows increased dramatically in 2013­2020, especially beginning in 2019.


5.3. Sources of the green factor's performance

Table 4 relates monthly green-factor performance to our proxies for shifts in green demands
by investors and consumers. We first regress the green factor on climate-concern shocks from
both the current and previous month. We find that the green factor's response to climate
news is significantly positive, albeit mostly lagged. (See Section 7 for a deeper analysis of
the lag.) In column 1 of Table 4, the coefficient on the current climate shock is positive but
insignificant, whereas the coefficient on the previous month's shock is nearly four times larger
and has a t-statistic of 2.85. Aside from this curious lag, the green factor's positive response
to climate-concern shocks makes sense. An increase in climate concerns is likely to raise
both the demand for products of green firms and the demand to hold those firms' stocks;
both effects push green stock prices higher relative to brown. Climate shocks explain 17% of
the green factor's monthly variance. Column 2 of Table 4 adds the earnings-news variables
to the previous regression. Both variables enter positively, indicating better earnings news
for greener stocks, but neither coefficient is estimated precisely enough to be statistically
significant. The climate coefficients remain similar to those in column 1.

    What if there had been no shocks to climate concerns or to green-versus-brown earnings?
Figure 5 compares the green factor's realized performance to its counterfactual performance
in the absence of climate and earnings shocks. Using the regression estimated in column 2
of Table 4, we compute the counterfactual monthly green factor as the regression intercept
plus the estimated residual, thereby assuming zero shocks to climate concerns and earnings.
(Equivalently, the counterfactual equals the realized value minus the regressors times their
respective coefficients.) The dashed line in Figure 5 plots the cumulative counterfactual
return, and the solid line shows the cumulative realized return. We also plot a 95% confidence
interval around the counterfactual, recognizing that the regression coefficients are estimated
with error. To compute this interval, we repeatedly draw regression coefficients from their
estimated sampling distribution, use those coefficients to compute simulated counterfactual
returns, and then plot the simulated returns' 95% confidence intervals.

    The striking result in Figure 5 is that, absent climate-concern and earnings shocks, the
green factor's performance is essentially flat. Moreover, the counterfactual performance is
ingstar defines a sustainable fund as follows: "For a fund to be included in the sustainable funds universe,
it must hold itself out to be a sustainable investment. In other words, ESG concerns must be central to its
investment process and the fund's intent should be apparent from a simple reading of its prospectus...."


                                                    16
reliably below the realized performance, as the latter lies well outside the 95% confidence
interval. Because the climate-concern and earnings shocks are unanticipated, so too is es-
sentially all of the green factor's positive performance over the period. That is, the positive
performance does not imply higher expected returns on green stocks versus brown.

   Column 3 of Table 4 adds sustainable fund flows to the previous regression. Reverse
causation is a potential concern when regressing returns on contemporaneous flows. Instead
of flows (or shifts in ESG tastes) causing returns, flows could be chasing same-period returns.
We address this potential endogeneity by instrumenting for same-quarter sustainable flow
using its previous-quarter value. The exclusion restriction plausibly holds, because flows
cannot chase future realized returns. We find large first-stage t-statistics, indicating that the
relevance condition holds and there is no problem with weak instruments.

  In column 3 we also add sustainable funds' lagged total AUM, a proxy for the level of
ESG tastes. This addition is motivated by PST's theoretical result that the expected green-
factor return depends negatively on the average strength of ESG tastes (see equation (33) in
PST), and the size of the ESG industry depends positively on those tastes (see Figure 5 in
PST). We obtain annual sustainable fund AUM from the previously mentioned Morningstar
report.12 We scale ESG AUM by the total market capitalization of CRSP stocks.

  The coefficients on both of the fund variables in column 3 exhibit their predicted signs.
The estimated coefficient on flows is positive, consistent with higher flows indicating stronger
green-stock demands and thus upward pressure on green-stock prices. The lagged AUM
of sustainable funds gets a negative estimated coefficient, consistent with the above PST
prediction. As with the earnings shocks, however, neither of the fund variables enters with
enough precision to achieve statistical significance. One possible explanation is that our
proxies for ESG flows and assets are noisy, given that they are derived from data on U.S.
sustainable mutual funds and ETFs, omitting other ESG holdings. The coefficients on the
climate and earnings variables are virtually unchanged from their values in column 2. These
results suggest that our proxies for earnings news and ESG flows do not provide information
about shifts in green demands beyond that captured by our climate-concern variable.

       We also decompose the green factor's performance with respect to its sources. Figure
  12
    We convert Morningstar's annual series to a quarterly series by using data on ESG flows and market
returns, to approximate capital gains and losses. We estimate ESG funds' AUM at the end of quarter t,
denoted AU ^M t as

                   ^M t =        True, known AU Mt if t is the year's last quarter
                  AU           ^M t-1 (1 + Rt                                                                (6)
                              AU            mkt
                                                ) + ESGF lowt (1 + 1
                                                                   2 Rt
                                                                       mkt
                                                                           ) otherwise,
       mkt                                                   1
where Rt   is the market return in quarter t. The fraction   2   reflects that flows arrive throughout a quarter.


                                                   17
6 displays the decomposition based on the estimates in column 3 of Table 4. The solid
line plots the green factor's realized cumulative performance. The other lines show the
factor's counterfactual performance after "turning off" one or more shocks. First, we com-
pute counterfactual green-factor returns assuming zero changes in climate concerns. These
counterfactual returns equal realized green-factor returns minus the contemporaneous and
lagged changes in climate concerns times their respective estimated coefficients. Next, we
additionally assume zero earnings shocks. Finally, we assume zero ESG flows. To plot the
latter line, we set ESG flows to zero in the regression model, and we set ESG assets to their
counterfactual values in the absence of ESG flows. Counterfactual ESG assets grow by ESG
funds' imputed returns but not their flows.13

       Figure 6 reveals that climate-concern shocks account for most of the gap between the
actual and counterfactual performance plotted previously in Figure 5; the additional contri-
bution from earnings shocks is modest. New in Figure 6 is the effect of zeroing out sustainable
fund flows, in addition to the climate-concern and earnings shocks removed previously. Un-
der that all-in scenario, the counterfactual performance of the green factor is substantially
negative, as shown by the bottom dash-dot line. In other words, shutting down all of the
identified ex post shocks to the green factor leaves it with negative estimated performance,
consistent with its theoretically implied ex ante performance.

       Next, we analyze sources of the green factor's alpha. As shown earlier in Table 2, the green
factor's performance over our sample period remains significantly positive after controlling
for various factors. In particular, even though the green factor tilts away from value stocks,
the value factor's unprecedented underperformance in the 2010s cannot explain the green
factor's positive performance. To assess similar robustness of the results in this section, we
compute each month's realized green factor net of its exposure to the three factors of Fama
and French (1993) by taking the intercept plus the residual from the time-series regression of
the green factor on the Fama-French factors. We then use this green-factor "alpha" instead
of the green factor to repeat the analyses in Table 4 and Figure 5. The results appear in
  13
    Define ESGAssetst to be AUM at end of quarter t, ESGF lowst to be ESG flows during t, and ESGRt
to be return on ESG funds in t. We impute the value of ESGRt by taking the average of ESGR1t and
ESGR2t from the following two equations, which differ only in the assumed timing of flows:
                                          ESGAssetst - ESGF lowst
                            ESGR1t    =                           -1                                  (7)
                                              ESGAssetst-1
                                                ESGAssetst
                            ESGR2t    =                             - 1.                              (8)
                                          ESGAssetst-1 + ESGF lowst

            ~
We set ESGAssets   t = ESGAssets in 2009q4, then in subsequent quarters we grow ESG assets by the
                                      ~
imputed ESGRt . We then scale ESGAssets     t by the size of CRSP, as before. We find that counterfactual
ESG assets are roughly flat from 2009 to 2020.



                                                   18
Table 5 and Figure 7.

   The results in Table 5 are very similar to those in Table 4. Climate-concern shocks enter
positively for both the current and previous month, with the previous month's effect being
much larger and statistically significant. Although none of the other variables enter with
significance, their coefficients again have their predicted signs, with the minor exception of
ESG flow, which enters with a small negative coefficient. Overall, the regression results using
the green-factor alpha deliver a virtually identical message to those using the green factor.
Not surprisingly, the same statement then applies to the counterfactual analysis displayed
in Figure 7. That is, zeroing out climate and earnings shocks removes all of the otherwise
substantial positive alpha. We find similar results if we repeat these analyses using Carhart
(1997) four-factor alphas, P´
                            astor-Stambaugh (2003) four-factor alphas, or Fama and French
(2015) five-factor alphas (see the Appendix).

   As explained earlier, our measure of climate concerns builds on that of Ardia et al. (2021).
Those authors in turn acknowledge the prior work of Engle et al. (2020), who construct two
measures of climate concerns, also based on media coverage. Ardia et al. discuss those
alternative measures and explain that their measure adds risk as an another component of
climate concerns. We rely on that more recent measure, but we also examine the robustness of
our results to including the Engle et al. measures. We find that doing so does not change our
conclusions. For example, we augment the independent variables in column 3 of Table 4 by
including climate-concern shocks based on both of the Engle et al. measures for the current
and previous month. The coefficients on all of those additional variables are statistically
insignificant. In contrast, the shocks we construct based on the Ardia et al. measure still
enter in that augmented regression as they do in the earlier regressions: the coefficient is
positive and insignificant for the current month but much larger and significant for the
previous month. See the Appendix for details.



6. Greenness and individual stock returns

All of our empirical analysis thus far is based on the green factor. That factor's positive
performance is essentially equivalent to green stocks outperforming brown, given the factor's
construction in equation (3). Next, to show that our conclusions do not hinge solely on the
green factor's time series, we run panel regressions using individual stocks.

   Table 6 reports regressions of individual stock returns in month t on various regressors.
All regressions include time fixed effects and therefore capture cross-sectional variation in


                                              19
returns. We begin in column 1 with a single regressor: the stock's greenness, gi,t-1 . The
coefficient on greenness is significantly positive, indicating that greener stocks perform better
over the sample period, consistent with the positive performance of the green factor.

       Column 2 of Table 6 adds two regressors: gi,t-1 interacted with the climate-concern shock
in months t and t - 1. The coefficients on those regressors mirror the results in column 1 of
Table 4: the coefficient on gi,t-1 interacted with month t's climate-concern shock is positive
but insignificant, while the coefficient on the interaction with month t - 1's shock is larger and
significant. As before, this result implies that green stocks outperform when climate concerns
increase, albeit mostly with a lag. Notably, the coefficient on stand-alone greenness, gi,t-1 ,
turns slightly negative.14 That is, all of green stocks' outperformance indicated in column
1 disappears after we remove the effects of increased climate concerns. This result accords
with that in Figure 6, in which the green factor's positive performance all but disappears
after removing climate shocks.

       Column 3 of Table 6 adds the two earnings-news variables for individual stocks. Not
surprisingly, both are strongly related to individual stock returns. Even after controlling for
these important drivers of individual stock returns, however, the climate-concern coefficients
are little changed, and the coefficient on gi,t-1 remains slightly negative. The same is true
in column 4, which adds interactions between gi,t-1 and the ESG flow and AUM variables
defined earlier. Similar to before, we instrument for the interaction of gi,t-1 and contem-
poraneous ESG flows by using gi,t-1 interacted with lagged ESG flows. Consistent with
the predicted signs, the flow interaction enters positively and the AUM interaction enters
negatively, but neither is significant. These results mirror the time-series results in Table 4.
Finally, adding book-to-market as a regressor in column 5 has negligible effects. Importantly,
across columns 2 through 5, the climate-concern coefficients remain little changed, and the
coefficient on gi,t-1 remains slightly negative but insignificant.

   Overall, the panel-regression analysis of individual stocks delivers the same message as
the time-series analysis of the green factor: the outperformance of green stocks over brown
is attributable entirely to climate-concern shocks.
  14
    The sample shrinks as we move across the columns and add more regressors. These changes in sample
are not responsible for the changes in g 's coefficient, however. In the Appendix, we hold the sample constant
across the columns and show a similar pattern in g 's coefficients.




                                                     20
7. Timing of climate news and green-factor returns

In this section, we take a closer look at the strong relation between the green factor's returns
and shocks to climate concerns. As shown previously in Section 5.3, this relation is positive
but mostly asynchronous. Recall from Tables 4 and 5 that the green factor has a positive but
insignificant relation to the current month's climate-concern shock, whereas its relation to
the previous month's climate shock is significant and much stronger. To better understand
this relation, we examine it at a higher data frequency.

       First, we turn to the weekly frequency. The weekly change in climate concerns is well
approximated by M CCCt , the value of the MCCC index averaged across the days in week
t.15 To create the weekly green-factor series, we compute a daily series by applying equation
(3) at the daily frequency and then compounding those daily factor realizations within each
week. A convenient by-product of this approach is the daily factor series, which we use later
in this section. We estimate the slope coefficients in the time-series regression
                                              T
                                 GFt = a +          M CCCt- + et ,                                  (9)
                                              =0

where GFt is the green factor in week t and T = 7 weeks.

       Figure 8 plots the estimated  coefficients for lags  = 0, 1, . . . , 7 weeks, along with
their 95% confidence intervals. The point estimate of 0 is positive but far from significant.
The estimates of 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 are all positive, though only 4 is significant, marginally,
at the 95% confidence level. The weekly relation is thus lagged, peaking at the lag of four
weeks. This evidence is consistent with our prior evidence based on monthly data. Stock
prices seem to incorporate shifts in climate concerns with a multi-week delay.

       Second, we conduct the same analysis at the daily frequency. We measure the daily
change in climate concerns by M CCCt , the value of the MCCC index on day t, with an
adjustment for non-trading days. On such days, stock returns are missing, but the MCCC
index is available. Since news released during non-trading days gets into stock prices on the
first subsequent trading day, we define M CCCt to be the sum of the MCCC index values
since the end of the previous trading day. For example, M CCCt on a Monday is the sum
of the raw MCCC values from Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. We then run the time-series
regression in equation (9), except that t is now measured in days, with T = 5 days.
  15
    The weekly value of  implied by the monthly value of 0.94 is 0.985. As a result, 1 -   0 and the
second term in equation (5) is small. With T = 3 × 52 = 156 weeks, T = 0.985156  0.09, so the third term
in equation (5) is also small, implying Ct  M CCCt . We use the same approximation later at the daily
frequency, where it is even more precise because the daily  = 0.998 and T = 3 × 365 = 1, 095 days.


                                                   21
   Figure 9 plots the estimates of  for lags of  = 0, 1, . . . , 5 days, along with their 95%
confidence intervals. Unlike in weekly data, the positive estimate of 0 is now statistically
significant. This evidence is consistent with that of Ardia et al. (2021), who also report a
positive contemporaneous daily relation between their MCCC index and green stock returns.
This is not a given because Ardia et al. measure stocks' greenness differently, by using firms'
self-reported greenhouse gas emissions as reported by the Asset4/Refinitiv database. Ardia
et al.'s stock universe is also smaller than ours as they focus on the S&P 500 firms.

   Figure 9 also shows negative estimates of 1 and 2 , though only that of 1 is significant,
and marginally so. The estimated magnitudes of 1 and 2 add up approximately to that
of 0 , indicating that the negative relations estimated at lags of one and two days offset the
positive contemporaneous relation. These results explain why we do not observe significant
contemporaneous relations in weekly and monthly data. A natural interpretation of the daily
results is that trading driven by same-day climate news exerts temporary price pressure that
is fully reversed within two days.



8. Conclusion

Realized returns are a popular proxy for expected returns in the empirical asset pricing
literature. However, high realized returns do not always indicate high expected returns,
especially if they are realized over a relatively short period. We offer the salient example
of green assets over the past decade. We show that green assets' high recent returns are
unexpected, reflecting news about environmental concerns rather than high expected returns.
After constructing a theoretically motivated green factor from U.S. stock data, we show that
the factor's recent outperformance vanishes after removing the effects of climate-concern
shocks. Surprisingly, those shocks get reflected in the green factor's returns with a multi-
week delay. We also find that a two-factor asset pricing model featuring the green factor
absorbs much of the historic underperformance of value stocks in the 2010s.

   Realized asset returns are notoriously noisy, and much of their volatility is viewed as
inexplicable (e.g., Roll, 1984). We explain some of it for the green factor by linking the
factor's returns to various proxies for shocks to green demands, such as a text-based measure
of climate concerns, two measures of green-versus-brown earnings news, and sustainable fund
flows. Additional proxies can be considered by future studies, with the aim of explaining
a larger fraction of the green factor's returns. Future work can also apply our approach to
other aspects of ESG investing, within various equity styles, and for other asset classes.


                                              22
   Our results contain a warning for investigations of climate-risk pricing. We find that
green stocks typically outperform brown when climate concerns increase. This result echoes
similar findings by Choi, Gao, and Jiang (2020), Engle et al. (2020), and Ardia et al. (2021).
Equilibrium expected returns of stocks that are better hedges against adverse climate shocks
include a negative hedging premium if the representative investor is averse to such shocks
(e.g., PST). Empirically confirming a climate risk premium, however, must confront the large
unanticipated positive component of green stock returns during the last decade. Without
accounting for those unexpectedly high returns on stocks that appear to be relatively good
climate hedges, one could be led astray. That is, one could infer that stocks providing better
climate hedging have higher expected returns, not lower as theory predicts.




                                             23
                                                                          Panel A. Yield spread ("greenium")
                        -0.015

                                       -0.02

                        -0.025
Percent per year




                                       -0.03

                        -0.035

                                       -0.04

                        -0.045

                                       -0.05

                        -0.055
                           Sep 2020                   Oct 2020      Nov 2020    Dec 2020     Jan 2021   Feb 2021   Mar 2021   Apr 2021
                                                                                           Date


                                                                 Panel B. Cumulative return on the long-short portfolio
                                            0.3
                                                      Realized
                                                      Expected
             Cumulative return (percent)




                                           0.25

                                            0.2

                                           0.15

                                            0.1

                                           0.05

                                             0
                                           Sep 2020   Oct 2020      Nov 2020    Dec 2020     Jan 2021   Feb 2021   Mar 2021   Apr 2021
                                                                                           Date


Figure 1. German twin bonds. Panel A plots the daily time series of the "greenium,"
the difference between the yields of the German government's 10-year green bond and its
non-green twin, in annual terms. Panel B plots the performance of a portfolio that goes long
the 10-year green bond and short its non-green twin. The solid line plots this long-short
portfolio's daily cumulative realized return. The dashed line plots the expected cumula-
tive return as of the first day of trading of the green bond (September 8, 2020), absent a
subsequent change in the greenium, which was -1.6 bps on that day.




                                                                                      24
                2500 2000
     Number of stocks
  1000   1500   500




                            2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019   2020
                                                                        Date

Figure 2. MSCI coverage. The figure plots the number of stocks in our sample with
non-missing MSCI environmental scores at the beginning of the month. The dashed red line
is at November 2012, where our sample begins. MSCI expanded its coverage in October
2012. We begin our sample in November 2012, as we require lagged environmental scores.




                                                                      25
            .4
            .3
  Cumulative return
         .2 .1
            0




                      2013   2014   2015   2016     2017   2018   2019   2020
                                               Date

Figure 3. Cumulative return of the green factor. This figure plots the cumulative
return of the green factor, which is computed from equation (3) on a monthly basis.




                                            26
                12




                                                                                          .2
                                                                                          .15
                           10
  Level of climate concern




                                                                                          Cumulative return
                                                                                                 .1
              8




                                                                                          .05
                6




                                                              Level of climate concern
                                                              Cumulative green factor




                                                                                          0
                4




                                2013   2014   2015          2016       2017        2018
                                                     Date

Figure 4. Climate concerns and the green factor. The level of climate concerns is
computed as Ct = 36    
                    =0  M CCCt- , where M CCCt is the monthly measure of Ardia et al.
(2021), and  = 0.94.




                                                     27
              .2
                                Realized
                                Counterfactual
                                95% CI
                    .1
   Cumulative return
  0           -.1




                         2013         2014       2015          2016   2017       2018
                                                        Date

Figure 5. Counterfactual green-factor returns. The solid line shows realized cumula-
tive, compounded green-factor returns. The dashed line shows its counterfactual counterpart
computed from column 2 of Table 4. The counterfactual monthly green-factor return equals
its realized value minus the regressors times their respective regression slopes. Dotted lines
indicate the counterfactual's 95% confidence interval. We compute confidence intervals us-
ing the following steps: (1) Estimate the regression from column 2 of Table 4 and store the
estimated coefficients and their covariance matrix. (2) Repeat the following steps (2a)­(2c)
500 times: (2a) draw a new coefficient vector from a normal distribution with mean and
variance saved in step (1); (2b) use the new coefficient to compute each period's counter-
factual return; (2c) compute and store cumulative counterfactual returns. (3) Each month,
compute the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the counterfactual cumulative returns stored in
step (2c).




                                                   28
             .2                 Realized
                                (1) No climate news
                                (2) Also no CF news
                                (3) Also no ESG flows
                    .1
   Cumulative return
  0          -.1




                         2013              2014         2015          2016   2017   2018
                                                               Date

Figure 6. Components of green-factor returns. The solid line plots the realized cu-
mulative, compounded green-factor returns. The remaining lines show counterfactual green-
factor returns computed using the model from column 3 of Table 4. To create the line "(1)
No climate news," we compute counterfactual monthly green-factor returns as their realized
value minus the values of " Climate concerns (same month)" and " Climate concerns
(prev. month)" times their respective regression coefficients. To create the line "(2) Also no
CF news," we use the previous counterfactual returns but also subtract "Earnings announce-
ment returns" and " Earnings forecasts" times their respective regression coefficients. To
create the line "(3) Also no ESG flows," we use the previous counterfactual returns but also
subtract "ESG flows" times its regression coefficient and ["ESG assets" minus counterfac-
tual ESG assets] times the coefficient on "ESG assets," where counterfactual ESG assets is
computed as in footnote 13.




                                                          29
           .15
                            Realized
                            Counterfactual
                            95% CI
           .1
  Cumulative alpha
    0         .05
           -.05
           -.1




                     2013         2014       2015          2016   2017    2018
                                                    Date

Figure 7. Counterfactual green-factor alpha. This is the same as Figure 5 but replaces
the green factor with its Fama-French three-factor alphas, computed as in Table 5.




                                               30
     .005
  
  0  -.005




             0      1          2         3         4           5          6         7
                                         Lag  (weeks)

Figure 8. Weekly response of the green factor to climate news. This figure plots
the  coefficients from the weekly time-series regression in equation (9). The sample runs
from November 2012 to June 2018. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                           31
     .0004
     .0002
  
     0
     -.0002




              0         1              2               3             4              5
                                      Lag  (trading days)

Figure 9. Daily response of the green factor to climate news. This figure plots the
 coefficients from the daily time-series regression in equation (9). The sample runs from
November 2012 to June 2018. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                           32
                                         Table 1
                        Industries ranked by environmental scores


Average g is the environmental score averaged across firms within each MSCI industry at
the end of 2019. MSCI uses the GICS sub-industry classification.



 Rank   MSCI Industry                       Average g      Rank   MSCI Industry                        Average g
   1    Asset Management & Custody Banks      0.870         33    Textiles, Apparel & Luxury Goods      -0.502
  2     Professional Services                 0.850         34    Auto Components                       -0.505
  3     Telecommunication Services            0.841         35    Property & Casualty Insurance         -0.506
  4     Consumer Finance                      0.837         36    Casinos & Gaming                      -0.542
  5     Health Care Equipment & Supplies      0.835         37    Real Estate Development               -0.548
  6     Health Care Providers & Services      0.825         38    Semiconductors                        -0.657
  7     Life & Health Insurance               0.761         39    Electrical Equipment                  -0.750
  8     Interactive Media & Services         0.736          40    Construction & Farm Machinery         -0.758
  9     Diversified Financials                0.732         41    Tobacco                               -0.885
  10    Media & Entertainment                 0.704         42    Trading Companies & Distributors      -0.987
  11    Diversified Consumer Services         0.614         43    Industrial Machinery                  -1.040
  12    Biotechnology                         0.567         44    Containers & Packaging                -1.091
  13    Pharmaceuticals                       0.489         45    Energy Equipment & Services           -1.159
  14    Multi-Line Insurance & Brokerage      0.405         46    Real Estate Management & Services     -1.198
  15    Investment Banking & Brokerage        0.387         47    Airlines                              -1.214
  16    Banks                                 0.348         48    Hotels & Travel                       -1.566
  17    Restaurants                           0.309         49    Building Products                     -1.620
  18    Construction & Engineering            0.125         50    Utilities                             -1.903
  19    Aerospace & Defense                   0.097         51    Integrated Oil & Gas                  -2.008
  20    Commercial Services & Supplies        0.069         52    Food Products                         -2.019
  21    Air Freight & Logistics              -0.055         53    Beverages                             -2.044
  22    Household Durables                   -0.116         54    Metals and Mining, Precious           -2.193
  23    Software & Services                  -0.130         55    Oil & Gas Refining, Marketing         -2.522
  24    Electronic Equipment, Instruments    -0.170         56    Construction Materials                -2.556
  25    Leisure Products                     -0.173         57    Specialty Chemicals                   -2.818
  26    Automobiles                          -0.215         58    Marine Transport                      -2.828
  27    Retail - Food & Staples              -0.251         59    Paper & Forest Products               -2.930
  28    Retail - Consumer Discretionary      -0.269         60    Metals and Mining, Non-Precious       -2.947
  29    Road & Rail Transport                -0.299         61    Steel                                 -2.955
  30    Household & Personal Products        -0.300         62    Oil & Gas Exploration & Production    -3.010
  31    Industrial Conglomerates             -0.364         63    Diversified Chemicals                 -3.212
  32    Technology Hardware, Storage         -0.391         64    Commodity Chemicals                   -3.783




                                                      33
                                        Table 2
                               Green-factor performance


We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from November 2012 to December
2020. The dependent variable is the green factor. Mkt-Rf is the excess market return. SMB
and HML are the size and value factors of Fama and French (1993). UMD is the momentum
factor of Carhart (1997). LIQ is the traded liquidity factor of P´
                                                                 astor and Stambaugh (2003).
RMW and CMA are the profitability and investment factors of Fama and French (2015).
Returns are in percent per month. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses.


                           (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)
           Constant       0.312    0.371     0.205     0.180     0.202     0.209
                          (2.91)   (3.38)    (2.48)    (2.46)    (2.42)    (2.60)

           Mkt-RF                  -0.0474   0.00648   0.0374    0.00925   0.00552
                                   (-1.28)    (0.17)   (1.19)     (0.29)    (0.17)

           SMB                               -0.121    -0.0977   -0.107    -0.169
                                             (-3.77)   (-3.54)   (-2.24)   (-4.02)

           HML                               -0.198    -0.120    -0.196    -0.150
                                             (-6.42)   (-3.78)   (-5.70)   (-4.49)

           UMD                                         0.127
                                                       (4.57)

           LIQ                                                   -0.0229
                                                                 (-0.38)

           RMW                                                             -0.130
                                                                           (-1.62)

           CMA                                                             -0.138
                                                                           (-2.36)
           Observations    98       98          98      98          98       98
           R2             0.000    0.034      0.408    0.519      0.411     0.464




                                             34
                                   Table 3
             Pricing value and momentum in the green-factor model


We estimate monthly time-series regressions of either HML (in columns 1 and 2) or UMD
(in columns 3 and 4) on the excess market return and the green factor by using data from
November 2012 to December 2020. Returns are in percent per month. Robust t-statistics
are in parentheses.


                                       Value           Momentum
                   Constant       -0.709 -0.151      0.663 -0.0640
                                  (-1.93) (-0.50)    (1.92) (-0.22)

                   Mkt-RF         0.139    0.0678    -0.368    -0.275
                                  (1.18)   (0.70)    (-3.75)   (-3.14)

                   Green factor            -1.503              1.960
                                           (-4.55)             (6.18)
                   Observations    98         98       98        98
                   R2             0.041     0.345     0.173    0.487




                                           35
                                          Table 4
                              Sources of green-factor returns


We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from November 2012 to June 2018. The
dependent variable is the green factor. " Climate concerns" is a monthly change in the level
of climate concerns, computed as in equation (5). The two earnings-news measures, "Earnings
announcement returns" and " Earnings forecasts," are described in Section 5.2. They correspond
to the quarter that contains the given month. "ESG flows" equals the quarter's dollar flow into
ESG funds scaled by the average total CRSP market capitalization during the quarter that contains
the given month, times 1000. We instrument for contemporaneous ESG flow by using its previous-
quarter value. The first-stage t-statistic for lagged flows is 3.23. "ESG assets" equals total AUM
in ESG funds scaled by the total CRSP market capitalization and measured at the beginning of
the quarter containing the given month, times 1000. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses.


                                                       (1)        (2)       (3)
                Climate concerns (same month)       0.00637    0.00328    0.00357
                                                     (0.95)     (0.49)     (0.54)

                Climate concerns (prev. month)       0.0235     0.0211     0.0212
                                                     (2.85)     (2.52)     (2.59)

               Earnings announcement returns                    0.558      0.509
                                                                (0.98)     (0.87)

                Earnings forecasts                              0.227      0.260
                                                                (0.41)     (0.42)

               ESG flows                                                   0.0429
                                                                           (0.46)

               ESG assets                                                 -0.00157
                                                                           (-0.59)

               Constant                             0.000132   0.000289   0.00195
                                                     (0.11)     (0.22)     (0.37)
               Observations                             68        68         68
               R2                                     0.171      0.190     0.181




                                               36
                                        Table 5
                             Sources of green-factor alpha


This is the same as Table 4, except the dependent variable is the green factor's Fama-French
three-factor alpha. We estimate these alphas in time-series regressions of the monthly green
factor on the Fama-French factors, using data from November 2012 to June 2018. We set
each month's alpha equal to the estimated intercept plus residual.


                                                   (1)          (2)         (3)
           Climate concerns (same month)         0.00730      0.00583     0.00498
                                                  (1.34)       (1.08)      (0.85)

           Climate concerns (prev. month)         0.0183      0.0170      0.0168
                                                  (3.32)      (3.03)      (3.06)

          Earnings announcement returns                        0.219       0.307
                                                               (0.53)      (0.66)

           Earnings forecasts                                  0.184      0.0987
                                                               (0.39)     (0.21)

          ESG flows                                                       -0.0103
                                                                          (-0.12)

          ESG assets                                                      -0.00111
                                                                           (-0.48)

          Constant                               -0.000173   -0.0000734   0.00307
                                                   (-0.18)     (-0.07)     (0.70)
          Observations                                68          68         68
          R2                                        0.187       0.194      0.193




                                            37
                                           Table 6
                            Greenness and individual stock returns


This table shows results from panel regressions in which the dependent variable is stock i's return
in month t. gi,t-1 is the stock's lagged greenness. Ct is month t's change in aggregate climate
concerns, computed from equation (5). "[Earnings announcement ret.]i,t " is the stock's sum of
the three-trading-day excess returns (stock minus market) around earnings announcements and
management earnings forecasts (if available) during the quarter containing month t. "[ Earnings
forecast]i,t " is the change in analysts' mean long-term earnings growth rate forecast for stock i
during the quarter containing month t. "[ESG flows]t " is the flow into ESG funds scaled by
the total CRSP market capitalization during the quarter that contains month t, times 1000. We
instrument for gi,t-1 × [ESG flows]t by using gi,t-1 times scaled ESG flows from the previous quarter.
The first-stage t-statistics for the instrument in columns 4 and 5 are 3.61 and 5.27, respectively.
"[ESG assets]t-1 " equals total ESG AUM scaled by CRSP at the end of the previous quarter, times
1000. We subtract from ESG assets a constant equal to the counterfactual ESG assets averaged
across regression observations. Subtracting this constant affects the coefficient on gi,t-1 but not the
coefficient on gi,t-1 × [ESG assets]t-1 . BE/ME is lagged at least six months. The sample begins
in November 2012. All regressions include month fixed effects, cluster by month, and use robust
standard errors.


                                          (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)
    gi,t-1                              0.00213   -0.0000103    -0.000267    -0.00309   -0.00416
                                         (2.24)     (-0.01)       (-0.27)     (-0.84)    (-0.85)

    gi,t-1 × Ct                                     0.00769      0.00802     0.00830     0.00806
                                                     (1.15)       (1.36)      (1.31)      (1.15)

    gi,t-1 × Ct-1                                      0.0166     0.0148      0.0159     0.0168
                                                       (2.21)     (2.24)      (2.30)     (2.29)

    [Earnings announcement ret.]i,t                               0.320       0.320       0.315
                                                                 (13.14)     (13.14)     (12.36)

    [ Earnings forecast]i,t                                       0.0592      0.0596     0.0587
                                                                  (5.02)      (5.08)     (4.45)

    gi,t-1 × [ESG flows]t                                                     0.0753     0.0813
                                                                              (0.79)     (0.77)

    gi,t-1 × [ESG assets]t-1                                                 -0.00160   -0.000847
                                                                              (-0.58)     (-0.33)

    ln(BE/ME)i,t-1                                                                      -0.000741
                                                                                          (-0.52)
    Observations                        218,208     151,294      131,689     131,689     114,320




                                                  38
                                     REFERENCES

Ardia, David, Keven Bluteau, Kris Boudt, and Koen Inghelbrecht, 2021, Climate change
   concerns and the performance of green versus brown stocks, Working paper, National
   Bank of Belgium.
Avramov, Doron, Si Cheng, Abraham Lioui, and Andrea Tarelli, 2021, Sustainable investing
   with ESG rating uncertainty, Working paper, IDC.
Baker, Malcolm, Daniel Bergstresser, George Serafeim, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2018, Financing
   the response to climate change: The pricing and ownership of U.S. green bonds, Working
   paper, Harvard University.
Baldauf, Markus, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Constantine Yannelis, 2020, Does climate change
   affect real estate prices? Only if you believe in it, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1256­
   1295.
Berg, Florian, Julian F. Koelbel, and Roberto Rigobon, 2020, Aggregate confusion: The
   divergence of ESG ratings, Working paper, MIT.
Bernstein, Asaf, Matthew T. Gustafson, and Ryan Lewis, 2019, Disaster on the horizon:
   The price effect of sea level rise, Journal of Financial Economics 134, 253­272.
Beyer, Anne, Daniel A. Cohen, Thomas Z. Lys, and Beverly R. Walther, 2010, The finan-
   cial reporting environment: Review of the recent literature, Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 50, 296­343.
BlackRock, 2020, Global Sustainable Investing Survey.
Bolton, Patrick, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2020, Do investors care about carbon risk? Journal
   of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Bolton, Patrick, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2021, Global pricing of carbon-transition risk,
   NBER working paper.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
   52, 57­82.
Chava, Sudheer, 2014, Environmental externalities and cost of capital, Management Science
   60, 2223­2247.
Choi, Darwin, Zhenyu Gao, and Wenxi Jiang, 2020, Attention to global warming, Review of
   Financial Studies 33, 1112­1145.
Eccles, Robert G., and Judith C. Stroehle, 2018, Exploring social origins in the construction
   of ESG measures, Working paper, University of Oxford.
El Ghoul, Sadok, Omrane Guedhami, Chuck CY Kwok, and Dev R. Mishra, 2011, Does
   corporate social responsibility affect the cost of capital?, Journal of Banking and Finance
   35, 2388­2406.
Engle, Robert F., Stefano Giglio, Bryan T. Kelly, Heebum Lee, and Johannes Stroebel, 2020,
   Hedging climate change news, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1184­1216.


                                             39
Faccini, Renato, Rastin Matin, and George S. Skiadopoulos, 2021, Dissecting climate risks:
   Are they reflected in stock prices? Working paper, University of London.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
   stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, The equity premium, Journal of Finance
   57, 637­659.
Edmans, Alex, Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and
  equity prices, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 621­640.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2007, Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices,
   Journal of Financial Economics 83, 667­689.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal
   of Financial Economics 116, 1­22.
Fink, Larry, 2021, BlackRock CEO's annual letter to shareholders. https://www.blackrock.
   com/corporate/investor-relations/larry-fink-chairmans-letter.
Giglio, Stefano, Bryan T. Kelly, and Johannes Stroebel, 2020, Climate Finance, Annual
   Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Krishna Rao, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber,
   2021, Climate change and long-run discount rates: Evidence from real estate, Review of
   Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul S., Matthew Gustafson, Ryan Lewis, and Michael Schwert, 2021,
   Sea level rise exposure and municipal bond yields, Working paper, Yale University.
G¨
 orgen, Maximilian, Andrea Jacob, Martin Nerlinger, Ryan Riordan, Martin Rohleder, and
   Marco Wilkens, 2020, Carbon risk, Working paper, University of Augsburg.
Heinkel, Robert, Alan Kraus, and Josef Zechner, 2001, The effect of green investment on
   corporate behavior, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 431­449.
Hong, Harrison, Frank Weikai Li, and Jiangmin Xu, 2019, Climate risks and market effi-
   ciency, Journal of Econometrics 208, 265­281.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Kai Li, and Chi-Yang Tsou, 2020, The pollution premium. Working paper,
   HKUST.
Huynh, Thanh, and Ying Xia, 2021, Climate change news risk and corporate bond returns,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Ilhan, Emirhan, Zacharias Sautner, and Grigory Vilkov, 2021, Carbon tail risk, Review of
    Financial Studies 34, 15401571.
In, Soh Young, Ki Young Park, and Ashby Monk, 2019, Is `being green' rewarded in the
    market? An empirical investigation of decarbonization and stock returns, Working paper,
    Stanford University.
Krueger, Philipp, Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks, 2020, The importance of climate
   risks for institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1067­1111.

                                            40
Larcker, David F., and Edward M. Watts, 2020, Where's the greenium? Journal of Account-
   ing and Economics 69, 1­26.
Lester, Anna, and Chen He, 2018, Harnessing ESG as an alpha source in active quantitative
   equities, State Street Global Advisors white paper.
Nagy, Zolt´
          an, Altaf Kassam, and Lenda-Eling Lee, 2016, Can ESG add alpha? An analysis
   of ESG tilt and momentum strategies, Journal of Investing 25 (2), 113­124.
Painter, Marcus, 2020, An inconvenient cost: The effects of climate change on municipal
   bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 468­482.
P´      
 astor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2001, The equity premium and structural breaks,
   Journal of Finance 56, 1207­1239.
P´      
 astor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
   Journal of Political Economy 111, 642­685.
P´      
 astor, Lubo s, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2009, Predictive systems: Living with imperfect
   predictors, Journal of Finance 64, 1583­1628.
P´      
 astor, Lubo s, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2021, Sustainable investing in
   equilibrium, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Pedersen, Lasse Heje, Shaun Fitzgibbons, and Lukasz Pomorski, 2021, Responsible investing:
   The ESG-efficient frontier, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Roll, Richard, 1984, Orange juice and weather, American Economic Review 74, 861­880.
Seltzer, Lee, Laura T. Starks, and Qifei Zhu, 2021, Climate regulatory risks and corporate
    bonds, Working paper, University of Texas.
US SIF Foundation, 2020, Report on US Sustainable and Impact Investing Trends.
Zerbib, Olivier David, 2019, The effect of pro-environmental preferences on bond prices:
   Evidence from green bonds, Journal of Banking and Finance 98, 39­60.




                                           41
