                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE ROLE OF INFORMATION IN THE ROSEN-ROBACK FRAMEWORK

                                         Xuwen Gao
                                           Ran Song
                                     Christopher Timmins

                                      Working Paper 28943
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28943


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




The authors would like to thank seminar participants at NUS and Peking University for their
helpful comments. All remaining errors and omissions are our own. Ran Song acknowledges the
research support from Yale-NUS College and the Tan Chin Tuan Chinese Culture Civilization
Program in Singapore. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Xuwen Gao, Ran Song, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Information in the Rosen-Roback Framework
Xuwen Gao, Ran Song, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 28943
June 2021
JEL No. Q51,Q53,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we study the role of information in non-market valuation. We develop a variant of
the Rosen-Roback model of inter-urban sorting that incorporates public access to information
about air quality, and demonstrate that information constraints create a wedge between the
revealed and true hedonic prices. Moreover, the direction and the magnitude of that wedge
depends on the individual's perception bias. We empirically test our theoretical predictions by
leveraging a natural experiment ­ the unexpected disclosure of PM2.5 data in China. We find that
perception bias before the data disclosure leads to a downward estimation bias in hedonic
valuation. The hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure increases substantially from 171 to
336 Chinese Yuan in response to the information shock. Our work sheds light on the application
of Rosen-Roback theory for non-market valuation in countries where the public access to
information is restricted.

Xuwen Gao                                      Christopher Timmins
HSBC Business School                           Department of Economics
Peking University                              Duke University
Shenzhen 510632                                209 Social Sciences Building
China                                          P.O. Box 90097
gaoxw@phbs.pku.edu.cn                          Durham, NC 27708-0097
                                               and NBER
Ran Song                                       christopher.timmins@duke.edu
Division of Social Science
Yale-NUS College
16 #01-220
College Ave West
Singapore, 138527
songr@nber.org
1. Introduction
     In the past forty years, the Rosen-Roback hedonic model (Rosen, 1979; Roback, 1982) has
become an important tool for valuing non-market amenities. An underlying assumption of the
Rosen-Roback hedonic framework is that households have complete information about the level
of amenities across space. On the basis of this assumption, households sort across locations
reflecting the tradeoff between income, housing costs and amenities. Therefore, the hedonic price
measured by geographical differences in income and housing prices reflects the implicit value of
amenities such as environmental quality.
     However, this complete information assumption often fails to hold. In many highly polluted
developing countries, real-time environmental information is either blocked by policy makers or
is never even gathered. Even in some developed countries, pollution monitoring networks are
sparse, failing to cover a large fraction of population. Information constraints could prevent
amenity-induced spatial sorting and create a wedge between the estimated hedonic price and the
real implicit value of pollution abatement. As a consequence, researchers may recover biased
estimates of individuals' Marginal Willingnesses to Pay (MWTP) for an improvement to
environmental quality when relying on observed residential decisions.
     In this paper, we relax the assumption of complete information in the Rosen-Roback model.
We theoretically analyze the role of information in non-market valuation in a simple equilibrium
framework, and then leverage the unexpected disclosure of PM2.5 data in China to evaluate the
causal association between information availability and the hedonic price of air quality.
     We first establish a simple variant of Rosen-Roback model incorporating public access to
information. At its heart is the idea that people maximize utility via their residential sorting
decisions by trading off income, housing costs, and their perceived level of a location specific
amenity. In equilibrium under complete information, income and house price gradients will
capture the implicit value of amenities like air quality. However, in equilibrium under incomplete
information, there will exist a wedge between regional differences in income and housing prices
and the true value of the amenity. Information constraints bias hedonic price estimates, and the
magnitude and the direction of that bias will depend upon the magnitude and the direction of
decision-makers' perception biases. Our adaptation of the Rosen-Roback model quantifies the
implications of information failure on hedonic values.




                                                1
      China provides an ideal laboratory to test the predictions of our modified Rosen-Roback
model. Despite being exposed to hazardous levels of pollution, Chinese citizens used to have
limited or no access to information about local air quality. In 2012, China launched a nation-wide,
real-time air quality monitoring and disclosure program, incorporating PM2.5 concentration into
the air quality measure for the first time. The information shock triggered the spatial sorting of
people in China (Khanna et al. 2021) and allows us to quantify changes in the compensating
differential for pollution driven by the provision of pollution information.
      We derive a wage hedonic equation from our equilibrium framework with information
constraints, in which the outcome variable is income adjusted by local housing prices.1 Thus, our
hedonic price measure reflects spatial differences in both income and housing costs. Our primary
variable of interest is the interaction of an information disclosure indicator for the level of pollution,
which represents the wedge between the revealed hedonic price (under incomplete information)
and implicit value of clean air in the Rosen-Roback framework.
       We leverage the staggered publication of the real time PM2.5 data across three waves of
Chinese cities. The central government determined the sequence of staggered rollout according to
the location and the tier of cities and several pre-determined designations. Since these conditions
were established prior to the information program, controlling for city-fixed effects allows us to
account for unobservables that might affect the sequence of the data rollout. We also isolate
exogenous fluctuations in pollution, leveraging variation in wind direction combined with the
historical placement of distant thermal power plants (as in Freeman et al., 2019), and a regression
discontinuity around the Huai river (as in Chen et al., 2013). We estimate the interaction between
the information disclosure indicator and the level of pollution, controlling simultaneously for the
two independent components of the interaction term.
      In order to measure air quality before and after China's disclosure of official PM2.5 data, we
employ satellite-based PM2.5 data measured using the Global Annual PM2.5 Grids derived by Van
Donkelaar et al. (2016). The data have a high grid cell resolution of 0.01 degree and can provide a
comprehensive and reliable measurement of air quality for all Chinese cities. The correlation




1
 In our paper, we consider the geographical variation in both nominal income and housing prices driven by amenity differences.
Therefore, throughout our paper, we define the compensating differential as the additional amount of real income (nominal income
deflated by the housing price) that an individual must be offered in order to motivate them to accept a reduction in the level of
amenity.


                                                               2
between satellite-based PM2.5 data and monitor-based PM2.5 data in China is up to 0.8 (Freeman,
Liang, Song, Timmins, 2019).
      We find salient differences in the compensating differential for PM2.5 pollution under
heterogenous scenarios of information availability. The disclosure of pollution data significantly
increases the hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure in China. Driven by the unexpected
dissemination of information, a median individual's MWTP for a one-unit reduction in PM2.5
concentration raises from 171 Chinese Yuan under incomplete information to 336 Chinese Yuan
under complete information.               This increase represents approximately 0.83% of the median
individual's income. Our research confirms a news report saying that firms in China pay substantial
`pollution premiums' to attract workers after pollution information was widely disseminated (New
York Times, 2015).
      Our results indicate that information constraints lead to a wedge between the revealed hedonic
price and the true implicit value of clean air; the magnitude of the wedge accounts for as large as
about 49.1% of the implicit value. These findings verify the predictions of our theoretical
framework and demonstrate the importance of incorporating access to information in the Rosen-
Roback hedonic model. As Chinese people tend to underestimate the level of air pollution before
the data disclosure (Barwick et al., 2019), the downward perception bias leads to a downward
estimation bias in hedonic valuation. Overlooking the role of information would severely
understate the economic value of amenities and undermine benefit-cost analysis for important
public policies.
      Our primary contribution lies in the incorporation of public access to information into the
Rosen-Roback hedonic theory and the analysis of the implications of information constraints on
the applicability of the hedonic methodology. Under incomplete information, people would
maximize their perceived utility based on their perceived level of amenities, which they would
trade-off against earnings and housing prices across space. Perception bias would distort the
relationship between the real implicit value and the revealed hedonic price of amenities, biasing
MWTP estimates. We are among the first to analyze the role of information in the Rosen-Roback
framework, and to both theoretically and empirically demonstrate how information failure affects
the foundation of revealed-preference framework.2

2
  An alternative widely used revealed-preference methodology is the general equilibrium sorting model. Although we focus on how
information failure biases the MWTP estimates from the hedonic model, our theoretical analysis indicates that incomplete
information also undermines the estimation of the MWTP via equilibrium soring model.


                                                              3
      We also speak to the literature in applied economics that employs the hedonic approach to
measure compensating differentials. Environmental and urban economists estimate amenity values
and quality of life based on revealed compensating differentials (Blomquist et al., 1988; Albouy,
2008), and labor economists use compensating differentials to measure the economic value of job
attributes (Hersch, 1998) and the value of statistical life (Viscusi, 1993; Aldy and Taylor, 2019).
All these papers implicitly assume that people have complete information on these variables, and
we are unaware of any paper evaluating the association between information integrity and revealed
compensating differentials. Against this backdrop, we analyze how the access to information
determines the validity of the compensating differential estimates.
      The empirical part of our work builds on contemporaneous works on willingness to pay for
clean air (Freeman, Liang, Song, Timmins, 2019; Ito and Zhang, 2020) and the economic effects
of information disclosure (Barwick et al., 2019; Wang and Zhang, 2021) in China.3 Barwick et al.
(2019) conduct pioneering research on the effects of pollution information on a wide range of
avoidance behaviors and health outcomes. They use AOD concentration as the pollution measure
and also explore the exogeneous shock of PM2.5 data disclosure in China. In contrast, our
empirical application uses satellite PM2.5 data that are consistent with the official PM2.5 measure
but are available both before and after the release of official data to analyze the how restrictions
on the access to PM2.5 information biases the hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure estimated
by regional differences in income and housing prices.
      Our findings provide important policy implications. Efficient environmental policies are all
based on the idea of equating the private costs of polluting activities to their social costs at the
margin. Therefore, knowing the social marginal costs of pollution or social marginal benefits of
abatement is a precondition for properly applying these policies. As the hedonic price of avoiding
pollution exposure is widely used to measure the social costs of pollution by governments in many
countries, our analysis suggests that information constraints could prevent the design of efficient
policies, particularly where public information about pollution is limited.
      The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out our adaption of the Rosen-
Roback model to consider information constraints. Section 3 discusses the natural experiment of


3
  Freeman, Liang, Song and Timmins (2019) estimate the willingness to pay for clean air based on the spatial variation in income
and housing prices. Ito and Zhang (2020) examine air purifier transactions to recover household preference for the reduction in
indoor PM10 concentration. Wang and Zhang (2021) study the effects of information disclosure on face mask consumption in
China.


                                                               4
data disclosure in China, and Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents estimation techniques
used to test our theoretical predictions and Section 6 reports estimation results. Section 7 concludes.


2. A Rosen-Roback Framework with Incomplete Information

     We relax the underlying assumption of complete information and build a variant of Rosen-
Roback model incorporating the access to amenity information. Under complete information,
people maximize their utility via geographical sorting, arbitraging location specific amenities,
income, and housing costs. Thus, in equilibrium, spatial differences in income and housing prices
reflect the implicit value of the amenity. However, under incomplete information, the public tends
to misinterpret the level of the amenity, distorting the arbitrage process. As a result, incomplete
information leads to a wedge between income and housing price differentials and the true value of
the amenity, biasing hedonic estimates.


2.1 The Hedonic Price under Complete Information
     In this section, we develop a simple version of the Rosen-Roback model with complete
information to use as a starting point.         Each individual's residential location choice set is
characterized by a location-specific amenity (say, air quality). When complete information on the
amenity is available, individual ! chooses residential city " to maximize their indirect utility:
                                                         $% &
                                            #!,# = %!,# &#  '#                                      (1)
where %!,# is the nominal income that individual ! could earn in city ", and &#  and '# represent the
unit price of housing services and the amount of the amenity in city ", respectively. ) is the fraction
of housing expenditure in income, and * measures preferences for the components of '# .
     Under complete information, individual ! makes a tradeoff between amenities, income and
housing costs via spatial sorting, choosing the optimal level of amenity to maximize their utility.
The core of the hedonic framework requires that, in equilibrium, identical individuals must be
indifferent among locations; if not, movements would occur to arbitrage away utility differences.
                                                       + , we can take the total derivative with
Holding indirect utility as fixed at some common level #
respect to the level of amenity:
                                ()!,#          (+!,#        (,
                                                             #
                                         = #+#  (*   +#,#  (* + #*# = 0                             (2)
                                   (*#              #            #

Using Roy's identity, the optimum consumption of housing services for individual ! in city " is:


                                                        5
                                                               )$#        %+!,#
                                                
                                               /!,# = -)              =                                      (3)
                                                               %!,#       ,# 

     Substituting equation (3) into (2), the marginal willingness to pay for ' with complete
                 .
information (1234* ) can be written as the marginal rate of substitution between income and the
amenity:
                                       ) &#         ( /01 +!,#            ( /01 ,#                   +
                                                                                                    !,#
                          .
                      1234* =)                 =5                  -)                6 × %!,# = * 5 *   6    (4)
                                        %!,#          (*#                    (*#                         #


Equation (4) is widely used for non-market valuation. In equilibrium under complete information,
the MWTP for '# is determined by the preference parameter * , and can be fully captured by
regional differences in income and housing prices. Therefore, econometricians can rely on income
and housing price gradients to calculate the implicit value of the amenity.


2.2 The Hedonic Price under Incomplete Information
     When people do not have full access to information about amenities, the level of the location-
                                             8# :
specific amenity perceived by individuals is '
                                                      8# = '#2
                                                      '                                                      (3)
where 9 measures the magnitude and the direction of perceptual bias. If people tend to understate
the actual level of the amenity, then 9 < 1; if they overstate the level of the amenity, then 9 > 1.
Individual ! will then sort across locations in order to maximize their perceived indirect utility:
                                                              $% 2&
                                                 8!,# = %!,# &#
                                                 #              '#                                           (4)
Returning to sorting equilibrium and taking the total derivative of perceived indirect utility with
respect to the level of amenity yields:
                                3!,#
                               ()
                                        8+  (+!,# + #
                                       =#           8,  (,# + #
                                                              8* = 0                                         (5)
                               (*#        # (*        # (*      #
                                                       #                     #

The optimal consumption of housing services conditional upon choosing a particular city remains
the same as equation (3). Thus, the marginal willingness to pay for '# under incomplete
                 +
information (1234* ) is:
                                     3&
                                     )           ( /01 +!,#             ( /01 ,#                     +
                           +            #                                                          !,#
                       1234* =       3%
                                            =5                     -)              6 × %!,# = 9* 5 *   6     (7)
                                     )  #
                                                     (*#                   (*#                           #


MWTP differs between scenarios of complete and incomplete information:
                        +        !,#        .      !,#     +                                 +
                    1234* = 9* 5 *   6  1234* = * 5*   6                                                     (8)
                                                               #                                 #




                                                               6
        +
and 1234* will not represent the actual preference for '# due to the perception bias captured by
9.The researcher cannot therefore rely on spatial differences in income and housing prices to
quantify the implicit value of '# . Information constraints could explain the unreasonable low
MWTP for environmental quality improvement in many highly polluted developing countries (an
issue raised by Greenstone and Jack (2015)). Similarly, information constraints may also create a
wedge between estimated and true quality of life indices based on the Roback model.4

3. Natural Experiment in China
      China provides a unique setting in which to study the impacts of information constraints on
hedonic valuation. Despite the hazardous level of exposure to pollution, Chinese citizens used to
have limited or no access to real time information about local air quality. In 2000, China started
to publish an Air Pollution Index (API) based on PM10,SO2 and NO2,5 but only did so for 42
cities. The number of cities for which this information was available increased gradually to 120
in 2012. However, official API and PM10 data were vulnerable to the manipulation of local
government prior to 2012 due to weak monitoring and enforcement of the central government
(Chen et al., 2012; Ghanem and Zhang, 2014).
      While air pollution information prior to 2012 focused on SO2, NO2 and PM10, fine
particulate pollution has been the most important source of air pollution in China. Fine particles
(PM2.5, diameter < 2.5m) are much more hazardous than larger particles with respect to mortality,
cardiovascular and respiratory endpoints, and PM2.5 is considered to be the best indicator of the
level of health risk resulting from air pollution by the WHO. 6 However, real time PM2.5
information was not included in the calculation of the API. As the Chinese people had little or no
information about this important determinant of air quality, they used to regularly understate the
level of atmospheric contamination and would often mistake low visibility on polluted days caused
by severe PM2.5 pollution for fog rather than smog (Barwick et al., 2019).
      In 2012, China launched a nation-wide, real-time air quality monitoring and disclosure
program. The program published a real-time Air Quality Index (AQI) and information about
PM2.5,7 incorporating PM2.5 concentration into air quality measures for the first time in China.

4
  Roback (1982) points out that hedonic prices of different amenities can be used as weights in the calculation of a city quality of
life (QOL) ranking.
5
  API is defined as the maximum value of three pollutant indexes, including SO2, NO2, and PM10.
6
  See WHO reports: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-quality/en/
7
  Since 2012, China started to release real time data on six major air pollutants, including PM2.5, P10, O3, CO, NO2 and SO2. The


                                                                 7
To address the issue with the previous reporting system, the program established a monitoring
network delivering real-time air quality data to the central government, effectively enforcing
pollution monitoring and significantly improving data accuracy.
      The nation-wide program was conducted in three waves on the basis of pre-determined
conditions, including the location (e.g. Yangtze River Delta, Pearl River Delta), the city tier (e.g.
provincial-level cities), and pre-determined designations (e.g. national environmental protection
exemplary cities designated prior to the program).8 In the first wave, 74 major Chinese cities
released real-time data on PM2.5 and other air pollutants by December, 2012. The second wave
added 116 cities by October 31, 2013, and the remaining 177 cities joined the program by
November 20, 2014 in the final wave. The information on real time PM2.5 concentration has been
available to all Chinese cities by 2015.
      The program published both hourly and daily PM2.5 data in real time on the website of the
Ministry of Environmental Protection of China (MEP), and mass media was encouraged to
disseminate the data. The sudden disclosure and dissemination of real time air quality data
dramatically improved the public access to local pollution information and dramatically increased
public awareness of the health costs of pollution exposure. The unexpected data disclosure strongly
affected the avoidance behavior of Chinese citizens. As illustrated in Figure A1, the transaction of
indoor air filtration increases sharply in response to the information shock.
       Khanna et al. (2021) document that people tend to sort from polluted to clean cities in China,
and the PM2.5 data disclosure significantly enhanced the migration response to air pollution. The
strength of the Rosen-Roback hedonic framework lies in the use of income and housing price
differentials across space driven by amenity-induced sorting. Therefore, the information disclosure
should impact the hedonic price of an air quality improvement measured by the Rosen-Roback
framework. Figure 1a shows that there was no detectable relationship between real income (i.e.,
nominal income adjusted by housing costs, defined formally in Section 5) and the amount of
PM2.5 across space when PM2.5 data were not available to the public. However, as illustrated in
Figure 1b, we see a clear positive association between PM2.5 concentration and real income after




AQI is an overall index of these major air pollutants.
8
  See the Implementation Plan for the First Phase Monitoring of the New Air Quality Standards, the Implementation Plan for the
Second Phase Monitoring of the New Air Quality Standards and the Implementation Plan for the Third Phase Monitoring of the
New Air Quality Standards released by the Ministry of Environmental Protection of China (MEP).


                                                              8
the publication of real-time PM2.5 data. The positive compensating differential for PM2.5
exposure after the data disclosure is in accordance with the spirit of Rosen-Roback theory.

4. Data
4.1 Air Quality Data
      We use satellite-derived PM2.5 data, covering periods before and after China's disclosure of
official PM2.5 data. City-level annual PM2.5 concentrations are measured using the Global
Annual PM2.5 Grids derived from satellite data by Van Donkelaar et al. (2016).9 The raster grids
of this ground calibrated PM2.5 data have a high grid cell resolution of 0.01 degree. This yields a
comprehensive and reliable measurement of air quality for a wide range of cities in China, covering
all the prefecture, sub-provincial and provincial cities. Figure A2 shows that our satellite-based
measure of PM2.5 is consistent with the official measure of PM2.5 released by the MEP in China.
The correlation between satellite PM2.5 data and monitor-based PM2.5 data in China is up to 0.8
(Freeman, Liang, Song Timmins, 2020).


4.2 Income and Housing Price Data
      Income and housing price data come from the China Labor-force Dynamics Survey (CLDS).
CLDS is a national social survey, containing information describing approximately 21,000
individuals in about 14,000 households across 29 provinces of China. A probability-proportional-
to-size sampling (PPS) based on population size and administrative units is adopted to ensure the
national representatives of the survey. As a result, the distribution of sample size across cities in
CLDS is consistent with the geographic distribution of population in China.
      The data not only record very detailed information of housing prices and housing conditions,
but also contain a wide range of demographic and socio-economic characteristics of individuals,
including age, gender, education level, residential city, employment status, hukou type
(rural/urban), and income. We restrict our attention to the working population with positive income.
On average, wage income accounts for 97.3% of individual income in our sample. As housing
attributes and ownership may confound the location-specific housing price measure, we follow
Bayer et al. (2007, 2009) to use micro housing information to compute a city-specific price of


9
 Van Donkelaar et al. (2016) estimate ground-level PM2.5 by combining Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) retrievals from the NASA
MODIS, MISR, and SeaWiFS, which are subsequently calibrated to global ground-based observations of PM2.5 using
Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR).


                                                            9
housing services, regardless of housing attributes and ownership.10
         CLDS is conducted in three waves in 2012, 2014 and 2016, recording information about
income and housing price one-year prior to the survey. Thus, the data cover periods both before
and after the publication of official PM2.5 data in China. We combine three waves of the survey,
and construct individual-level pooled cross-sectional data across 2011, 2013 and 2015 for our
empirical analysis.


4.3 Inputs into Instrumental Variables and City Controls
         We collect information on large-scale (capacity>1.5 million KW) thermal power plants, and
their coal consumption from China's Electric Power Yearbooks and Energy Statistical Yearbooks.
We supplement this with information on the establishment year of plants, the angle between their
locations and annual dominant wind direction of each city, and the distance to each city.
         We obtain city characteristics, involving GDP per capita, government expenditure and other
amenities from the City Statistical Yearbooks and China Urban Construction Statistical Yearbook.
Weather condition data come from China Meteorological Data Service Center. We collect monthly
data on weather amenities and convert into corresponding yearly measure.


5. Empirical Specification
         In this section, we empirically test the predictions of our variant of Rosen-Roback theory
incorporating the role of information. We rearrange equation (4) and (7) in Section 2, and the
MWTP for improvement to a particular amenity '# can then be estimated as:
                                                                          '
                                                              (4015+!,# /,# 7
                                              1234* =                           × %!,#                           (9)
                                                                   (*#

       %
%!,# /&# measures real income ­ i.e., housing price adjusted income.11 The parameter ) measures
the fraction of housing expenditure in income and captures the relevance of housing costs in the
deflation of income in this expression. Thus, our real income measure represents the spatial
variation in both nominal income and housing prices, and we use the real income gradient with
respect to the level of the amenity to calculate the corresponding hedonic price.
         Our theoretical analysis documents that the MWTP estimates differ in scenarios with and

10
     See Appendix B for the detailed procedure to calculate city-specific housing price.
11
     Tombe and Zhu (2019) and Khanna et al. (2021) use the same specification to measure real income in China.


                                                                  10
without the public access to amenity information, so we leverage the natural experiment of
unexpected PM2.5 data disclosure in China to estimate changes in the hedonic price of air quality
driven by the information shock. Our empirical specification is as follows:


@ABCDEFG%HIAJE!#,8 K = L9 + L: 412.5#8 × O!PIGAPQRE#8 + L; 412.5#8 + L< O!PIGAPQRE#8 (10)
                                        L= S!# + T# + U>?1!0@,8 + V A!?B,8 + W!#,8


where DEFG%HIAJE!#,8 is the real income received by individual ! in city " and year X. We use the
average value of ) in the population (0.171) in order to derive real income from nominal income
and the price of housing services in location j. O!PIGAPQRE#8 is an indicator for whether or not
real time PM2.5 data have been published in city " and year X, and 412.5#8 is the amount of PM2.5
concentration. Our primary independent variable of interest is the interaction of the amount of
PM2.5 to the information disclosure indicator, which represents the wedge between the revealed
hedonic price and the implicit value of clean air under information constraints. Our modified
Rosen-Roback model documents that the wedge depends on people's perception bias under
incomplete information, and the parameter 9 in the model measures the direction and the
magnitude of that bias. We can directly link Equation (10) to our model, and 9 = L9 /(L9 + L: ). If
the perception parameter 9<1, people understate the level of air pollution before the data disclosure.
      The schedule of staggered publication of PM2.5 data depends on the tier and location of cities
and other pre-determined conditions, so we control for city (T# ), and city tier-by-year (V A!?B,8 )
fixed effects.12 We also include region-by-year fixed effects (U>?1!0@,8 ) to account for spatially
differentiated environmental and economic policies in China.13 We use individual-level pooled
cross-sectional data in 2011, 2013 and 2015 to estimate equation (10). S!# are controls, including
individual demographic characteristics (e.g., age, educational attainment), an indicator for whether



12
   Our specification explores the exogenous changes in the public access to pollution data. The central government determined the
sequence of staggered data publication according to the tier and the location of cities, as well as other pre-determined designations.
Since these conditions are pre-determined prior to the program, controlling for city-fixed effects along with city tier-by-year fixed
effects allows us to account for unobservables correlated with the staggered sequence of the program. In Table A2, we test whether
lagged city attributes can predict the sequence of information disclosure across cities controlling for these fixed effects. We fail to
find any meaningful associations between the unexpected information release and lagged city attributes, like population, GDP,
energy consumption, pollutants emission and industrial structure.
13
   There are seven macro-regions in China: East China, North China, Central China, South China, Southwest China, Northwest
China and Northeast China.


                                                                 11
individual ! holds local hukou,14 and Dahl correction terms to address the potential issue of Roy
sorting bias (Roy, 1951; Dahl, 2002).15
      Pollution is likely to be associated with local economic activity, so naïve OLS estimates may
be biased as a result. To deal with the endogeneity concern, we use two different strategies to
isolate the causal effect of pollution--an instrumental variable based on how wind direction
interacts with the placement of distant thermal power plants (as in Freeman et al., 2019), and a
regression discontinuity around the Huai river (as in Chen et al., 2013).


5.1 Instrument #1: Wind Direction and Coal-Fired Power Plants
      Our first source of plausibly exogenous variation in pollution is based on an insight from
Freeman, Liang, Song, and Timmins (2019). We quantify the extent to which distant large-scaled
thermal power plants are located upwind of a given city. The instrument value is penalized if plants
are not located directly upwind of the city and if it is further away, using our first-stage equation:
                                                    :          :
                412.5#8 = *9 + *: E
                                  F 5C                    6 5G!H8 6 \F8 + T# + U>?1!0@,8 + V A!?B,8 + ]#8                    (11)
                                                  () D:            (#

where ^F8 is the angle between the annual dominant wind direction of city " and the plant _, and
changes across years, `!PXF# denotes the distance from the plant _ to city " , \F8 is the coal
consumption of plant _ in year X . We only use large-scale thermal power plants that are located
more than 50 km from a city, but inside a 300km distance from the city. Figure A3a describes the
intuition of the instrument. The underlying variation comes from how wind patterns blow air
pollutants from distant thermal power plants to cities. Both the dominant wind direction and the
number of power plants change overtime. Figure A4 shows that the first stage relationship between
the wind direction IV and local air pollution is strong, and Table A4 reports that the F-statistics are
all greater than 10 across different specifications.
     We expect that our instrumental variable is orthogonal to local economic activities. First, wind

14
   Mobility costs may distort the estimation of hedonic prices using the Rosen-Roback framework (Bayer et al., 2009), and these
costs are high in China due to hukou restrictions (Tombe and Zhu, 2019; Liang, Song and Timmins, 2020). We address this issue
by including an indicator for not having a local hukou.
15
   A potential issue with the wage hedonic estimation is the Roy sorting bias. Roy sorting refers to the problem that individuals
respond to idiosyncratic wage draws and are likely to move to a location where that wage draw is good. For example, individuals
from a particular region could earn unusual high wages in a given place, because their personal abilities have unusual comparative
advantages specific for working in this place. Thus, other people who looks like these individuals cannot earn same wages if they
move to the place. We follow the semi-parametric approach proposed by Dahl (2002) to address the Roy sorting bias by adding
correction terms. See Appendix C for detailed discussions on Roy sorting and the approach of Dahl (2002). Addressing the Roy
sorting bias also helps us to account for mobility costs faced by migrants; mobility costs may affect wages earned by migrants.



                                                               12
direction is determined by nature, and it is exogenous to local economic activities. Second, those
large-scale thermal power plants supply electricity to vast areas of China, including many remote
regions; many do not even supply electricity to their nearby cities at all, but rather to many remote
provinces. Further, the setup of large-scale power plants and the allocation of electricity supply
from them is determined by the central government ­ it is difficult for local governments to exert
influence on the siting of large-scale plants and the electricity supply from them.16 Finally, the
spillover from distant power plants on local economic activity is extremely small, but the pollutants
emitted from power plants located upwind severely contaminate the local air.
         We examine potential concerns with this instrument in Section 6.2. For instance, the location
and the coal consumption of power plants tend to be correlated with economic conditions of nearby
cities, and so we demonstrate robustness to excluding power plants in various distances from cities.
Our falsification tests further indicate that baseline economic characteristics, population and
electricity demand do not predict the future placement of plants. Both the public and the
government's concern over environmental quality are relatively recent, and we show robustness to
using only old power plants, such as those built before the establishment of the MEP. Among other
sensitivity tests, the IV results are strongly robust to excluding populated and politically important
cities and coal-producing provinces, as well as adding additional controls for electricity
consumption and economic conditions.


5.2 Instrument #2: The Huai River Regression Discontinuity
         Our second identification strategy relies on an important spatially-differentiated public
heating policy in China. Since the 1950s, China established a coal-based free heating system to
cities north of the Huai River. This policy had long lasting effects, as even today the heating
supplies differ largely between cities on different sides of the river. The large amount of coal
burning used for centralized heating supply has substantially driven up the level of air pollution in
northern cities. As shown in Figure A5, there is a sharp increase in PM2.5 concentration just north
of the River border. Chen et al. (2013) use this spatial policy discontinuity to study the impacts of
air pollution on life expectancy by comparing cities straddling the Huai River.
         Driven by the Action Plan on Air Pollution Prevention released by the State Council of China,
cities in the north of China started to gradually switch from coal to natural gas for winter heating

16
     In 2015, large-scale (capacity>1.5 million KW) thermal power plants only accounts for 2.59% of coal-fired plants in China.


                                                                 13
beginning in 2013. Thus, our second plausibly exogenous source of variation in pollution comes
from the interaction of the long-lasting public heating policy to the recent fuel switching policy.
The interplay of two polices causes the difference in air quality between the north and the south to
change over time. We will discuss the Huai River regression discontinuity in detail in section 6.2.4.


5.3 Identification on how Pollution Effects Shift with the Information Shock
     We focus on how the real income-pollution gradient changes in response to the unexpected
publication of PM2.5 data. Our primary variable of interest is the interaction of an information
publication indicator with the level of PM2.5. Including the information dummy accounts for any
remaining unobservables that may be correlated with the implementation of the program, and
adding the level of pollution (instrumented by our IVs) accounts for unknown confounders that
may not be fully accounted for by our instruments. We perform balance tests in Table A3. There
are no systematic differences in both the level of air pollution and the value of our wind direction
IV before and after the unexpected disclosure of pollution data. Additionally, the information
disclosure does not have any meaningful effect on a wide range of city characteristics, including
other amenities, government environmental protection expenditure, industrial structure, emission
discharges, and among others.


6. Empirical Results
6.1 Baseline Results
     Table 1 presents the baseline results of the shift in the real income gradient with respect to
PM2.5 concentration driven by the unexpected disclosure of real-time PM2.5 information. Panel
A shows the OLS estimates. Both the amount of PM2.5 and its interaction with the information
disclosure indicator are statistically insignificant. Local PM2.5 concentration tends to be correlated
with industrial production, population and other confounding factors, which may affect earnings
and housing prices. Thus, the endogeneity problem biases the naïve OLS estimates, resulting in
both statistical and economic insignificance of the coefficient estimates.
     In Panel B, we deal with the endogeneity concern using the instrumental variable based on
the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of distant coal fired
plants. In column (1), we control for both city fixed effects and region-by-year fixed effects to
account for city-level predetermined characteristics (i.e., determined prior to the information



                                                 14
program and therefore possibly associated with its implementation) and spatially differentiated
public policies in China. Since the sequence of the information policy rollout depends on the tier
of cities, we further add the city tier-by-year fixed effects in column (2). Column (2) presents the
results of our baseline specification of Equation (10), and we impose a more stringent restriction
by controlling for a triple interaction between region-, city tier- and year- fixed effects in column
(3). Our IV estimates are robust to different specifications. Across all these specifications, the
coefficients on the interaction of PM2.5 concentration and the PM2.5 data disclosure dummy are
positive and statistically different from zero. The results indicate that the release of official PM2.5
data raises public awareness of air pollution and significantly increases the compensating
differential required for exposure to PM2.5 pollution. The coefficient on the level of PM2.5 alone
is positive but insignificant, indicating no significant association between PM2.5 concentration
and real income before the public had access to local PM2.5 information. We further include
weather amenities in columns (4)-(6) to rule out the potential for endogeneity due to the correlation
between pollution and weather conditions. Our parameter estimates are quantitively and
qualitatively similar.
     The IV estimates of the interaction term range from 0.0083 to 0.0087 and the estimates of the
information disclosure indictor range from -0.34 to -0.35. Since the median level of PM2.5 is
around 40 in China, combining the two parameter estimates implies that the release of pollution
information raises real income in highly polluted cities to compensate for the adverse effects of
pollution, but reduces real earnings in less-polluted cities.
     The empirical results are consistent with the predictions of the variant of Rosen-Roback
theory sketched in Section 2. Incomplete information biases the hedonic price estimates and
creates a wedge between the revealed hedonic price and the true implicit value of amenities. As
demonstrated by our model with information constraints, the direction of the estimation bias
depends on the direction of people's perception bias. The corresponding perception bias parameter
in the model 9 = L9 /(L9 + L: ) =0.51, and the coefficient on the interaction of the data disclosure
indicator and the level of PM2.5 (L: ) is significantly positive. Thus, people tend to underestimate
the level of air pollution before the disclosure of pollution information. This is in accordance with
the finding of Barwick et al. (2019) that Chinese citizens used to regularly understate the severity
of atmospheric contamination, and would mistake low visibility on polluted days caused by severe
PM2.5 pollution for fog rather than smog (Barwick et al., 2019). As a consequence of the



                                                  15
downward perception bias, there is a downward estimation bias in the hedonic price of clean air
due to incomplete information.
     Referring to our baseline results in column (2), a median Chinese citizen is willing to pay 171
Chinese Yuan for a 1 ]B/J< reduction in PM2.5 concentration under incomplete information, and
336 Chinese Yuan for the same marginal reduction in PM2.5 concentration under complete
information. The shift in the MWTP estimates driven by the data disclosure accounts for
approximately 0.83% of the median income in China.


6.2 Sensitivity Analyses
     Our baseline empirical results confirm the conclusions of our variant of Rosen-Roback model
with information availability. In this section, we perform a wide range of meaningful robustness
checks. We explore threats to identification, different source of variation, alternative model
specifications and data sources.


6.2.1 Endogeneity Concerns over the Wind-Direction IV
     In our baseline empirical specification, we employ the instrumental variable based on the
interplay between wind direction, the distance to cities and the coal consumption of distant large-
scale coal-fired plants to address the endogeneity issue of air pollution. A major issue with this IV
is the potential endogenous placement of power plants. Policy makers may take the three
components of the IV into account when placing thermal power plants, and they may tend to
protect the air quality of certain types of cities. Thus, we address the concern that this IV is
correlated with unobservables associated with nearby cities. In Table A6, we further exclude the
power plants within 80km, 130km and 180km around the city, respectively. Our empirical pattern
is robust to excluding nearby coal-fired plants.
     Even though policy makers may not have used the same criteria ­ the interaction between
wind direction, the distance to cities, and the coal consumption ­ to site power plants in the past,
they may have paid more attention to the resulting environmental costs when locating power plants
in more recent years. Both the public and the government have recently started to attach more
importance to environmental protection in China; an important signal of this was the establishment
of the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) in 2008. We thus exclude power plants built
within the most recent five to eight years, respectively, in Table A7. Indeed, when we use power



                                                   16
plants built more than eight years ago, we rely only on plants built prior to the establishment of
the MEP in China. This empirical strategy is more conservative, because cities with newly built
plants are assigned to the `control group'. However, we still see a similar empirical pattern. The
disclosure of pollution information significantly raises the real income-pollution gradient in the
Rosen-Roback framework, and hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure increases from 150 to
179 Chinese Yuan. Therefore, we rule out the concern that our IV results are confounded by the
recent environmental concern and policies in China.
     We may expect that thermal power plants are more likely to be located in coal-producing
regions in China. The concentration of coal production may affect regional industrial structure,
raising concerns over other unobserved correlations with individual income. Shanxi is the largest
coal producing province in China, we therefore drop Shanxi province in Table A8. Excluding this
coal producing region does little to influence the association between pollution information and
the estimated hedonic price in our Rosen-Roback Framework.
     Another concern with this IV strategy is that the siting and coal consumption of power plants
may be driven by the electricity demand of nearby cities, even though large-scale plants supply
electricity to vast areas of China, including many remote provinces (Freeman, Liang, Song, and
Timmins, 2019). To account for the potential role played by electricity demand, we control for
city-level industrial electricity consumption (in Panel A), and then total electricity consumption
(in Panel B) in Table A9. Controlling for electricity demand barely changes our empirical pattern.
The MWTP to avoid exposure to PM2.5 pollution increases from 148 to 172 Chinese Yuan in
response to the information shock, which is quite similar with our baseline estimates.
     We further test whether policy makers favor heavily populated and politically important cities,
and locate power plants in a way that takes the interplay between wind direction, the location and
the coal consumption of power plants into account. In particular, we examine whether baseline
city attributes can predict newly built plants. In Table A10, we look at the predictive effects of city
characteristics in 2004 on the ratio of upwind power plants built after 2005, as well as the IV
constructed only using plants built after 2005. Baseline city characteristics, including GDP,
population and electricity demand, have nothing to do with the location and coal consumption of
newly built coal-fired plants.




                                                  17
6.2.2 An Alternative Version of the Wind-Direction IV
     In this section, we construct an alternative version of the wind-direction IV that uses the coal
consumption of power plants located upwind of a given city as the IV, controlling for the aggregate
coal consumption of all other power plants located not in the upwind area but within the same
distance radius from the city. The empirical specification of first stage and second stage IV
estimation is as follows:
                                                :                              :
          412.5#8 = *9 + *: E                         E
                            F,IFJ!@G 5G!H8 6 \E8 + *; F,K0@$LFJ!@G 5G!H8 6 \F8                  (12)
                                                    (#                             (#

                          +T# + U>?1!0@,8 + V A!?B,8 + ]#,8
                                                                               :
          @ABCDEFG%HIAJE!#,8 K = ^ + L: 412.5#8 + L; E
                                                     F,K0@$LFJ!@G 5G!H8 6 \F8                   (13)
                                                                                   (#

                          +T# + U>?1!0@,8 + V A!?B,8 + W!#,8
                     :
where E
      F,LFJ!@G 5G!H8 6 \F8 represents the total coal consumption of plants located in the upwind
                         (#

area of city ", and the value is penalized if those plants are further away. As illustrated in Figure
A3b, the upwind area is a section of a circular buffer drawn at a distance of 50-300km from city ",
and the angle between the left/right side of the section and the wind direction of the city is 45
                               :
degrees. E
         F,K0@$LFJ!@G 5G!H8 6 \F8 denotes the total coal consumption of plants located within
                                   (#

the same distance (50-300km) from city " but not in the upwind area, and the value is penalized in
the same way based on distance. In Figure A3b, the shaded dark grey area is the upwind area of
city ". Excluding the upwind area around the city, the remaining light grey area is defined as the
non-upwind area around city ".
     The variation of this alternative wind-direction IV comes only from how wind direction
allocates coal consumption between the upwind versus the non-upwind areas around a particular
city. Although we consider the distance to the city and the coal consumption of upwind plants in
the IV construction in Equation (12), we account for the distance and the coal consumption of
those `controlled' plants located in the non-upwind area around the city. Therefore, this IV strategy
allows us to account for any remaining unobservables that may be correlated with total coal
consumption and distance to cities.
     Table A11 reports the first-stage estimates. Because we only leverage the distribution of coal
consumption between the upwind area versus other areas in this IV, the first stage relationship is



                                                         18
not so strong as that of our baseline wind direction IV, but the F-statistics are still close to 10 across
different specifications.
     Table A12 presents the corresponding second stage results. The empirical pattern is
quantitively and qualitatively similar to our baseline results. The coefficients on our primary
variable of interest ­ the interaction between PM2.5 concentration and the data disclosure indicator
­ is precisely estimated and significantly positive. The results are also insensitive to excluding
power plants within various distance bins of cities. Therefore, our alternative wind direction IV
yields a similar empirical pattern that incomplete information leads to a wedge between the
hedonic price and implicit value of clean air, and release and dissemination of air quality data kills
such wedge.
     The only potential concern with this alternative IV is the endogeneity of wind direction.
Policy makers may locate coal-fired plants such that pollutants do not travel to politically
important or heavily populated cities. If that were the case, we should see fewer thermal plants
placed upwind of these influential cities. Table A13 reports the number of large-scale coal-fired
plants sited upwind of five largest cities as well as the total amount of their coal consumption in
2015. Beijing and Tianjin are the most populated and politically important cities in Northern China,
but they experience severe atmospheric contamination. However, we see three large-scale coal-
fired plants located upwind of Beijing and Tianjin, respectively. The total consumption of plants
located upwind of Beijing is up to 195 million tons and is 150 million tons for those located upwind
of Tianjin. In contrast, an average Chinese city only has two upwind large-scale plants with the
total coal consumption of 79 million tons, which are far below the values in Beijing and Tianjin.
We next compute the fraction of the upwind plants in the total number of large coal-fired plants in
the second column. The ratio is 38% for both Beijing and Tianjin, slightly higher than the
corresponding national mean. Overall, the summary statistics of the coal consumption and the
location of power plants indicate that policy makers do not intentionally place the coal-fired plants
away from these populated or politically important cities. This is in line with the falsification test
showing that baseline city population and economic conditions do not predict the future placement
of plants in section 6.2.1.


6.2.3 Additional Controls and Alternative Samples
     In this section, we first introduce various sets of covariates that might confound the



                                                   19
relationship between public access to PM2.5 information and the compensating differential for
PM2.5 exposure. We then examine whether our empirical pattern is driven by big cities and highly
polluted cities.
    The strength of the Rosen-Roback theory lies in that regional differences in income and
housing costs reflect the implicit values of amenities. Thus, spatial differentiated economic
conditions may confound the estimated compensating differential for air pollution exposure. As
reported in Panel A of Table A14, our estimates display similar patterns as before if we include
GDP per capita, population and industrial structure as covariates. Therefore, the changes in the
MWTP estimates (revealed by the Rosen-Roback Framework) in response to the information
dissemination are not driven by economic conditions.
    Air quality is only one of the important amenities determining location-specific livability, so
based on the spirit of the Rosen-Roback theory, regional differences in real income may pick up
the effects of other amenities. To allay this concern, we control for other local amenities affecting
the welfare of residents in Panel B of Table A14, including the number of doctors, the number of
library books, and the area of green coverage. Adding additional amenities does not affect our
results meaningfully, indicating that our IV strategy does a good job to isolate the effects of air
quality.
     We expect that fine particulate matter concentration may correlate with local industrial
emissions. To account for the confounding effects of local pollutant discharges, we control for
industrial water emission, industrial SO2 emission and industrial dust emission in Panel C of Table
A14. Our estimated empirical pattern hardly changes, and the effects of information disclosure on
the estimated MWTP from the Rosen-Roback framework is quite similar to our baseline estimates.
     In developing countries like China, industrialization, severe pollution and economic
opportunities are highly concentrated in several big cities, which may confound the relationship
between pollution and spatial income differences in the Rosen-Roback Framework. To examine
whether our hedonic estimates are driven by these cities, we exclude one influential city at a time
in Table A15. Our results are quantitively and qualitatively similar.


6.2.4 The Huai River Regression Discontinuity
     In this section, we use a different identification strategy based on the spatially-differentiated
winter heating system in China. Beginning in the 1950s, China provided a centralized coal-based



                                                 20
heating system to cities north of the Huai River. This policy has had long lasting effects, as even
today, cities north of the river boundary receive centralized heating supply from the government
every winter, whereas cities in the south do not (Ito and Zhang, 2020). The heating system relies
on coal burning in water boilers, releasing a large amount of particulate matter and leading to a
higher level of air pollution in the north.
     In response to the Action Plan on Air Pollution Prevention, China started to gradually switch
from coal to natural gas for winter heating after 2013, which has attenuated the effects of the
centralized heating on air quality deterioration in northern cities. Thus, we leverage the variation
in pollution coming from the interplay of the long-lasting public heating policy and the recent fuel
policy. Driven by the interaction of the two polices, the difference in air quality between the north
and the south changes over time. Thus, the first-stage equation is given by:
             412.5#8 = a9 + a: bARX# × dEFRef8 + a; D# × bARX# × dEFRef8                         (14)
                             +T# + U>?1!0@,8 + V A!?B,8 + g#8
bARX# is an indicator variable for whether city " is located north of the Huai River boundary, and
the running variable D# is the distance of city " from the river border. We use the interaction of
bARX# and year-fixed effects to leverage the variation over time in the discontinuous shift in fine
particle concentration at the river border (D# =0). The strength of this specification lies in that it
allows us to control for city-fixed effects to account for city-level unobsevables that may confound
the effects of information disclosure.
     We follow Ito and Zhang (2020) to select 400 miles as the bandwidth and use a local linear
control for the running variable. We interact the linear control with year-fixed effects to allow for
changes in the effects of distance to the river border over time. Table A5 presents the first-stage
results of our spatial regression discontinuity, with F-statistics greater than 10 across various
specifications. Using 2015 as the baseline, we find that the north-south air quality gap is
significantly larger in 2011 and 2013, before the time when China had largely switched to natural
gas for winter heating in northern cities. Table A16 presents the second stage RD estimates. Once
again, we find a similar empirical pattern suggesting a significant increase in the MWTP for
reducing PM2.5 concentration in response to the pollution information rollout. We control for the
interaction of the longitude decile to year-specific fixed effects in the last three columns to allay
the concern that unobservables in the west-east dimension may confound our RD estimates.
However, accounting for these unobservables barely changes our estimates. As reported in Table


                                                 21
A17 and A18, our spatial RD estimates are robust to the selection of bandwidth and control
function for the running variable.


6.2.5 Placebo Tests
     To further examine the causal relationship between the unexpected information disclosure
and the shift in the hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure, we conduct various sets of placebo
tests on our IV identification as well as the treatment effects of the unexpected information
disclosure.
     Our first IV is based on the plausibly exogenous variation driven by how wind direction
interacts with the location and the coal consumption of distant coal-fired plants. Section 6.2.2
documents that we consistently find similar results if we fix the total coal consumption of power
plants and only leverage how wind direction allocates coal consumption between the upwind area
and other areas within the same distance radius. This indicates that wind direction is the dominant
factor driving our empirical pattern (rather than the distance to cities and the total coal consumption
of plants). To further test the validity of this approach, we perform a placebo test by adding 180
degrees, to the wind direction angle, while holding all other factors in the IV construction constant.
As reported in Table A19, the falsified instrument can hardly identify the effects of air pollution
exposure, confirming that wind direction is the driving factor determining our baseline IV results.
     Our second source of plausibly exogenous variation lies in the interplay of the centralized
heating policy in cities north of the Huai River and the recent energy policy of switching from coal
to natural gas for winter heating. The cutoff for our RD design is the Huai River boundary, we thus
move the river border in a parallel fashion by 5 degrees in Table A 20. The placebo spatial RD is
less likely to predict the effects of our primary variable of interest.
     We next turn our attention to the treatment effects of the data rollout in China. The real time
PM2.5 data were released in three waves, and the sequence of data rollout determine the treatment
status of cities. We assign a "placebo" treatment status to each city by randomly allocating cities
to each of the three waves. Table A21 shows that the "placebo" treatment of data disclosure does
not have any meaningful effect on the hedonic price of reducing PM2.5 exposure. In Table A22,
we conduct additional placebo tests by arbitrarily delaying the time of data release by one year and
two years, respectively. The placebo data disclosure is unable to pick up the significant change in
the MWTP for clean air induced by the improved access to information, predicted by our variant



                                                  22
of Rosen-Roback theory sketched in Section 2.


7. Conclusion
     Our paper highlights the consequences of restricted access to information on non-market
valuation. The core of the Rosen-Roback theory lies in that the hedonic price of an amenity
measured by spatial differences in income and housing prices is equivalent to its implicit value.
Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that information failure would differentiate the estimated
hedonic price from the true implicit price of the amenity, undermining the core of the Rosen-
Roback framework. Changes in the hedonic price of avoiding PM2.5 exposure, driven by the
natural experiment of unexpected PM2.5 information disclosure in China, consolidate the
predictions of our theoretical analysis. Since the public has limited or no access to real time
environmental information in many developing countries, our theoretical and empirical evidence
speaks directly to the behavioral paradox between the extremely high economic and health burdens
of pollution and people's unreasonable low MWTP for improvements in environmental quality in
developing countries (Greenstone and Jack, 2015).
     Our work has important implications for cost-benefit analysis of environmental policies. The
goal of Pigouvian policy is to force polluters to internalize the social costs of polluting activities
in the absence of a market (Pigou, 1912). Information constraints would bias the estimates of the
social costs of pollution, rendering it much harder for policy makers to design optimal
environmental policies.
     Our analysis documents that estimation bias in hedonic valuation is driven by perception
biases that arise due to limited information. With the increased availability of global satellite-based
data on various dimensions of environmental quality, future researchers can continue to measure
the difference between levels of environmental quality perceived by the public and measured by
satellite data and develop approaches to recover estimates of the true willingness to pay under
incomplete information.




                                                  23
References
Aldy, J.E. and Viscusi, W.K., 2008. Adjusting the value of a statistical life for age and cohort effects.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), pp.573-581.
Barwick, P.J., Li, S., Lin, L. and Zou, E., 2019. From Fog to Smog: The Value of Pollution
  Information. NBER Working Paper, (w26541).
Bayer, P., Ferreira, F. and McMillan, R., 2007. A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences
  for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4), pp.588-638.
Bayer, P., Keohane, N. and Timmins, C., 2009. Migration and Hedonic Valuation: The Case of Air
Quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 58(1), pp.1-14.
Blomquist, G.C., Berger, M.C. and Hoehn, J.P., 1988. New Estimates of Quality of Life in Urban
  Areas. The American Economic Review, pp.89-107.
Bryan, G. and Morten, M., 2019. The aggregate productivity effects of internal migration:
  Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy, 127(5), pp.2229-2268.
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Greenstone, M. and Li, H., 2013. Evidence on the Impact of Sustained
  Exposure to Air Pollution on Life Expectancy from China's Huai River Policy. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32), pp.12936-12941.
Chen, Y., Jin, G.Z., Kumar, N. and Shi, G., 2012. Gaming in Air Pollution Data? Lessons from
  China. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 13(3).
Dahl, G.B., 2002. Mobility and the return to education: Testing a Roy model with multiple markets.
  Econometrica, 70(6), pp.2367-2420.
Freeman, R., Liang, W., Song, R. and Timmins, C., 2019. Willingness to Pay for Clean Air in
  China. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 94, pp.188-216.
Ghanem, D. and Zhang, J., 2014. `Effortless Perfection:' Do Chinese Cities Manipulate Air
  Pollution Data?. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 68(2), pp.203-225.
Greenstone, M. and Jack, B.K., 2015. Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for An Emerging
  Field. Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1), pp.5-42.
Hoch, I. and Drake, J., 1974. Wages, Climate, and the Quality of Life. Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 1(4), pp.268-295.
Hersch, J., 1998. Compensating Differentials for Gender-specific Job Injury Risks. The American
  Economic Review, 88(3), pp.598-607.
Ito, K. and Zhang, S., 2020. Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from Air Purifier Markets
   in China. Journal of Political Economy, 128(5), pp.1627-1672.
Khanna, G., Liang, W., Mobarak, A.M. and Song, R., 2021. The Productivity Consequences of
  Pollution-induced Migration in China. NBER Working Paper, (w28401).
Liang, W., Song, R. and Timmins, C., 2020. Frictional Sorting. NBER Working Paper, (No.
  w27643).




                                                  24
New York Times, 2015, December. Companies in South China See Opportunity in Beijing's Smog.
  The New York Times Company. https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/23/world/asia/beijing-air-
  pollution-china-smog.html.
Pigou, A.C., 1912. Wealth and Welfare. Macmillan and Company, limited.
Roback, J., 1982. Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. Journal of political Economy, 90(6),
pp.1257-1278.
Rosen, S., 1979, Wages-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life, In Mieszkowski P. and
  Straszheim M.(eds.), Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore, John Hopkins University
  Press, 74-104.
Roy, A.D., 1951. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford economic papers, 3(2),
  pp.135-146.
Tombe, T. and Zhu, X., 2019. Trade, Migration, and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis of
  China. American Economic Review, 109(5), pp.1843-72.
Wang, Z. and Zhang, J., 2021. The Value of Information Disclosure: Evidence from Mask
 Consumption in China. Duke Kunshan University Working Paper.
Van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R.V., Brauer, M., Hsu, N.C., Kahn, R.A., Levy, R.C., Lyapustin, A.,
  Sayer, A.M. and Winker, D.M., 2016. Global Estimates of Fine Particulate Matter using a
  Combined Geophysical-statistical Method with Information from Satellites, Models, and
  Monitors. Environmental science & technology, 50(7), pp.3762-3772.
Viscusi, W.K., 1993. The value of risks to life and health. Journal of economic literature, 31(4),
  pp.1912-1946.




                                               25
                        Figure 1a: PM2.5 and Real Income before the Information Disclosure




                         Figure 1b: PM2.5 and Real Income after the Information Disclosure




Notes: Real Income is measured by !/#! . ! and # are nominal income and housing price, respectively, and $ is the share of housing
expenditure in income. Cities are grouped into one hundred groups according to the quantile of PM2.5 concentration. The y-axis
denotes the log of the mean value of real income in each quantile, and x-axis denotes the mean value of PM2.5 in each quantile.
Income and housing price data come from CLDS, and PM2.5 data are drawn from the Global Annual PM2.5 Grides.




                                                               26
                         Table1: Information Disclosure and Income-Pollution Gradient

                                                              Dependent variable: Log Real Income
                                    (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                    Panel A: OLS regression
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure             -0.000311       -0.000471         -0.000448       -0.000302        -0.000485        -0.000528
                                 (0.00134)        (0.00130)        (0.00135)       (0.00138)        (0.00134)        (0.00137)
 PM 2.5                          -0.000757       -0.000955         -0.000152       -0.000550        -0.000759        -1.76e-05
                                 (0.00325)        (0.00327)        (0.00330)       (0.00315)        (0.00318)        (0.00325)
 Disclosure                       0.0165           0.0180             0.0257         0.0246           0.0273           0.0349
                                 (0.0683)         (0.0707)           (0.0726)       (0.0691)         (0.0690)         (0.0717)
 Without local hukou             0.168***         0.169***           0.169***       0.168***        0.168***         0.169***
                                 (0.0423)         (0.0422)           (0.0420)       (0.0424)         (0.0423)         (0.0420)
 Adjusted R-squared                0.417            0.417             0.418          0.417            0.417            0.418
                                                     Panel B: IV regression
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure            0.00825**        0.00825**        0.00865**        0.00850**        0.00844**        0.00863**
                                 (0.00396)        (0.00405)        (0.00395)       (0.00408)        (0.00416)        (0.00402)
 PM 2.5                           0.00836         0.00856             0.0144        0.00733          0.00775           0.0130
                                 (0.0269)         (0.0263)           (0.0299)       (0.0267)         (0.0261)         (0.0296)
 Disclosure                       -0.335*          -0.346*           -0.347*        -0.336*          -0.341*          -0.339*
                                  (0.183)          (0.187)           (0.188)         (0.189)         (0.191)          (0.191)
 Without local hukou             0.166***         0.166***           0.167***       0.165***        0.166***         0.166***
                                 (0.0425)         (0.0425)           (0.0425)       (0.0427)         (0.0427)         (0.0426)
 MWTP                              164.9             165              173.1           170             168.7            172.6
 Observations                     34,731           34,731             34,731         34,731           34,731           34,731
 City FE                            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                Yes              Yes               No             Yes              Yes              No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE             No               Yes               No              No              Yes              No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE
 × Year FE                          No               No                Yes             No               No              Yes
 Weather controls                   No               No                No             Yes              Yes              Yes
  Demographics                       Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for
education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data
across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction
terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. In Panel B, we use instrumental variables specification using the interaction
between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of power plants. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level
are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                27
Appendix
Table of Contents
Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures ............................................................................ A1
  A.1 Additional Figures ........................................................................................................................... A1
  A.2 Summary Statistics and Balanced Tests .......................................................................................... A4
  A.3 First-Stage Results ........................................................................................................................... A8
  A.4 Additional Results and Tests of Baseline Wind Direction IV ....................................................... A10
  A.5 Results of the Alternative Wind Direction IV ............................................................................... A15
  A.6 Results of Additional Controls and Alternative Samples .............................................................. A18
  A.7 Results of Huai River Regression Discontinuity........................................................................... A20
  A.8 Results of Placebo Tests ................................................................................................................ A23
Appendix B: City-Specific Housing Price Measure .............................................................. A27
Appendix C: Roy Sorting and the Dahl Correction Approach .......................................... A28
Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures
A.1 Additional Figures

                            Figure A1: The number of air purifier sales from 2006 to 2014




                             Notes: Air purifier transaction data collected by a consulting company.




                             Figure A2: Monitor-based PM2.5 and Satellite-based PM2.5




Notes: Cities are grouped into one hundred groups according to the quantile of PM2.5 concentration measured by ground monitors.
The y-axis denotes the mean value of satellite-based PM2.5 in each quantile, and x-axis denotes the mean value of monitor-based
PM2.5 in each quantile. Monitor-based data come from the official website of the MEP of China, and satellite-based PM2.5 data
are drawn from the Global Annual PM2.5 Grides.




                                                             A1
                                         Figure A3a: Baseline Wind Direction IV




                                       Figure A3b: Alternative Wind Direction IV




Notes: The thick arrow denotes the annual dominant wind direction of city '. In Figure A2a, the dark dot denotes a large-scale
thermal power plant located at least 50km outside city ' and within 150km from the city. The angle ( represents the angle between
the annual prevailing wind direction of city ' and the large-scale power plant. Large-scale thermal power plants are defined as
plants whose installed-capacities are larger than 1.5 million KW. In Figure A2b, the dark grey area is the upwind area of city ',
which is defined as a section of a circular buffer drawn at a distance of 50km-300km from the city, and the angle between the
left/right side of the section and the annual dominant wind direction of city ' is 45 degree. We exclude the upwind area from the
50km-300km `loop' around city ', and the light grey area is defined as the non-upwind area around the city.




                                                              A2
                           Figure A4: First Stage Relationship of Baseline Wind direction IV




Notes: Cities are grouped into one hundred groups according to the quantile of the baseline wind direction IV measure. The y-axis
denotes the mean value of PM2.5 in each quantile and x-axis denotes the quantile of wind direction IV. PM2.5 data are drawn from
the Global Annual PM2.5 Grides.




                                   Figure A5: Discontinuity in PM2.5 at the Huai River




Notes: The y-axis denotes PM2.5 concentration, and the x-axis denotes relative latitude north to the river boundary. Cities with
positive degrees are located north of the river border, those with negative degrees are located south of the river border. PM2.5 data
are drawn from the Global Annual PM2.5 Grides.




                                                                A3
A.2 Summary Statistics and Balanced Tests


                                              Table A1: Summary Statistics
Variable name                                            Description                                Mean             Std. dev
Real income                              Nominal income adjusted by housing prices               21,459.600        19,880.842
Rural hukou                       Indicator = 1 if the person holds rural hukou, =0 otherwise       0.705             0.456
                                     Indicator = 1 if the highest degree is high school, =0
Mid-skill                                                                                           0.178             0.382
                                                            otherwise
                                     Indicator = 1 if the highest degree is some college or
High-skill                                                                                          0.122             0.327
                                                       above, =0 otherwise
Male                                           Indicator = 1 if the person is male                  0.483             0.500
Age                                                                                                44.146            14.192
Pollution Levels                                Annual PM2.5 concentration                         43.285            17.145
Temperature                                       Annual mean temperature                          156.999           51.409
Humidity                                           Annual mean humidity                            67.936            10.336
GDP per capita                                                                                   57,152.041        36,090.569
Population                                        Number of city population                        595.341           426.090
Indu elec cons                                Industrial electricity consumption                1,154,910.276     1,504,542.415
Total elec cons                                 Total electricity consumption                   1,931,323.405     2,604,252.372
Wastewater                                     Industrial wastewater emission                     9,428.148         9,251.731
SO2                                                Industrial SO2 emission                       55,054.823        59,742.000
Dust                                               Industrial Dust emission                      48,186.896       222,583.024
                                                                                                                        !
Note: Table shows summary statistics for outcome variable and most control variables. Real Income is measured by !",$ /#$ . ! and
# are nominal income and housing price, respectively, and $ is the share of housing expenditure in income. Total electricity
consumption includes industrial, residential and commercial consumption.




                                                              A4
                               Table A2: Lagged City Attributes and Data Disclosure

                    Dependent variable:                                     Data Disclosure Indicator
                                                                     (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)
                    Lagged GDP                                   0.00354     -0.00857     0.00841       -0.0114
                                                                 (0.0167)     (0.0126)    (0.0178)      (0.0131)
                    Lagged Population                             0.0149      0.0168       0.0149        0.0173
                                                                 (0.0660)     (0.0442)    (0.0655)      (0.0443)
                    Share of Secondary Industry in GDP           0.00408      0.00897     0.00403       0.00880
                                                                 (0.0122)    (0.00889)    (0.0122)      (0.00881)
                    Share of Tertiary Industry in GDP            0.00165      0.0119      0.00163        0.0117
                                                                 (0.0114)    (0.00853)    (0.0113)      (0.00852)
                    Lagged SO2 Emission                           0.0906      0.0291       0.0877        0.0361
                                                                 (0.0634)     (0.0465)    (0.0657)      (0.0432)
                    Lagged Total electricity consumption          -0.0250     0.0462
                                                                 (0.0987)     (0.0595)
                    Lagged Industrial electricity consumption                             -0.0314        0.0321
                                                                                          (0.0546)      (0.0304)
                    Observations                                    308         308         308           308
                    Adjusted R-squared                             0.665       0.777       0.779         0.665
                    City FE                                          Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
                    Region FE × Year FE                              Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
                    City-Tier FE × Year FE                           No         Yes          No           Yes
Notes: City-level panel regression across 2011, 2013 and 2015. Dependent variable is an indicator whether PM2.5 data have been
published in a given city-year, independent variables are city attributes lagged by one year. We use cities that are included in our
baseline regression and drop cities with missing values in city attributes. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are
reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                A5
Table A3: Changes in Pollution, Wind Direction IV and City Attributes Before and After the Disclosure

                  Independent variable: Information Disclosure Indicator
                                                                             (1)       (2)       (3)
                                               Panel A. Pollution levels
                  PM 2.5                                                   -0.775    -0.616    -0.459
                                                                           (0.745)   (0.925)   (0.975)
                                             Panel B. Wind Direction IV
                  Baseline Wind Direction IV                               -3.427    -5.482    -4.623
                                                                           (3.685)   (4.435)   (5.164)
                  Wind Direction IV excluding Plants within 80km           0.388     -1.929    -0.398
                                                                           (3.073)   (3.758)   (4.458)
                  Wind Direction IV excluding Plants within 130km          -1.034    -3.161    -3.080
                                                                           (2.277)   (3.010)   (3.472)
                                                  Panel C. Amenities
                  Number of Doctors                                        -501.5    -200.9    95.05
                                                                           (522.0)   (346.3)   (386.4)
                  Area of green coverage                                   313.8     134.8     297.0
                                                                           (351.9)   (508.7)   (547.0)
                                             )anel D. Economic condition
                  GDP per Capita                                           -192.6    -367.5    -673.0
                                                                           (529.1)   (421.2)   (433.0)
                  Share of Secondary Industry in GDP                       0.188     -0.386    -0.594
                                                                           (0.570)   (0.778)   (0.824)
                  Share of Tertiary Industry in GDP                        0.0233    0.849     1.095
                                                                           (0.521)   (0.738)   (0.728)
                                        Panel E. Electricity Consumption
                  Industrial Electricity Consumption                       -0.294    3.160     3.008
                                                                           (4.178)   (5.247)   (5.346)
                  Total Electricity Consumption                            -5.372    4.434     3.970
                                                                           (5.963)   (5.618)   (5.772)
                                                  Panel F. Emissions
                               2
                  Industrial SO emission                                   5.993     3.128     1.500
                                                                           (4.646)   (3.637)   (2.898)
                  Industrial dust emission                                 130.7     147.3     189.3
                                                                           (118.2)   (140.7)   (180.8)
                                        Panel G. Government Expenditure
                  Government Public Invest                                 -25.51    -26.45    -28.71
                                                                           (16.24)   (21.37)   (23.53)
                  Urban Environment Expenditure                            -0.485    2.291     -0.274
                                                                           (1.568)   (2.160)   (0.536)


                                                         A6
                        Waste Water Treatment Expenditure                      -2.329     1.817     -0.302
                                                                               (1.683)   (2.955)   (0.639)
                        City FE                                                  Yes       Yes       Yes
                        Region FE × Year FE                                     Yes        Yes        No
                        City-Tier FE × Year FE                                   No        Yes        No
Notes: Row names show the dependent variable. The independent variable is an indicator for whether real time data have been
published in a given city. We use cities that are included in our baseline regression and drop cities with missing values in city
attributes. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               A7
A.3 First-Stage Results


                                      Table A4: First-stage of Wind Direction IV

                                                                      Dependent variable: PM 2.5
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
 Wind Direction and Coal Plants       0.0315***       0.0322***       0.0298***      0.0323***       0.0329***       0.0303***
                                      (0.00790)       (0.00820)        (0.00815)      (0.00769)       (0.00794)       (0.00811)
 Observations                           34,731          34,731          34,731         34,731          34,731          34,731
 Adjusted R-squared                     0.982           0.982            0.983          0.982           0.982           0.983
 F-Statistics                           15.89           15.39            13.38          17.58           17.16           17.16
 City FE                                 Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                     Yes             Yes              No             Yes             Yes             No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                   No             Yes              No             No              Yes             No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE ×
 Year FE                                  No             No               Yes            No              No              Yes
 Weather controls                         No             No               No             Yes             Yes             Yes
  Demographics                             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for
education attainment. City controls include temperature and humidity. We use cities that are included in all the three waves of our
CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the
city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 A8
                                                                  Table A5: First-stage of Huai River RD

                                                                                            Dependent variable: PM 2.5
                                                      (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)
 North × Year 2011                                7.362***                7.423***               7.898***               7.230***               7.324***               7.764***
                                                   (1.689)                 (1.702)                (1.792)                (1.671)                (1.684)                (1.771)
 North × Year 2013                                10.45***                10.48***               10.76***               10.36***               10.40***               10.68***
                                                  (2.278)                 (2.320)                (2.430)                (2.254)                (2.296)                (2.430)
                                              Linear × North×         Linear × North×        Linear × North×        Linear × North×        Linear × North×        Linear × North×
 Control function for the running variable
                                                  Year FE                 Year FE                Year FE                Year FE                Year FE                Year FE
 Observations                                       20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162
 Adjusted R-squared                                 0.986                  0.986                   0.986                  0.986                  0.986                  0.987
 F-Statistics                                       11.10                  10.81                   10.68                  11.09                  10.84                  10.63
 City FE                                             Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                                 Yes                    Yes                     No                     Yes                    Yes                    No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                               No                    Yes                     No                     No                     Yes                    No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE× Year FE                    No                     No                     Yes                    No                     No                     Yes
 Weather controls                                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Demographics                                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
  Longitude Decile× Year FE                             No                     No                   No                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. City controls include temperature
and humidity. We control for the interaction between the local linear distance to Huai River and year-fixed effects. We use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS
sample and located within a 400-mile bandwidth around the river boundary. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are
clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                         A9
A.4 Additional Results and Tests of Baseline Wind Direction IV



                                                   Table A6: Different Distance Bins for Selection of Power Plants

                                                                                      Dependent variable: Log real income
                                    (1)                (2)                   (3)              (4)                  (5)               (6)                   (7)             (8)
                                                                                                      Panel A
                                                          Baseline Results                                                                 Exclude 80km
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure            0.00825**          0.00825**           0.00850**          0.00844**             0.00752*         0.00766*            0.00807*           0.00818*
                                (0.00396)           (0.00405)          (0.00408)          (0.00416)             (0.00432)        (0.00444)           (0.00449)          (0.00459)
 MWTP                             164.9                165                170               168.7                150.5             153.2               161.4              163.6
                                                                                                      Panel B
                                                             Exclude 130km                                                                 Exclude 180km
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure            0.00901*            0.00908             0.0102*            0.0102*              0.0118*          0.0117**            0.0123**           0.0122**
                                (0.00534)           (0.00548)          (0.00569)          (0.00578)             (0.00601)        (0.00590)           (0.00612)          (0.00603)
 MWTP                             180.3               181.7              203.1              203.9                235.3             234.1               245.3              244.3
 Observations                     34,731             34,731             34,731              34,731               34,731            34,731             34,731             34,731
 City FE                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes              Yes
 Region FE × Year FE               Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes              Yes
 City-Tier FE × Year FE             No                 Yes                   No              Yes                   No               Yes                    No              Yes
 Weather controls                   No                 No                 Yes                Yes                   No               No                    Yes              Yes
  Demographics                      Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of power plants. Demographics include age, gender,
an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We use individual-
level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction terms to account for
the potential Roy sorting issue. We replicate baseline results in columns (1)-(4) of Panel A, exclude plants within 80 km around the city in columns (5)-(8) of Panel B, exclude plants
within 130 km in columns (1)-(4) of Panel B, and exclude plants within 180 km in columns (5)-(8) of Panel B. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in
parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                        A10
                                                               Table A7: Excluding Newly Built Power Plants

                                                                                      Dependent variable: Log real income
                                   (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                  (5)               (6)                 (7)                (8)
                                                                                                      Panel A
                                                         Plants> 5 yrs ago                                                              Plants> 6 yrs ago
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure           0.00753**           0.00748*           0.00775**            0.00762*             0.00781**        0.00787**           0.00812**          0.00811**
                                (0.00377)          (0.00384)           (0.00390)          (0.00398)             (0.00384)         (0.00391)          (0.00396)           (0.00403)
 MWTP                             150.6              149.6               154.9               152.4                156.2             157.4              162.3               162.2
                                                                                                      Panel B
                                                         Plants> 7 yrs ago                                                              Plants> 8 yrs ago
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure            0.00831*           0.00841*            0.00893*            0.00897*             0.00767*          0.00769*           0.00822*            0.00821*
                                (0.00443)          (0.00450)           (0.00463)          (0.00469)             (0.00417)         (0.00422)          (0.00445)           (0.00451)
 MWTP                             166.2              168.1               178.5               179.4                153.4             153.8              164.4               164.2
 Observations                    34,731              34,731             34,731              34,731               34,731            34,731              34,731             34,731
 City FE                           Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Region FE × Year FE               Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 City-Tier FE × Year FE            No                 Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                Yes                 No                 Yes
 Weather controls                  No                  No                 Yes                 Yes                  No                No                 Yes                 Yes
  Demographics                        Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of power plants. Cities affected by new plants included
in sample (i.e. in the `control' regions) so as to generate conservative estimates. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou
and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We use individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use
cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. We use power plants built more than
5 years ago in columns (1)-(4) of Panel A, power plants built more than 6 years ago in columns (5)-(8) of Panel A, power plants built more than 7 years ago in columns (1)-(4) of
Panel B, and power plants built more than 8 years ago in columns (5)-(8) of Panel B. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p
< 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                         A11
                                     Table A8: Excluding Coal Producing Region

                                                             Dependent variable: Log real income
                                   (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure            0.00853**        0.00860**        0.00884**         0.00875**        0.00877**        0.00883**
                                (0.00398)        (0.00407)         (0.00393)        (0.00408)        (0.00415)         (0.00399)
 MWTP                             170.5             172              176.7             175              175.4            176.6
 Observations                    34,091            34,091           34,091            34,091           34,091           34,091
 City FE                           Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
 Region FE × Year FE               Yes               Yes              No               Yes               Yes              No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE            No                Yes              No                No               Yes              No
 Region FE × City-Tier
 FE × Year FE                      No                No               Yes               No               No               Yes
 Weather controls                  No                No               No               Yes               Yes              Yes
  Demographics                     Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We use individual-level pool cross-section data across
2011, 2013 and 2015, use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample, and drop all cities in Shanxi Province.
We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are
reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               A12
                                     Table A9: Controlling for Electricity Demand

                                                                   Dependent variable: Log real income
                                          (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                Panel A: Add Industrial Elec. Cons.
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                   0.00765*        0.00779*         0.00862**      0.00769*          0.00779*       0.00846*
                                       (0.00433)       (0.00441)        (0.00425)      (0.00446)         (0.00455)     (0.00435)
 MWTP                                    153.1           155.9            172.3          153.8            155.9           169.1
                                                     Panel B: Add Elec. Cons.
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                   0.00741*        0.00753*         0.00838**      0.00751*          0.00760*       0.00826*
                                       (0.00428)       (0.00438)        (0.00416)      (0.00442)         (0.00453)     (0.00428)
 MWTP                                    148.1           150.5            167.6          150.3            152.1           165.2
 Observations                           32,118          32,118           32,118          32,118           32,118         32,118
 City FE                                  Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                      Yes             Yes              No             Yes              Yes             No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                   No              Yes              No              No              Yes             No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE ×
 Year FE                                  No              No               Yes             No               No             Yes
 Weather controls                         No              No               No             Yes              Yes             Yes
  Demographics                            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. Total electricity consumption includes industrial,
residential and commercial consumption. We use individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, use cities
that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample, and drop cities with missing values in electricity consumption. We
add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Total electricity consumption includes industrial,
residential and commercial consumption. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 A13
                              Table A10 Baseline Economy and the Wind Direction IV

   Dependent variable:                             The ratio of upwind plants              Wind direction and coal plants IV
                                                    (1)                  (2)                    (3)                   (4)
   Baseline GDP                                  -0.00641             -0.00611                0.156                 -0.0242
                                                 (0.00889)            (0.00513)               (0.564)               (0.290)
   Share of Secondary Industry in GDP            0.00120              0.000793                0.274                  0.242
                                                 (0.00394)            (0.00392)               (0.301)               (0.298)
   Share of Tertiary Industry in GDP             -0.00288             -0.00275                0.154                  0.157
                                                 (0.00590)            (0.00592)               (0.337)               (0.333)
   Baseline Population                           -0.00744             -0.00734                -0.611                -0.649
                                                 (0.00627)            (0.00601)               (0.480)               (0.468)
   Baseline Elec cons                            0.000646                                   0.000145
                                                (0.000903)                                   (0.0615)
   Baseline Industrial Elec cons                                      0.000949                                      0.0303
                                                                     (0.000773)                                    (0.0475)
   Observations                                     106                  106                   106                    106
   Adjusted R-squared                             0.0679               0.0761                 0.216                  0.218
                                                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes
   Region FE
                                                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
   City-Tier FE
Notes: City-level regression. Dependent variables are based on power plants built post 2005, and independent variables are
measured in the year 2004. We use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample, and drop cities with missing
values in baseline characteristics. Standard errors clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                                               A14
A.5 Results of the Alternative Wind Direction IV


                               Table A11: First-stage of Alternative Wind Direction IV

                                                                          Dependent variable: PM 2.5
                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
 Upwind coal consumption                     0.0193***      0.0193***      0.0173***       0.0198***      0.0198***      0.0175***
                                             (0.00582)      (0.00596)       (0.00577)      (0.00564)      (0.00577)       (0.00564)
 Observations                                  34,731         34,731         34,731          34,731         34,731         34,731
 Adjusted R-squared                            0.982          0.982           0.983          0.982           0.982          0.983
 F-value                                       10.99          10.51           8.992          12.26           11.79          11.79
 City FE                                        Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                            Yes             Yes            No             Yes             Yes            No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                          No             Yes            No             No              Yes            No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE× Year FE               No             No             Yes            No              No             Yes
 Weather controls                                No             No             No             Yes             Yes            Yes
  Demographics                                    Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Notes: Upwind coal consumption denotes the total coal consumption of power plants located at the upwind area of a given city. We
control for the total coal consumption of plants at the counterpart non-upwind area of the city. We use cities that are included in all
the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Demographics
include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment.
Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample.
Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                A15
                                      Table A12: Alternative Wind Direction IV with Distance Bins for Selection of Plants

                                                                                       Dependent variable: Log real income
                                    (1)                (2)                   (3)              (4)                   (5)              (6)                   (7)              (8)
                                                                                                       Panel A
                                                          Baseline Results                                                                 Exclude 80km
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure             0.0110**           0.0109**            0.0110**            0.0107*              0.0122**         0.0121**           0.0125**            0.0124**
                                (0.00485)           (0.00518)          (0.00517)           (0.00544)             (0.00569)        (0.00583)          (0.00606)           (0.00618)
 MWTP                              219.7               218                219.3              213.1                 243.2            242.4              250.6               248.2
                                                                                                       Panel B
                                                             Exclude 130km                                                                 Exclude 180km
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure             0.0112*             0.0110*            0.0121*             0.0119               0.00857**        0.00849*           0.00864*            0.00857*
                                (0.00617)           (0.00645)          (0.00702)           (0.00727)             (0.00426)        (0.00430)          (0.00459)           (0.00463)
 MWTP                              223.5              219.7               242.6              237.6                 171.4            169.9              172.8               171.4
 Observations                     34,731             34,731              34,731             34,731                34,731           34,731              34,731             34,731
 City FE                            Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
 City-Tier FE × Year FE             No                 Yes                   No               Yes                   No               Yes                   No               Yes
 Weather controls                   No                 No                  Yes                Yes                   No               No                   Yes               Yes
  Demographics                        Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the total coal consumption of power plants located at the upwind area of a given city, controlling for the total coal consumption of
plants at the counterpart non-upwind area of the city. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education
attainment. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh
correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. We exclude plants within 50 km around the city in columns (1)-(4) of Panel A, exclude plants within 80 km in columns
(5)-(8) of Panel B, exclude plants within 130 km in columns (1)-(4) of Panel B, and exclude plants within 180 km in Columns (5)-(8) of Panel B. Standard errors that are clustered
at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                         A16
                     Table A13: The Coal-fired Plants Located Upwind of Large Metropolitans
                               Number of Upwind         Ratio of Upwind       Coal Consumption       Smallest Angle of
       City                        Plants                    Plants           of Upwind Plants            Plants
       Beijing                          3                    37.5%                 194.779                 22.816
       Tianjin                          3                    37.5%                 149.590                 15.368
       Shanghai                         3                    13.6%                 105.619                 3.347
       Guangzhou                        5                    62.5%                 170.603                 0.088
       Shenzhen                         4                    57.1%                 152.005                 1.184
        National mean                     2                     35.8%                 79.161               17.194
Notes: The statistics are calculated using the large-scale thermal power plants located at 50-300km from a given city. We define
the upwind area as a section of a circular buffer drawn at a distance of 50-300km from a given city, and the angle between the
section and the annual dominant wind direction of the city being at least 45 degree.




                                                             A17
A.6 Results of Additional Controls and Alternative Samples



                 Table A14: Additional Controls: Economic Condition, Amenities, and Emissions

                                                                     Dependent variable: Log real income
                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                 Panel A: Add Economic Controls
       PM 2.5 × Disclosure                       0.00804*     0.00874*     0.00889**      0.00796*     0.00861*     0.00867**
                                                 (0.00445)    (0.00471)     (0.00415)     (0.00466)    (0.00488)     (0.00430)
       MWTP                                        160.8        174.8         177.8         159.2        172.2         173.5
       Observations                               32,766        32,766       32,766        32,766       32,766        32,766
                                                  Panel B: Add Other Amenities
       PM 2.5 × Disclosure                       0.00814*     0.00837*      0.00852*      0.00797*     0.00819*      0.00837*
                                                 (0.00445)    (0.00450)     (0.00436)     (0.00458)    (0.00462)     (0.00445)
       MWTP                                        162.8        167.5         170.5         159.5        163.9         167.5
       Observations                               32,400        32,400       32,400        32,400       32,400        32,400
                                                 Panel C: Add Emission Controls
       PM 2.5 × Disclosure                       0.00759*     0.00787*      0.00839*      0.00772*     0.00798*      0.00839*
                                                 (0.00440)    (0.00449)     (0.00442)     (0.00454)    (0.00460)     (0.00449)
       MWTP                                        151.8        157.4         167.9         154.3        159.6         167.7
       Observations                               31,263        31,263       31,263        31,263       31,263        31,263
       City FE                                      Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
       Region FE × Year FE                          Yes          Yes           No            Yes          Yes           No
       City-Tier FE × Year FE                       No           Yes           No            No           Yes           No
       Region FE × City-Tier FE × Year FE           No            No           Yes           No           No            Yes
       Weather controls                             No            No           No            Yes          Yes           Yes
        Demographics                               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. Economic Controls include GDP per capita, the share
secondary industry in GDP and share of tertiary industry in GDP. Other Amenities include the number of doctors, the number of
library books and the area of green coverage. Emission Controls include industrial water emission, industrial SO2 emission and
industrial dust emission. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, use cities that are included
in all the three waves of our CLDS sample, and drop cities with missing values in these control variables. We add Dalh correction
terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                A18
                                  Table A15: Excluding Big Cities and High Polluters

                                                              Dependent variable: Log real income
 City Excluded                   Beijing           Tianjin          Shanghai         Shenyang         Zhengzhou           Wuhan
                                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure           0.00824**         0.00846**         0.00846**         0.00827**        0.00816**         0.00849**
                                (0.00415)         (0.00425)        (0.00420)         (0.00415)         (0.00411)        (0.00399)
 MWTP                             164.7             169.3            169.1             165.4             163.3             169.8
 Observations                    34,314            34,341            34,368            34,568           34,380            34,196
 City FE                           Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Region FE × Year FE               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 City-Tier FE × Year FE            Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
 Weather controls                  Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes
  Demographics                     Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data
across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction
terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                A19
A.7 Results of Huai River Regression Discontinuity


                                                              Table A16: Huai River Regression Discontinuity

                                                                                               Dependent variable: Log real income
                                                      (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                               0.0158*                 0.0162*                0.0156*                0.0157*                0.0161*                 0.0158*
                                                  (0.00812)               (0.00864)              (0.00821)              (0.00832)               (0.00862)              (0.00825)
 PM 2.5                                             0.0174                 0.0165                  0.0112                 0.0193                 0.0180                 0.0122
                                                   (0.0153)               (0.0151)                (0.0136)               (0.0152)               (0.0149)               (0.0132)
 Disclosure                                        -0.845*                 -0.905*                -0.910*                -0.855*                 -0.916*               -0.954**
                                                    (0.457)                (0.493)                (0.470)                 (0.473)                (0.497)                (0.474)
 MWTP                                               315.7                   325                   311.3                  313.4                   322.3                  315.2
                                               Linear × North×        Linear × North×        Linear × North×        Linear × North×         Linear × North×        Linear × North×
 Control function for the running variable
                                                   Year FE                Year FE                Year FE                Year FE                 Year FE                Year FE
 Observations                                       20,162                 20,162                 20,162                  20,162                 20,162                 20,162
 City FE                                              Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                                  Yes                    Yes                    No                     Yes                     Yes                    No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                               No                     Yes                    No                      No                     Yes                    No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE × Year FE                   No                     No                     Yes                     No                     No                     Yes
 Weather controls                                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
 Demographics                                         Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
  Longitude Quintile FE × Year FE                     No                      No                     No                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include
temperature and humidity. We control for the interaction between the local linear distance to Huai River and year-fixed effects. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data
across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample and located within a 400-mile bandwidth around the river boundary. We add
Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
0.01.




                                                                                         A20
                                                       Table A17: Alternative Function for the Running Variable

                                                                                               Dependent variable: Log real income
                                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                                0.0159*                0.0164*                0.0155*                0.0157*                 0.0162*                0.0157*
                                                   (0.00841)              (0.00896)              (0.00836)               (0.00864)              (0.00895)              (0.00842)
 PM 2.5                                              0.0211                 0.0199                 0.0137                 0.0230                 0.0215                 0.0147
                                                    (0.0163)               (0.0160)               (0.0140)               (0.0162)               (0.0159)               (0.0136)
 Disclosure                                         -0.854*                -0.919*                -0.914*                 -0.861*                -0.928*                -0.957*
                                                    (0.472)                 (0.510)                (0.476)                (0.489)                (0.513)                (0.480)
 MWTP                                               318.2                  328.4                   310.1                  314.8                  324.8                  313.8
                                               Quadratic × Year       Quadratic × Year        Quadratic × Year       Quadratic × Year       Quadratic × Year       Quadratic × Year
 Control function for the running variable
                                                     FE                     FE                      FE                     FE                     FE                     FE
 Observations                                        20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162                 20,162
 City FE                                              Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                                  Yes                    Yes                     No                     Yes                    Yes                    No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                                No                    Yes                     No                     No                     Yes                    No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE × Year FE                    No                     No                     Yes                    No                     No                     Yes
 Weather controls                                      No                     No                     No                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Demographics                                         Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
  Longitude Quintile FE × Year FE                      No                      No                    No                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include
temperature and humidity. We control for interactions between quadratic controls for the distance to Huai River and year-fixed effects. We employ individual-level pool cross-section
data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample and located within a 400-mile bandwidth around the river boundary. We
add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                                                         A21
                                                       TableA18 Various Bandwidths in Regression Discontinuity

                                                                                                Dependent variable: Log real income
                                                                           (1)                          (2)                        (3)                      (4)
                                                                                   Panel A: 500 Miles
                 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                                   0.0175**                       0.0185*                   0.0188**                0.0199**
                                                                       (0.00863)                     (0.00934)                  (0.00904)               (0.00979)
                 Observations                                            23,050                       23,050                     23,050                   23,050
                                                                                   Panel B: 525 Miles
                 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                                   0.0243**                       0.0255*                   0.0252**                 0.0266*
                                                                        (0.0122)                      (0.0135)                   (0.0126)                (0.0139)
                 Observations                                            24,030                       24,030                     24,030                   24,030
                                                                                   Panel C: 550 Miles
                 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                                    0.0167*                       0.0174*                    0.0181*                 0.0191*
                                                                       (0.00929)                     (0.00996)                   (0.0100)                (0.0109)
                 Observations                                            24,935                       24,935                     24,935                   24,935
                 Control function for the running variable     Linear × North× Year FE       Linear × North× Year FE      Quadratic× Year FE       Quadratic× Year FE
                 City FE                                                  Yes                           Yes                        Yes                     Yes
                 Region FE × Year FE                                      Yes                           Yes                        Yes                     Yes
                 City-Tier FE × Year FE                                    No                           Yes                        No                      Yes
                 Weather controls                                         Yes                           Yes                        Yes                     Yes
                  Demographics                                             Yes                           Yes                       Yes                     Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include
temperature and humidity. In column (1), (3) and (5), we control for the interaction between the local linear distance to Huai River and year-fixed effects. In column (2), (4), and (6),
we control for the interactions between quadratic controls for the distance to Huai River and year-fixed effects. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013
and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample and located within various bandwidths around the river boundary. We add Dalh correction terms
to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are
reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                          A22
A.8 Results of Placebo Tests


                                            Table A19: Placebo Wind Directions

                                                              Dependent variable: Log real income
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure             0.000799         0.000813          0.00140          0.00258           0.00263          0.00212
                                 (0.00694)        (0.00732)        (0.00729)         (0.0105)         (0.0108)         (0.00915)
 Observations                      34,731           34,731           34,731           34,731           34,731           34,731
 City FE                            Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                Yes              Yes               No               Yes              Yes              No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE              No              Yes               No               No               Yes              No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE
 × Year FE                           No               No               Yes              No               No               Yes
 Weather controls                    No               No               No               Yes              Yes              Yes
  Demographics                         Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. We use `placebo' wind direction by adding 180 degree. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban
hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and
humidity. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all
the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors
that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. We add 180 degree to wind direction angle. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                                               A23
                                                                     Table A20: Placebo RD Cutoff

                                                                                            Dependent variable: Log real income
                                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)                   (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                              -0.0307               -0.0293                -0.0250               -0.0326               -0.0308                -0.0260
                                                  (0.0374)              (0.0349)              (0.0230)               (0.0395)              (0.0363)              (0.0232)
 PM 2.5                                           0.00641               0.00613               -0.00168               0.00762               0.00719              -0.000699
                                                  (0.0234)              (0.0226)              (0.0196)               (0.0242)              (0.0232)              (0.0195)
 Disclosure                                        1.606                 1.534                  1.369                 1.705                 1.610                  1.417
                                                 (1.897)                (1.822)               (1.255)              (2.006)                (1.897)               (1.268)
                                             Linear × North×        Linear × North×       Linear × North×       Quadratic× Year        Quadratic× Year       Quadratic× Year
 Control function for the running variable
                                                 Year FE                Year FE               Year FE                 FE                     FE                    FE
 Observations                                     18,136                 18,136                18,136                18,136                 18,136                18,136
 City FE                                            Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                    Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                                Yes                   Yes                    No                    Yes                   Yes                    No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                             No                    Yes                    No                    No                    Yes                    No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE × Year FE                 No                     No                    Yes                   No                     No                    Yes
 Weather controls                                   No                     No                    No                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
  Demographics                                         Yes                      Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes         Yes
Notes: Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators for education attainment. Weather controls include
temperature and humidity. We move the river border parallelly by 5 degree. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are
included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample and located within a 400 mile-bandwidth around the `placebo' river boundary. We add Dalh correction terms to account for the
potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                      A24
                                      Table A21: Placebo Data Rollout Sequence

                                                                   Dependent variable: Log real income
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                     0.00755        0.00732          0.00749       0.00897           0.00871      0.00874
                                        (0.00548)      (0.00571)        (0.00675)      (0.00571)     (0.00590)       (0.00718)
 PM 2.5                                  -0.0150        -0.0138          -0.0103        -0.0183          -0.0169      -0.0140
                                        (0.0347)        (0.0350)         (0.0430)      (0.0349)          (0.0353)    (0.0445)
 Disclosure                              -0.389          -0.378           -0.399        -0.450*          -0.438        -0.450
                                         (0.247)        (0.257)          (0.299)        (0.256)          (0.264)      (0.316)
 Observations                            34,731          34,731           34,731        34,731           34,731       34,731
 City FE                                   Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                       Yes            Yes              No             Yes              Yes          No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                    No             Yes              No             No               Yes          No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE × Year
 FE                                        No              No              Yes            No               No           Yes
 Weather controls                          No              No              No             Yes              Yes          Yes
  Demographics                              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. We randomly allocate cities to each of the three waves of data disclosure. We employ individual-level
pool cross-section data across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We
add Dalh correction terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are
reported in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 A25
                                          Table A22: Placebo Data Rollout Time

                                                                    Dependent variable: Log real income
                                           (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                     Panel A: Delay One Year
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                    0.00943          0.00937          0.00616         0.0107           0.0107         0.00743
                                       (0.00757)        (0.00771)        (0.00895)      (0.00799)         (0.00817)      (0.00920)
                                                     Panel B: Delay Two Years
 PM 2.5 × Disclosure                    0.00361          0.00339          0.00253        0.00492          0.00471         0.00365
                                       (0.00343)        (0.00347)        (0.00438)      (0.00350)         (0.00349)      (0.00454)
 Observations                            34,731          34,731           34,731          34,731           34,731          34,731
 City FE                                   Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
 Region FE × Year FE                       Yes             Yes              No              Yes             Yes              No
 City-Tier FE × Year FE                    No              Yes              No              No              Yes              No
 Region FE × City-Tier FE ×
 Year FE                                   No              No               Yes             No               No             Yes
 Weather controls                          No              No               No              Yes             Yes             Yes
  Demographics                            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Notes: Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, the location and the coal consumption of
power plants. Demographics include age, gender, an indicator for urban hukou, an indicator for without local hukou and indicators
for education attainment. Weather controls include temperature and humidity. We employ individual-level pool cross-section data
across 2011, 2013 and 2015, and use cities that are included in all the three waves of our CLDS sample. We add Dalh correction
terms to account for the potential Roy sorting issue. Standard errors that are clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 A26
Appendix B: City-Specific Housing Price Measure

     We define the value of the home occupied by individual ! in city ", #!,# , as the value of the
house (for owner-occupied units) or annual rent (for rental units) in our census data. Following
Bayer et al. (2007, 2009), we assume that #!,# is a function of a scaling parameter $# specific to
city" and a vector of housing characteristics &! . Then, we estimate the following regression:
                         '()#!,#,$ = '()$#,$ + ,$ -!,%&'() + .!* /$ + 0!,#,$
                                                                       +
                                                                                                 (B1)
Where -!,%&'() is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a owner-occupied unit and 0
otherwise. Dwelling characteristics &! describe the number of rooms, floor area, whether tap water
is provided, whether a kitchen is provided, whether a shower room is provided and whether there
is a bathroom. We run the housing price regression of Equation (B1) for 2011, 2013 and 2015,
separately. The city-and year-specific fixed effect '()$#$ measures the effective ``price of housing
services'' in city " and year 1 independent of ownership and housing attributes. Therefore, our
housing price measure captures the variation in housing costs both spatial and time variations in
housing costs.




                                               A27
Appendix C: Roy Sorting and the Dahl Correction Approach


     Roy sorting refers to the problem that individuals respond to idiosyncratic wage draws and
are likely to move to a location where that wage draw is good. For instance, individuals from a
particular region could earn unusual high wages in a given place, because their personal abilities
have unusual comparative advantages specific for working in this place. Thus, other people who
look like these individuals cannot earn same wages if they move to the place. We follow the semi-
parametric approach proposed by Dahl (2002) to address the Roy sorting bias.
     We use population census data in 2005 and divide individuals into groups based on their
original regions. Within each original region cell, we also allocate individuals into one of the two
education classes: high school dropouts and high school graduates. Then, we define selection
probability 2! as the fraction of the population in individual !4 cell that chooses to live in a
particular destination region. Finally, we augment wage hedonic equation by adding a quadratic
function of 2! . Controlling for selection probability can effectively correct for Roy sorting bias
(Dahl, 2002).
     We use baseline year data in 2005 to measure the selection probability, and control for city-
fixed effects in our baseline empirical specification of equation (10). Therefore, we can account
for any location-specific unobservables that may be correlated with these Dahl correction terms.
    The selection probability 2! can also capture bilateral migration costs across regions. If there
are high mobility costs associated with moving form region A to B, the share of people moving
from region A to B should be small (Bryan and Morten 2019).




                                               A28
