                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 TRADE AND INNOVATION

                                        Marc J. Melitz
                                      Stephen J. Redding

                                      Working Paper 28945
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28945


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We are grateful to Harvard University and Princeton University for research support. This paper
was commissioned for the conference and book "The Economics of Creative Destruction" in
Honor of Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt. Thanks to Sam Kortum, Dan Trefler and participants
at the conference for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Innovation
Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 28945
June 2021
JEL No. F1,F43,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

Two central insights from the Schumpeterian approach to innovation and growth are that the pace
of innovation is endogenously determined by the expectation of future profits and that growth is
inherently a process of creative destruction. As international trade is a key determinant of firm
profitability and survival, it is natural to expect it to play a key role in shaping both incentives to
innovate and the rate of creative destruction. In this paper, we review the theoretical and
empirical literature on trade and innovation. We highlight four key mechanisms through which
international trade affects endogenous innovation and growth: (i) market size; (ii) competition;
(iii) comparative advantage; (iv) knowledge spillovers. Each of these mechanisms offers a
potential source of dynamic welfare gains in addition to the static welfare gains from trade from
conventional trade theory. Recent research has suggested that these dynamic welfare gains from
trade can be substantial relative to their static counterparts. Discriminating between alternative
mechanisms for these dynamic welfare gains and strengthening the evidence on their quantitative
magnitude remain exciting areas of ongoing research.


Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics &
School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

One of the central insights of recent research on innovation and growth is that the pace of in-
novation is endogenously determined by the expectation of future pro ts. As international trade

is a key determinant of rm pro tability, through both the size of the market and the extent of
product market competition, it is natural to expect it to play a key role in shaping innovation
and growth. In this paper, we review the theoretical and empirical literature on trade and inno-

vation, focusing on insights from taking a Schumpeterian perspective. According to this view,
growth occurs through a process of creative destruction, such that existing state of art technolo-

gies are progressively replaced by the next generation of technologies.1 Through endogenis-

ing the rate of innovation, these theories open up an entirely new channel for potential welfare

gains from trade. In addition to the conventional static welfare gains from trade, these theories

point towards the possibility of dynamic welfare gains from increases in the rate of innovation

and growth. Determining the magnitude of these dynamic welfare gains from trade, the relative

importance of di erent possible mechanisms for them, and whether they involve a permanent

change in economic growth (endogenous growth) or a temporary one along the transition path

(semi-endogenous growth) remain exciting areas of ongoing research.

    In the existing international trade literature, there is a good deal of consensus about the static

welfare gains from trade, de ned as the increase in the level of ow utility from country participa-

tion in international markets. Traditional theories of international trade following Ricardo (1817),
Heckscher (1919) and Ohlin (1924) emphasize cross-country variation in the opportunity cost of
production for di erent commodities as source of comparative advantage and welfare gains from

trade. Specialization to exploit these di erences in opportunity cost gives rise to inter-industry
trade, as countries export in industries of comparative advantage and import in those of com-
parative disadvantage. New theories of international trade following Krugman (1979a), Helpman

(1981) and Helpman and Krugman (1985) highlight product di erentiation and increasing returns
   1
     For an earlier review of trade and technological change, see Grossman and Helpman (1995). For surveys of recent
research on trade and innovation, see Shu and Steinwender (2018) and Akcigit and Melitz (2021). For syntheses of
Schumpeterian growth theory in general, see Aghion and Howitt (1997) and Akcigit et al. (2014).


                                                         1
to scale, which can generate welfare gains from trade through both an expansion of product vari-

ety and reductions in production costs. The resulting specialization to realize these economies of
scale generates intra-industry trade, in which countries simultaneously export and import simi-
lar products within the same industry. Finally, theories of heterogeneous rms in di erentiated

product markets following Melitz (2003) and Bernard et al. (2003) point towards the non-random
selection of the most productive rms into international trade and the resulting intra-industry
reallocations of resources. The most productive rms expand into enter export markets while

increased competition induces the least productive rms to exit. This generates welfare gains
through increased average industry productivity.

   While theories of endogenous innovation and trade open up the possibility for dynamic wel-

fare gains from trade, there is much less consensus about the existence and magnitude of such

changes in countries' rates of innovation and growth. Four main mechanisms for these dynamic

welfare gains from trade have been proposed. First, international trade expands the market size

accessible to rms. To the extent that innovation involves xed costs, this expansion of market

size can raise the incentive to innovate, because these xed costs can be spread over a larger

number of units of production. Second, international trade increases product market competi-

tion as the producers from di erent countries enter one another's markets. To the extent that

this increased product market competition reduces rm pro ts, this can depress the incentive to

innovate, as in the classic trade-o in industrial organization between static and dynamic e -

ciency. However, an important contribution of the Schumpeterian approach has been to uncover
a rich nexus of channels through which increased competition can have the opposite e ect of
raising the incentive to innovate, or generate a non-monotonic relationship between innovation

and competition.
   Third, international trade induces specialization according to comparative advantage, as in
the conventional theories of trade discussed above. If sectors di er in their rates of innovation

and growth, this specialization according to comparative advantage can a ect aggregate rates of
growth through a change in sectoral composition. However, the implications of this specialization


                                                2
for welfare are more subtle, since output and consumption growth are not equal to one another

in the open economy. Even if a country specializes in sectors with slow output growth, it can
enjoy the fruits of its trade partners' more rapid output growth through an ongoing improvement
in the international terms of trade. Fourth, international knowledge spillovers can directly a ect

countries' rates of economic growth, and international trade in goods itself can be a conduit
through which ideas spread around the world. These knowledge spillovers can facilitate catch-
up to the world technology frontier and can accelerate the rate of advancement of this world

technology frontier. Trade can in uence knowledge spillovers through changing both the set of
 rms selling in a market and the set of rms producing in a country. Knowledge spillovers may

occur serendipitously, or as a result of either direct investment in knowledge acquisition, or more

indirectly via imitation of more advanced products (leading to product cycle, in which products

are rst invented in some parts of the world, and then imitated in others).

       In exploring these di erent mechanisms through which international trade can a ect inno-

vation and growth, we distinguish between three key classes of models of endogenous innova-

tion. First, there are models of endogenous innovation through the expansion of product vari-

ety (horizontal di erentiation), which build on the closed economy framework of Romer (1990),

and include Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991) and Grossman and Helpman (1991a). Second, there

is the Schumpeterian approach of endogenous innovation through the improvement of product

quality (vertical di erentiation), including Aghion and Howitt (1992), Grossman and Helpman

(1991c) and Grossman and Helpman (1991a). Third, more recently, models combining elements
of both those approaches have been developed. In much of this recent literature, rms supply
horizontally-di erentiated varieties, but these varieties di er systematically from one another in

terms of productivity or quality.2
       Some economic forces are common to variety and quality-based models of endogenous in-
novation. In both approaches, innovations di er from conventional economic goods in two key

respects. First, they are non-rivalrous, such that once an idea has been created, it can be used by
   2
       See Akcigit and Melitz (2021) for a more detailed review of this recent literature.



                                                             3
anyone at zero marginal cost. Second, they are partially excludable, such that intellectual prop-

erty rights or intangible knowledge about the implementation of innovations enable researchers
to appropriate at least some of the economic return from them. Furthermore, many of the forces
that in uence the future pro ts from innovation are common to both groups of models, including

the roles of both market size and product market competition.
   Other economic forces are quite di erent between variety and quality-based models of inno-
vation. In particular, creative destruction features much more prominently in the Schumpeterian

approach. Since products are vertically di erentiated, all consumers agree about which product is
preferred at given prices. Therefore, when innovation occurs, the existing state of the art technol-

ogy is displaced. This property has a number of economic implications. First, creative destruction

a ects the incentives for innovation for incumbent and entrant rms. In the basic Schumpete-

rian model, the fact that the existing stream of pro ts is destroyed by innovation (the replacement

e ect of Arrow 1962), implies higher incentives for innovation by entrants who then displace in-

cumbents. Second, creative destruction a ects the the size and magnitude of the externalities

from innovation, and hence the divergence between private and social rates of return. When

making their endogenous investments in innovation, new entrants do not internalize the exter-

nality from the destruction of existing rms' pro ts. Third, the vertical nature of innovation has

important implications for the relationship between incentives to innovate and product market

competition. Depending on the distance between rms in technology space, increased product

market competition can either depress incentives to innovate (through a discouragement e ect)
or enhance incentives to innovate (as rms try to escape competition).
   The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the baseline

Schumpeterian approach, and use this framework to discuss the di erent potential mechanisms
through which trade can a ect innovation. The remaining four sections of the paper consider
each of the above four mechanisms in turn. In Section 3, we review the literature on trade, mar-

ket size and innovation. In Section 4, we focus more speci cally on the nexus between trade and
Schumpeterian competition, and its consequences for innovation. In Section 5, we consider com-


                                                 4
parative advantage as a channel through which trade a ects aggregate innovation and growth.

In Section 6, we examine mechanisms where knowledge spillovers play a key role in shaping the
impact of trade on innovation. Section 7 summarizes our conclusions.


2    The Schumpeterian Approach

In this section, we introduce the baseline Schumpeterian approach to endogenous innovation and
growth from Aghion and Howitt (1992). To highlight the key insights, we begin by considering a
closed economy setting, before using this setting to highlight the potential mechanisms through

which trade can a ect innovation.


Preferences and Technology        We consider the following economic environment. Time is con-

tinuous and we suppress the time subscript to simplify notation. The economy is populated by

a continuous mass L of workers. Workers have linear intertemporal preferences, such that the

interest rate is equal to the subjective rate of time discount (r). Each worker is endowed with

one unit of labor that is supplied inelastically. Output of a single nal good (y ) is produced using

intermediate inputs (x) according to the following production technology:

                                 y = Ax ,             0 <  < 1,                                  (1)

where A corresponds to the quality or productivity of intermediate inputs; we choose the nal

good as the numeraire, such that its price is equal to one.

    Intermediate inputs are produced one-for-one with labor according to a linear technology,

such that employment in intermediate production equals output of intermediate inputs (x). Labor
market clearing implies that employment in intermediate input production plus employment in

research (n) equals the economy's total supply of labor:

                                            L = x + n.                                           (2)

    Innovations are assumed to arrive randomly in the research sector, with a Poisson arrival
rate n, where  parameterizes the productivity of research. Each innovation is assumed to

                                                 5
improve the quality or productivity of intermediate inputs by a constant proportion  > 1, such

that there is a productivity or quality ladder, with At+1 = At , where t indexes innovations.
An important feature of this speci cation is that each generation of researchers bene ts from
knowledge spillovers from previous generations, with each innovation standing on the shoulders

of the previous state of the art technology. A rm that successfully innovates can monopolize
the intermediate sector until replaced by the next innovator. We assume that innovations are
drastic, such that nal goods rms prefer to employ the state of the art intermediate input at the

pro t-maximizing monopoly price rather than the next best technology at its marginal cost of
production.


Research Sector Free entry into research implies that the wage in the intermediate sector (wt )

using technology t equals the probability of innovation () times the value of the next technology

t + 1 (Vt+1 ):

                                           wt = Vt+1 .                                          (3)

The value of successful innovation (Vt+1 ) depends on the ow of pro ts from monopolizing the

intermediate sector (t+1 ) and the probability of being subsequently replaced by the next best

technology (nt+1 ) according to the following Bellman equation:


                                   rVt+1 = t+1 - nt+1 Vt+1 .                                    (4)


In equilibrium, all research is undertaken by entrants rather than the incumbent monopolist of the
current state of the art technology, because of the "replacement e ect": The incremental increase
in pro ts for the incumbent from developing the next generation of technology is smaller than

the total pro ts gained by an entrant from displacing an incumbent. Aghion et al. (1997) and
Aghion et al. (2001) extend this framework with multiple ladder rungs (resulting from "step-by-
step" innovation outcomes). In this version, incumbents still have an incentive to innovate, but

the highest innovation e ort is still exerted in anticipation of replacing the incumbent at the top
of the ladder.


                                                6
Intermediate Sector At each point in time, the monopolist of the state of the art technology

t chooses output (x) of intermediate inputs to maximize pro ts (t (x)):

                            xt = arg max {t (x) = pt (x) x - wt x} ,                           (5)
                                        x


where pt (x) is the price of the intermediate input. This price is determined from the downward-

sloping demand curve from the nal goods sector:

                                        pt (x) = At x-1 .                                      (6)

Pro t maximization implies that the equilibrium price of the intermediate input is a constant

mark-up over marginal cost:
                                                      1
                                               pt =     wt ,                                   (7)
                                                      
where this constant mark-up (1/) re ects the fact that the producer of the state of art intermedi-

ate input faces a constant elasticity derived demand function (6). Equilibrium output and pro ts

in the intermediate sector can be written as the following functions of the productivity-adjusted

wage (t  wt /At ):
                                        1/(1-)                 1/(1-)
                                2                         2
                        xt =                      =                      x (t ) ,              (8)
                               wt /At                     t

                                        1-
                                t =                wt xt  At  (t ) .
                                         

General Equilibrium The general equilibrium of the model can be characterized by a no-

arbitrage condition equating the returns to working in the intermediate and research sectors and
the labor market clearing condition. From the free entry condition (3), the asset equation (4) and
equilibrium pro ts (8), no-arbitrage between the intermediate and research sectors implies:

                                                    (t+1 )
                                        t =                .                                   (9)
                                                  r + nt+1

Labor market clearing (2), together with equilibrium intermediate production (8) implies:

                                            L = nt + x (t ) .                                 (10)

                                                      7
   The no-arbitrage condition (9) and the labor market clearing condition (10) determine the

equilibrium productivity-adjusted wage (t ) and research employment (nt ) for technology t as
a function of expectations of the equilibrium productivity-adjusted wage (t+1 ) and research
employment (nt+1 ) for technology t + 1.


Steady-state Equilibrium In a steady-state equilibrium, there is a constant productivity-adjusted
wage (t+1 = t =  ) and constant research employment (nt = nt+1 = n). Combining the

no-arbitrage condition (9) and the labor market clearing (10), steady-state equilibrium research
employment solves the following relationship:

                                             1-
                                              
                                                
                                                 (L - n)
                                     1=                  .                                  (11)
                                               r + n

The economy's steady-state rate of output growth in turn depends on this equilibrium research

employment (n), the productivity of research (), and the size of innovations ( ):


                                           g = n ln .                                       (12)


Introducing Trade and its Impact on Innovation and Growth This characterization of the

closed economy equilibrium suggests four potential mechanisms for international trade to a ect

endogenous innovation and growth. First, the closed economy equilibrium features a scale e ect,

such that countries with a larger supply of labor (L) experience higher rates of innovation and

output growth. To the extent that international trade operates like an increase in the supply of
labor, this suggests a rst mechanism for trade to a ect innovation and growth through larger

market size.

   Second, the rate of innovation and output growth in the closed economy depends on the prof-
its from successful innovation. In this baseline Schumpeterian speci cation with drastic innova-

tion, the markup from successful innovation is completely determined by the parameter . More

generally, the pro ts from successful innovation depend on market structure and the degree of
product market competition. To the extent that international trade a ects market structure, this


                                                8
points towards a second mechanism for trade to a ect innovation and growth through product

market competition.
   Third, this baseline Schumpeterian model features a single nal good sector. More generally,
one could envision multiple nal goods sectors that di er in the productivity of innovation (),

the step size for each quality improvement ( ) and equilibrium investments in innovation (n). To
the extent that international trade changes the composition of economic activity across sectors
that di er in rates of innovation and growth, this highlights a third mechanism for trade to a ect

innovation and growth through specialization according to comparative advantage.
   Fourth, a key feature of this closed economy speci cation is that there are knowledge spillovers,

such that each generation of researchers builds on the discoveries of previous generations of re-

searchers. In an open economy, these knowledge spillovers can occur not only domestically

but also internationally, revealing a fourth mechanism for trade to a ect innovation and growth

through international knowledge spillovers. The magnitude of these knowledge spillovers is

likely to depend on the extent to which there is duplication in research, whether a country is close

to or far from the global technological frontier, and whether international knowledge spillovers

occur through international trade in goods (embodied) or occur independently of those ows of

goods (disembodied).

   In this baseline Schumpeterian model, there is a single intermediate input producer of the

state of art technology in equilibrium, because of the vertical di erentiation of technology. Ad-

ditionally, all innovation is undertaken by entrants rather than incumbent rms, because of the
"replacement e ect" discussed above. More generally, technologies can be both horizontally and
vertically di erentiated, such that a range of technologies operates in equilibrium, and incum-

bents can invest in innovation as well as entrants. In such setting, international trade can also
a ect innovation and growth is through reallocations of resources across heterogeneous produc-
ers. In much of the existing heterogeneous rm literature in international trade following Melitz

(2003), these reallocations a ect the level of productivity rather than innovation and growth. In
dynamic models of innovation and producer heterogeneity, they can also a ect endogenous rates


                                                 9
of innovation and growth through the four mechanisms discussed above.


E ciency     Models of endogenous innovation typically feature of number of externalities, such
that the private rate of return to R&D di ers from its social rate of return. Furthermore, these ex-

ternalities in general di er between variety and quality-based models of endogenous innovation.
First, researchers typically only appropriate part of the return to innovation, because they capture
only the pro ts from the innovation and not the associated consumer surplus. This "appropriabil-

ity e ect" acts to reduce private investments in innovation relative to the socially-optimal level.
Second, researchers typically do not take into account that their discovery can be used as an input

into research by subsequent generations of researchers. This "knowledge spillovers" e ect again

works to reduce private investments in innovation relative to the socially-optimal level.

   Third, in the standard Schumpeterian model of innovation discussed above, all innovation is

undertaken by entrants rather than incumbents, because of the replacement e ect. As a result,

the current generation of researchers does not internalize the destruction of the ow of pro ts

from the existing state of the art technology. This "business stealing" or "creative destruction"

e ect works to increase private investments in innovation relative to the socially-optimal level.

Fourth, in these Schumpeterian models in which incumbents are replaced by new entrants, the

private and social discount rates di er. The current generation of researchers internalizes the

expected ow of pro ts from innovation over the interval of time until they are displaced by a

subsequent generation of researchers, whereas the social planner internalizes that the increase in
quality from the innovation persists forever. Again this "discounting e ect" acts to reduce private
investments in innovation relative to the socially-optimal level.

   Even in the closed economy, these divergences between private and social rates of return to
innovation can provide a rationale for policy interventions to either promote or retard invest-
ments in innovation. In the open economy, these domestic distortions can interact with trade

frictions to in uence the welfare gains from trade, as discussed further below. Akcigit et al.
(2021) develop an open economy model of Schumpeterian growth that quantitatively examines



                                                10
those interactions. We discuss this contribution in the following section.


3    Market Size, Trade and Innovation

The idea that market size is an important determinant of economic development dates back to at
least Adam Smith. In the third chapter of the rst book of the Wealth of Nations, Smith (1776)

argued: "As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the
extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in other words,
by the extent of the market." We begin by discussing the role of market size in static models of

international trade. We next turn to consider the impact of market size on innovation in dynamic

trade models and the debate about scale e ects. Finally, we close this section by considering the

e ect of market size on innovation in models of rm heterogeneity.


Market Size in Static Trade Models      In static models of international trade, this idea that mar-

ket size in uences the extent of specialization and the division of labor was formalized in Krug-

man (1979a, 1980). In the presence of horizontal product di erentiation and increasing returns to

scale from xed production costs, each rm specializes in producing a distinct variety, and in the

closed economy the measure of varieties produced depends on the size of the economy's labor

force. In Krugman (1979a) with a variable elasticity of demand system and rms competing un-

der conditions of monopolistic competition, the opening of international trade both expands the

measure of varieties available to consumers and increases output of each variety, which increases
average productivity, because of the economies of scale. Both forces imply welfare gains from
trade, even for trade between countries with identical preferences and production technologies.

In Krugman (1980), the assumption of constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences and
monopolistic competition implies that there is no e ect of the opening of trade on average rm
size, and hence the sole source of welfare gains from trade is an expansion of the measure of

varieties available to consumers.




                                               11
Market Size in Dynamic Trade Models Whereas in these static trade models, the creation

of new varieties requires rms to incur a xed cost, in dynamic models of endogenous growth
through the expansion of product variety, such as Romer (1990), the stock of varieties expands
gradually over time through ow investments in research and development (R&D). These ow

investments again have the feature of a xed cost: Once the blueprint for a new variety has been
created, it can be used at zero marginal cost, leaving only production costs to be incurred. As a
result, basic models of endogenous innovation and growth feature a powerful scale e ect, such

that larger economies have higher rates of endogenous growth.
   Whether or not these scale e ects are consistent with the data has been a lively source of

debate. An in uential series of papers in Jones (1995a,b, 1999) argues that this prediction of scale

e ects is inconsistent with the empirical evidence. In particular, an implication of these scale

e ects is that an increase in resources devoted to R&D should lead to a proportionate increase

in a country's long-run rate of economic growth. In contrast to this prediction, the number of

scientists engaged in R&D in advanced countries grew dramatically in the second half of the

twentieth century, but country growth rates either exhibited a constant mean or declined on av-

erage. Motivated by these empirical ndings, Jones (1995a) develops a semi-endogenous growth

model, in which endogenous innovation shapes the economy's rate of growth in the transition to

steady-state, but the economy's long-run rate of growth is exogenously determined by population

growth. Young (1993) also develops a model in which scale e ects show up the level of economic

activity through a proliferation of product variety but not in changes in the economy's long-run
rate of growth. In practice, transition dynamics can be slow, and hence distinguishing between
endogenous and semi-endogenous growth models empirically can be challenging. Furthermore,

given these slow transition dynamics and discounting, whether policies a ect the growth rate
permanently or over a long transition period may be of relatively little consequence.
   Although international trade expands market size and hence increases incentives to invest in

innovation, its e ect on the rate of growth is more subtle than an increase in an economy's supply
of labor in the closed economy. The reason is that international trade also increases product


                                                12
market competition between rms, which decreases incentives to invest in innovation in the

simplest models of endogenous growth. Paralleling the result discussed above for static models
of international trade, if the horizontal di erentiation of varieties takes a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form, these market access and competition e ects exactly o set one another

in models of endogenous growth through product variety. In particular, suppose that countries
open to trade in goods alone, with no knowledge spillovers between them and no duplication in
research. In these circumstances, trade raises the level of countries' welfare through the increased

range of varieties available to consumers, but has no e ect on countries' long-run rates of growth,
because of the o setting market size and competition e ects, as shown in Rivera-Batiz and Romer

(1991) and Grossman and Helpman (1991a). Instead, international openness a ects countries'

rates of growth in these models through international knowledge spillovers and the elimination

of duplication in research. As for static models of international trade, this result is speci c to CES

preferences, and the impact of trade in goods alone would be more subtle for the general additive

preferences considered by Krugman (1979a) and Zhelobodko et al. (2012).


Market Size in Heterogeneous Firm Trade Models                     Much of the recent literature on rm

heterogeneity in international trade following Melitz (2003) has focused on models that are largely

static. In these frameworks, trade a ects the range of varieties available for consumption and

reallocates resources across rms of heterogeneous productivity, but does not in uence innova-

tion and growth. In the open economy equilibrium of these models, only the most productive
 rms self-select into exporting, because of the xed costs of serving export markets. Symmet-

ric reductions in international trade costs induce within-industry reallocations, in which high-

productivity exporters expand; intermediate productivity rms enter export markets; lower pro-
ductivity rms that serve only the domestic market contract; and the lowest-productivity rms

exit. Each of these responses reallocates resources within the industry towards more productive

 rms, raising average industry productivity.3 More recently, a number of studies have incor-
   3
    For reviews of this literature on rm heterogeneity, see for example Bernard et al. (2007), Melitz and Tre er
(2012), Melitz and Redding (2014) and Bernard et al. (2018). For research on selection into importing and Global



                                                      13
porated endogenous technology adoption or innovation into environments with heterogeneous

producers, and we now turn to consider the implications of this heterogeneity for the impact of
international trade on technology adoption, innovation and growth.
    In models of rm heterogeneity and endogenous technology choice, market size e ects also

play an important role in determining whether a more advanced technology is adopted. Bustos
(2011) considers a version of the Melitz (2003) model, in which heterogeneous rms make endoge-
nous decisions over both whether to incur a xed cost of exporting and whether to incur the xed

cost of adopting a more advanced technology.4 A key prediction of the model is that the increase
in rm revenues from exporting can induce rms to upgrade technology. Consistent with the pre-

dictions of the model, the e ect of tari reductions from MERCOSUR on technology upgrading

by Argentinian rms is greatest for rms in the upper-middle range of the rm-size distribution.

Costantini and Melitz (2008) develops a dynamic model of the decisions of heterogeneous rms to

adopt a new technology that features transition dynamics in response to trade liberalization. In

this framework, the distributional e ects of trade liberalization across rms depend on whether

trade liberalization is anticipated or unexpected, and whether it occurs gradually or all of a sud-

den. In particular, the anticipation of future trade liberalization, or a more gradual path of trade

liberalization once implemented, can induce rms to innovate ahead of export market entry.

    Further evidence of the importance of market size for incentives to innovate is provided by

Lileeva and Tre er (2010) using the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. Canadian plants that

were induced by the tari cuts to start exporting or to export more increased their labor produc-
tivity, engaged in more product innovation, and had higher rates of adoption of manufacturing
technology. Furthermore, the paper shows that the empirical nding that the productivity gains

from exporting are largest for the plants that are initially small and less productive can be ex-
plained by allowing for two forms of heterogeneity: in productivity and the return to investment.
The intuition can be seen by considering two rms that are initially just indi erent between ei-

ther (i) exporting and investing and (ii) doing neither. The initially higher-productivity rm will
Value Chains (GVCs), see Antràs et al. (2017) and Antràs and de Gortari (2020)
   4
     This key tradeo involving exports and technology adoption was rst analyzed by Yeaple (2005)


                                                     14
perform well in export markets, and so its indi erence must be due to low expected productivity

gains from investing. In contrast, the initially lower-productivity rm will perform poorly in ex-
port markets, and hence its indi erence must be due to large expected productivity gains from
investment. As a result, when trade barriers fall, and both rms start to export and invest, the

initially less productive rm will experience the greater productivity growth.
    While all the previous three studies focus on technology adoption, Atkeson and Burstein
(2010) develops a model of rm heterogeneity with both product innovation (the entry of new

 rms) and process innovation (investments to increase rm productivity). The model features
endogenous decisions over exit, exporting, product innovation and process innovation. The pa-

per decomposes the change in aggregate productivity from a reduction in trade costs into the

direct e ect (holding constant rms' exit, exporting, product innovation and process innovation

decisions) and the indirect e ect that arises from changes in rms' exit, exporting, process in-

novation and product innovation decisions. The free entry condition that equates the expected

value of entry with the sunk entry cost disciplines the overall magnitude of this indirect e ect.

The paper nds that, in the steady-state, the magnitude of this indirect e ect is not a ected by

the introduction of rm heterogeneity. Even though exporters respond to trade liberalization by

raising their innovation rates relative to non-exporters (under heterogeneity) ­ those di erences

do not translate into higher aggregate productivity relative to a model where all rms export and

share a common innovation rate. Impullitti and Licandro (2018) introduce oligopolistic competi-

tion into a similar dynamic framework. They nd that the endogenous markups induced by this
competition break that equivalence result highlighted by Atkeson and Burstein (2010), leading to
a rst-order impact of trade liberalization on welfare via rm selection with heterogeneous rms.

Tougher selection reduces markups and triggers higher productivity growth. In a calibrated ver-
sion of this model, Impullitti and Licandro (2018) nd that those additional welfare gains are
substantial: they are roughly doubled relative to a model without the rm-selection channel.5
    5
      Long et al. (2011) also incorporate oligopoly into a static model of trade and innovation. They nd that the
relative magnitude of the positive market size e ect and negative competition e ect critically depend on the level of
the trade costs.



                                                         15
        Using rm-level production, trade and patenting data, Aghion et al. (2020) provide theory

and evidence on the role of market size and competition e ects in in uencing incentives for
 rms to invest in ongoing innovation. To disentangle the direction of causality between export
demand and innovation, the paper constructs a rm-level export demand shock that captures

demand conditions in a rm's export destinations but is exogenous to the rm's decisions. Using
data for French manufacturing, the paper shows that French rms respond to exogenous growth
shocks in their export destinations by patenting more, and that this response is entirely driven

by the initially more productive rms. The paper shows that this pattern of results emerges
naturally in a model of rm heterogeneity with endogenous innovation. The positive market

demand shock induces all rms to innovate more because of the expansion in market size, but

also increases market entry and product market competition, which discourages innovation by

the less productive rms.


4        Product Market Competition, Trade and Innovation

As discussed in the previous section, the relative magnitude of market size and competition e ects

plays a key role in shaping the e ect of international trade on rates of innovation and growth.

In this section, we explore competition e ects in further detail. We begin by discussing the neg-

ative e ect of competition on innovation in conventional models of endogenous innovation and

growth. We next discuss three novel mechanisms through which competition can have positive

e ects on innovation in Schumpeterian models.6 Finally, we end this section by considering the

empirical evidence on these mechanisms and discussing ongoing work on their role in shaping
the e ects of international trade in general equilibrium.


Competition E ects in Conventional Innovation Models                            In conventional models of en-
dogenous innovation, whether variety or quality-based, greater product market competition de-

presses the incentive to innovate by lowering the expected future pro ts from innovation, as in
    6
        For a review of the evidence on competition and productivity, see Holmes and Schmitz (2010).



                                                          16
the classic trade-o between static and dynamic e ciency under monopoly in Industrial Organi-

zation. In contrast to these theoretical predictions, there is empirical evidence that greater prod-
uct market competition can in fact spur rms to greater innovative e orts. Using panel data for
U.K. manufacturing companies, Nickell (1996) nds that increased product market competition

leads to increased productivity, using both measures of domestic market competition and import
penetration. A distinctive feature of Schumpeterian models of innovation through product qual-
ity is that they provide microfoundations for this idea that greater product market competition

can enhance incentives to innovate. We next discuss three di erent mechanisms for this positive
e ect of competition on innovation in Schumpeterian models.


Schumpeterian Models of Step-by-Step Innovation              Aghion et al. (2001) develops a model

of endogenous growth with "step-by-step" innovation, in which technological laggards must rst

catch up with the leading-edge technology before battling for technological leadership in the

future. Such a speci cation changes the incremental incentives that rms face when deciding on

their innovative investments. In particular, when rms are "neck-and-neck" with similar levels

of technology, each rm may have a strong incentive to innovate to "escape competition." In

contrast, if a rm is far behind the technological frontier, increased product market competition

may reduce the incremental return to innovation, because the rm has to rst catch up with the

leader before advancing the frontier, leading to a "discouragement e ect." Therefore, the e ect

of competition on the overall aggregate rate of innovation can be subtle and potentially non-
monotonic, because it depends on the entire probability distribution of rms across alternative

states of technology, which is itself endogenous to the intensity of product market competition.


Schumpeterian Models of Agency Concerns              Aghion et al. (1999) develops a model of agency

concerns, in which increased product market competition a ects the incentives for technology
adoption by non-pro t maximizing managers. In particular, the paper considers a setting in which
managers enjoy private bene ts of control and face private costs of technology adoption, but

only appropriate some of the monetary returns from technology adoption, because the rm is

                                                17
dependent on outside nance. In such a setting, if the private bene ts of remaining solvent are

su ciently large, a deterioration of pro tability from an increase in product market competition
can raise managers' incentives to adopt new technologies. This allows the rm to remain solvent
and the manager to continue to bene t from the private bene ts of control. Therefore, agency

considerations from a separation of ownership and control can provide another route through
which increased product market competition can spur greater innovative e orts. Within this
framework, debt contracts can provide an alternative mechanism to discipline managers to exert

e ort in order to continue to enjoy the private bene ts of control.


Schumpeterian Models of Research and Development                        Aghion and Howitt (1996) consid-

ers a richer speci cation of technology and innovation that provides another channel through

which greater product market competition can raise innovation and growth. In the basic quality

ladder model of growth, technology is one-dimensional, such that each generation of technology

improves on the previous state of the art technology by a proportion  > 1. In contrast, Aghion

and Howitt (1996), allows technology to be multi-dimensional by drawing a distinction between

"research" and "development." Research produces fundamental knowledge, which by itself may

not be useful, but which opens up windows of opportunity, which are modeled as new product

lines. In contrast, "development" generates secondary knowledge, which allows these opportu-

nities to be realized, by lling up the new product lines. In this speci cation, more competition

between new and old product lines, as parameterized by increased substitutability between them,
can induce developers to switch from old to new product lines more rapidly, thereby leading to

more research and a higher rate of growth.7


Empirical Evidence          Although Schumpeterian models highlight these three di erent channels

through which increased product market competition can raise incentives to innovation, there
is scope for more empirical research to discriminate between these three mechanisms. In an
   7
     Such models of multi-dimensional technological change create the potential for path dependence, hysteresis
and technological lock-in, in which historical patterns of technological development can in uence long-run levels
of economic activity, as in Brezis et al. (1993) and Redding (2002).


                                                       18
in uential empirical study, Aghion et al. (2005) provides evidence of an inverted-U-shaped rela-

tionship between competition and innovation using company accounts data on a panel of rms
listed on the London Stock Exchange. This inverted U-shaped relationship is rationalized us-
ing a model of "step-by-step" innovation along the lines discussed above, in which competition

encourages neck-and-neck rms to innovate, but discourages laggard rms from innovating. To-
gether these two e ects generate the inverted U-shaped relationship. When competition is low, a
larger equilibrium fraction of sectors involve neck-and-neck competition, so that overall the es-

cape competition e ect dominates, and greater product market competition increases incentives
to innovate. In contrast, when competition is high, a large fraction of sectors have innovation be-

ing performed by laggard rms, so that the discouragement e ect is more powerful, and greater

product market competition decreases incentives to innovate. Additionally, two other properties

of the data provide further support for the mechanisms in the model. First, the average technolog-

ical distance between leaders and followers increases with competition, and second, the inverted

U-shape is steeper when industries are more neck-and-neck.


International Trade and the Schumpeterian Mechanisms International trade provides a

natural empirical setting for examining the consequences of increased competition on innovation.

As we previously discussed, international trade in general induces changes to both the market

size and competition channels for innovation. However, asymmetric changes that predominantly

a ect import competition provide a way of assessing the competition channel for the domestic
incumbent rms. Aghion et al. (2004) and Aghion et al. (2009) examine the impact of increased

foreign competition on the innovation activities and outcomes of U.K. rms. They nd that sec-

tors in the U.K. that were more exposed to increased foreign competition exhibited higher rates
of productivity growth ­ thus highlighting the importance of the escape competition channel.

When restricting the measure of competition more narrowly to "green eld" foreign entry (FDI),

they nd evidence supporting both the escape competition as well as the discouragement channel
­ leading to an inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation similar to Aghion



                                                19
et al. (2005).

    Another large asymmetric import competition shock that has hit advanced economies has
been the so called "China Shock", following its entry into the WTO in 2001. Autor et al. (2020)
examine the impact on the innovation response of U.S. rms, and nd evidence mostly support-

ing the discouragement channel: U.S. rms in sectors most impacted by the increase in Chinese
import competition respond by reducing R&D expenditures and new patent introductions. On
the other hand, Bloom et al. (2016) nd that increased Chinese competition induced European

 rms to increase their rates of innovation, highlighting the escape competition channel. Return-
ing to the case of U.S., Hombert and Matray (2018) nd evidence for both the discouragement

and escape competition channels. More speci cally, they nd that this escape competition chan-

nel works through rm investments in more di erentiated products. Yang et al. (2021) also nd

similar evidence for Canadian rms; and Fieler and Harrison (2018) nd that this type of escape

competition directed at product di erentiation is also exhibited by Chinese rms who face in-

creased competition by foreign rms entering the Chinese market following its accession to the

WTO.8
    Aghion et al. (2021b) o er a di erent explanation for the evidence of both positive and nega-

tive innovation responses to increased Chinese competition: They show that there are two very

distinct components to this increased competition that induced adjustments in opposite direc-

tions for French rms exposed to Chinese exports. One component is horizontal: the exposed

 rms produce a good that competes with similar imported Chinese goods. The other compo-
nent is vertical: the exposed rms use intermediate goods similar to the imported Chinese goods.

Aghion et al. (2021b) nd that the horizontal component of the China shock induces a strong

negative innovation response for the a ected French rms, whereas the response to the vertical
component is positive.

    On the theoretical side, there has been relatively little research introducing these Schumpete-
   8
     Bombardini et al. (2017) nd that a positive escape competition innovation response is exhibited by relatively
more productive Chinese rms. In a broader sample of 27 emerging markets, Gorodnichenko et al. (2010) nd
evidence supporting mainly the escape competition response.



                                                       20
rian mechanisms into general equilibrium models of international trade ­ even though inter-

national trade plays a key role in shaping product market competition. In a notable exception,
Akcigit et al. (2021) develops a general equilibrium model of step-by-step innovation and trade,
which is used to study the welfare implications of country trade and innovation policies. A R&D

tax credit is found to generate substantial welfare gains over medium and long horizons. The
optimal value of this tax credit is decreasing in the level of trade openness. They also nd that
protectionist policies can generate welfare gains in the short-run by shielding domestic rms from

foreign competition. But they subsequently engender substantially larger losses in the long-run
because they distort innovation incentives, leading to slower growth.


5    Comparative Advantage, Trade and Innovation

In models of endogenous innovation and trade, comparative advantage plays an important role,

both in shaping the e ects of economic growth, and in determining the pace of innovation and

growth. We rst discuss how comparative advantage in uences the e ects of economic growth

in the open economy. We next consider comparative advantage as determinant of innovation and

growth. Finally, we consider potential implications for public policy in the open economy.


Comparative Advantage and the E ects of Economic Growth                 In the open economy, com-

parative advantage plays a key role in shaping the e ects of economic growth. Matsuyama (1992)

and Uy et al. (2012) show that the e ect of sectoral productivity growth on structural transfor-
mation and economic development hinges critically on whether the economy is closed or open
to international trade. In a closed economy, higher productivity growth in agriculture induces

structural transformation away from that sector in the presence of inelastic demand between sec-
tors, as in classic model of unbalanced growth of Baumol (1967). In contrast, in an open economy,
higher productivity growth in agriculture can have the opposite e ect reallocating employment

towards that sector through specialization according to comparative advantage.
    More generally, comparative advantage and international trade are important in determin-


                                               21
ing the relative price implications of economic growth. For example, Ventura (1997) develops a

Ramsey model of capital accumulation in which rates of economic growth decline with capital
accumulation in the closed economy, because of the conventional force of diminishing marginal
returns to capital accumulation. In contrast, in the open economy, countries can continue to

grow rapidly without any decline in the rate of return to capital accumulation, as long as their
endowments remain within the factor price equalization set. This framework thus provides a
neoclassical rationalization of "economic miracles" such as the rapid economic growth of South

Korea from 1960 onwards. In Acemoglu and Ventura (2002), international trade leads to a stable
world income distribution even in the absence of diminishing marginal returns to capital accu-

mulation. This is because specialization and trade introduce de facto diminishing returns, as

countries that accumulate capital faster than average experience declining export prices, thereby

depressing the rate of return to capital and discouraging further accumulation.


Comparative Advantage as a Determinant of Economic Growth                  We now turn to com-

parative advantage as a determinant of economic growth. If sectors di er in terms of rates of

innovation and growth, specialization across these sectors according to comparative advantage

naturally a ects aggregate economic growth through a composition e ect. Therefore, specializa-

tion according to comparative advantage not only generates static welfare gains as in neoclassical

trade theories, but also has dynamic welfare e ects through the rate of economic growth. As part

of a broader analysis of human capital accumulation and economic growth, Lucas (1988) develops
a two-sector model in which the two sectors di er in terms of their rates of learning by doing.

Depending on patterns of comparative advantage, the opening of international trade can lead an

economy to specialize in the sector with a lower rate of learning by doing, slowing its aggregate
rate of economic growth. Relatedly, Young (1991) develops a Ricardian model with a continuum of

goods, in which learning by doing in each good is bounded. When a less developed country trades

with a developed country with a higher level of technology, it specializes in lower-technology
goods, in which more of the potential for learning by doing has already been exhausted. As a re-



                                               22
sult, the less-developed country experiences static welfare gains from specialization according to

comparative advantage but dynamic welfare losses, as specialization in these lower-technology
goods reduces its rate of growth relative to the closed economy. In Lucas (1993), spillovers of such
learning by doing across goods are shown to provide an alternative explanation for "economic

miracles," such as the rapid economic growth of South Korea from 1960 onwards.
    While the previous three papers focus on learning by doing, Grossman and Helpman (1990,
1991a) develop R&D-based models of endogenous innovation, in which specialization according

to comparative advantage can again a ect aggregate economic growth. Consider an environ-
ment with two countries, two production sectors (low and high technology) and one factor of

production (labor). In the low-technology sector, a homogeneous good is produced using a con-

stant returns to scale technology under conditions of perfect competition. In the high-technology

sector, horizontally-di erentiated goods are produced under conditions of monopolistic competi-

tion. In addition to these two production sectors, there is a research sector that produces designs

for new horizontally-di erentiated varieties for the high-technology sector. Therefore, the low-

technology sector is technological stagnant, whereas there is endogenous innovation from an

expansion of product variety in the high-technology sector. To focus on the role of these endoge-

nous investments in technological capabilities, the two countries are assumed to be identical in

all respects, except for the initial stock of technological knowledge (captured by the initial mass

of blueprints for varieties in the high-technology sector).9

    In this environment, the e ect of international trade on economic growth and welfare depends
critically on whether knowledge spillovers are international or national in scope. With interna-

tional knowledge spillovers, research rms in both countries have access to the same stock of

knowledge, as determined by the worldwide stock of designs for di erentiated varieties in the
high-technology sector. In this case, there is a continuum of equilibrium trajectories that are

consistent with given initial conditions in the two countries. All of those lead to di erent steady-

state patterns of production and trade. The two countries' rates of growth of output di er across
    9
      For Ricardian models of international trade that incorporate Schumpeterian models of innovation, see Scott Tay-
lor (1992), Scott Taylor (1994) and Somale (2021).


                                                         23
these steady-state equilibria because they involve di erent patterns of specialization between

the low and high-technology sectors. However, the two countries' rates of growth of consump-
tion and welfare are equal and identical across all of these steady-state equilibria. Even if one
country experiences a slower rate of output growth than the other because it specializes in the

low-technology sector, it nonetheless experiences the same rate of consumption growth as its
trade partner, because it enjoys a terms of trade gain from the higher rate of output growth in
its trade partner. Therefore, this prediction highlights the importance of distinguishing between

output and consumption growth in the open economy, and the role of the international terms of
trade in shaping the incidence of productivity growth between countries in the open economy.

   With national knowledge spillovers, research rms in each country have access to di erent

stocks of knowledge, as determined by the national stock of designs for di erentiated varieties

in the high-technology sector. In this case, initial conditions in the form of the initial stock of

designs in each country play a central role in determining steady-state patterns of production

and trade. In general, several di erent types of steady-state equilibria are possible, with di er-

ent patterns of specialization across sectors and with di erent trajectories for relative wages in

the two countries. However, a key property of the model with national knowledge spillovers is

that it becomes possible for an initial technological lead in research to become self-perpetuating

(hysteresis). Furthermore, in some of these steady-state equilibria, relative wages and welfare

can di er between the two countries. The country with the higher initial stock of designs for

di erentiated varieties is characterized by a higher steady-state level of wages and welfare. In
these circumstances, there is a potential for an R&D subsidy in the initially more technologically
backward country to be welfare improving, depending on the assumptions regarding retaliation

by its trade partner.


Comparative Advantage and Public Policy Interventions This property that national pub-

lic policy interventions can, in some circumstances, be welfare improving is a common charac-
teristics of models of comparative advantage and endogenous technological change. Krugman



                                                24
(1987) considers a Ricardian model of a continuum of goods following Dornbusch et al. (1977), in

which learning by doing is speci c to each sector. In this environment, comparative advantage
evolves endogenously over time, because current patterns of comparative advantage determine
current production and the rate of learning by doing, which in turn determines future patterns of

comparative advantage. As a result, temporary shocks, such as real exchange rate appreciations
or protectionist trade policies, can have permanent e ects on long-run patterns of comparative
advantage and trade.

   Redding (1999) explores the idea that developing countries may face a trade-o between spe-
cialization according to existing comparative advantage (in low-technology goods), and entering

sectors in which they currently lack a comparative advantage, but may acquire such a com-

parative advantage in the future as a result of the potential for productivity growth (in high-

technology goods). Learning by doing occurs as an externality at the industry level and hence

is not internalized by individual rms when making their production decisions. As a result, spe-

cialization according to current comparative advantage under free trade can be welfare reducing.

Furthermore, public policy intervention to promote specialization in the high-technology sec-

tor can be welfare improving, not only for the country undertaking the intervention, but more

surprisingly also for its trade partner.

   Melitz (2005) develops a welfare-maximizing model of infant industry protection, in which

the domestic infant industry is competitive and experiences dynamic learning e ects that are

external to rms. The competitive foreign industry is mature and produces a good that is an
imperfect substitute for the domestic good. A government planner can protect the infant industry
using domestic production subsidies, tari s, or quotas in order to maximize domestic welfare over

time. As protection is not always optimal (although the domestic industry experiences a learning
externality), the paper shows how the decision to protect the industry should depend on the
industry's learning potential, the shape of the learning curve, and the degree of substitutability

between domestic and foreign goods.
   In these previous three papers, learning by doing is modelled as occurring serendipitously


                                               25
through an externality. In contrast, in R&D-based models of innovation and growth, agents in-

vesting in R&D internalize the future pro ts to be derived from successful innovation. Neverthe-
less, there is in general a di erence between private and social rates of return in these R&D-based
models, as discussed above. This domestic distortion can interact with trade frictions to in uence

the welfare gains from trade and provide a rationale for public policy interventions, as discussed
for the open economy models of R&D-based innovation in Grossman and Helpman (1990, 1991a).
In these open economy models, there is typically a di erence between the decisions of national

social planners and those of a world social planner, and the case for intervention for a national
social planner typically depends heavily on whether or not retaliation occurs.


6    Knowledge Spillovers, Trade and Innovation

Another key mechanism through which the international economy a ects domestic economic

activity is international knowledge spillovers. These international knowledge spillovers directly

a ect rates of innovation and growth, because they determine the growth rate of the world tech-

nological frontier, and promote catch-up or convergence to this world technology frontier. As

discussed in the previous section, these knowledge spillovers can also play an important role

shaping the e ects of international trade in goods, depending for example on whether they are

national or international in scope. These knowledge spillovers can occur serendipitously, and

independently from the ow of goods (e.g. through research publications); they can be promoted

through ows of goods (as in the reverse-engineering of products); or they can be the result of

investments: in knowledge acquisition directly, or in imitation (as in models of the product life-
cycle). In the remainder of this section, we rst review models of innovation and technology

di usion. We next examine the role of international trade as a conduit for knowledge spillovers.

Finally, we consider models of the product cycle.


Innovation and Technology Di usion            Eaton and Kortum (1999) develops a quantitative

model of the invention of new technologies and their di usion across countries. In equilibrium,


                                                26
all countries grow at the same steady-state rate, with each country's productivity ranking deter-

mined by how rapidly it adopts ideas. Research e ort is determined by the economic return to
idea generation at home and abroad. Patents a ect the return to ideas. The decision to patent an
invention depends on the cost of patenting in a country and the expected value of patent pro-

tection in that country. Using data on international patenting, productivity, and research, the
paper shows how to infer the direction and magnitude of the international di usion of technol-
ogy. Using data from the ve leading research economies, the paper nds that the world lies

about two-thirds of the way from the extreme of technological autarky to free trade in ideas ­ in
the sense that research performed abroad is about two-thirds as potent as domestic research. As

a result, the United States and Japan together drive around two-thirds of the growth in each of

the countries in the sample.

   Acemoglu et al. (2006) develop a model in which rms undertake both innovation and adop-

tion of technologies from the world technology frontier. The selection of high-skill managers

and rms is more important for innovation than for adoption. As the economy approaches the

frontier, selection becomes more important. Countries at early stages of development pursue

an investment-based strategy, which relies on existing rms and managers to maximize invest-

ment but sacri ces selection. Closer to the world technology frontier, economies switch to an

innovation-based strategy with short-term relationships, younger rms, less investment, and bet-

ter selection of rms and managers. The paper shows that relatively backward economies may

switch out of the investment-based strategy too soon. Therefore, policy interventions to encour-
age the investment-based strategy, such as limits on product market competition or investment
subsidies, can be bene cial. However, these policies can have long-run costs, because they make

it more likely that a society will be trapped in the investment-based strategy and fail to converge
to the world technology frontier.


Trade as a Conduit for Knowledge Spillovers          Using data on 21 OECD countries plus Israel
during the period 1971-1990, Coe and Helpman (1995) provides empirical evidence on the role of



                                                27
international trade as a conduit for knowledge spillovers.10 For each country, a domestic knowl-

edge stock is created using cumulative domestic R&D expenditure. Similarly, a foreign knowledge
stock is created using foreign cumulative R&D expenditure, weighted by bilateral import shares.
Using a panel data regression speci cation, domestic total factor productivity growth is found to

be statistically signi cantly related to both domestic and foreign R&D knowledge stocks. More
open countries with higher shares of imports in GDP are found to bene t more strongly from
foreign R&D capital stock than more closed countries. For some of the smaller countries, foreign

R&D capital stocks are more important as sources of domestic productivity growth than domes-
tic R&D capital stocks. The rates of return to both domestic and foreign R&D are high, with an

average rate of return from investment in R&D of 123 percent in G7 countries and 85 percent

in the remaining 15 countries. Around one quarter of the total bene ts of R&D investment in a

G7 country are found to accrue to its trade partners through international knowledge spillovers.

In subsequent work, Coe et al. (2009) nd that domestic institutions are an important determi-

nant of the rate of return to R&D. Countries where the ease of doing business and the quality of

tertiary education systems are relatively high tend to bene t more from their own R&D e orts,

from international R&D spillovers, and from human capital formation.11

       Aghion et al. (2021a) nd strong evidence for this knowledge spillover channel via interna-

tional trade links. They nd that a French rm's entry into a new export market induces (after a

few years lag) a substantial innovation response in that export market. This innovation response

takes the form of new patents that refer back to the technology developed by the French exporter,
measured as a citation link from the new patent to the patents held by the French exporter.


Creative Destruction          Hsieh et al. (2020) develop a Schumpeterian model of innovation, trade
and growth that builds on the closed economy model of Klette and Kortum (2004). Innovation

is undertaken by both incumbent and entrants in a domestic and foreign economy. Creative de-

struction occurs when innovators take over the market for an existing product. This creative
  10
     For a review of the literature on international technology spillovers, see Keller (2004).
  11
     For evidence on the role of R&D and human capital as sources of absorptive capacity that facilitate catch up to
the technological frontier, see Gri th et al. (2004).

                                                        28
destruction can occur both domestically and internationally, where domestic rms take over for-

eign markets for a product, or foreign rms take over the domestic market for a product. The
arrival rates of innovation both at home and abroad are treated as exogenous and calibrated to
match moments in the data. In the baseline version of the model, innovators build on the tech-

nology of sellers in a market, such that international trade in goods facilitates the ow of ideas.
The di usion of ideas between the two countries generates a constant reallocation of products
and implies that the two economies grow at the same rate in the long-run. In the baseline version

of the model, in which ows of goods facilitate idea di usion, lower tari s boost trade and the
long-run rate of export reallocation as well as growth. For the calibrated parameters of the model,

these dynamic welfare gains from trade are larger than the conventional static welfare gains.


Dynamic Selection Sampson (2016) develops a dynamic model of heterogeneous rm selec-

tion that features elements of both variety and quality-based models of growth. Firms supply

horizontally di erentiated varieties, but these varieties di er in terms of productivity or quality.

As in the existing literature on rm heterogeneity following Melitz (2003), rms pay a sunk en-

try cost in order to draw a productivity from a distribution. However, the key new feature of

the model is that the distribution from which this productivity is drawn upon entry depends on

the productivity distribution of incumbent rms. This captures a learning spillover from incum-

bents to entrants across the entire distribution of productivity. Because only a subset of relatively

more productive entrants produce (and transition to incumbent status), the productivity distribu-
tion shifts upward over time. This dynamic selection process induces technology di usion that

in turn generates endogenous growth without scale e ects. On the balanced growth path, the

lower bound of the support of the productivity distribution increases over time. The free entry
condition implies that trade liberalization must increase the dynamic selection rate to o set the

increase in pro ts from new export opportunities. As a result, trade integration raises long-run

growth. This dynamic selection is a new source of welfare gains from trade that is driven by
producer heterogeneity. For the calibrated parameters of the model, these dynamic welfare gains



                                                 29
from trade are around three times larger than the conventional static welfare gains from trade.


Endogenous Technology Adoption Perla et al. (2021) develops an alternative dynamic model
of heterogenous rm selection in which incumbent rms (rather than entrants) choose whether

to invest in upgrading technology. As in Melitz (2003), rms supply di erentiated varieties un-
der conditions of monopolistic competition with free entry. Firms choose whether to incur a
 xed cost in order to export. Firms also choose to either upgrade their technology or to con-

tinue to produce with their existing technology. The productivity of the existing technology
evolves stochastically according to a geometric Brownian motion. If a rm decides to upgrade its

technology, it pays a xed cost in return for a random productivity draw from the equilibrium

distribution of rms that produce in the domestic economy. This upgrading process is interpreted

as technology di usion, because rms upgrade by adopting technologies already used elsewhere.

A rm's incentive to upgrade depends on the expected bene t of a new productivity draw and the

opportunity cost of taking that draw. In equilibrium, lower productivity rms nd it pro table to

upgrade technology, because they have both lower opportunity costs and higher expected bene-

 ts of a new productivity draw.

   Reductions in iceberg trade costs increase the rate of technology adoption and economic

growth because they widen the ratio of pro ts between the average and the marginal adopting

 rm. As trade costs decline, low-productivity rms that serve only the domestic market contract,

as foreign competition reduces their pro ts. In contrast, high productivity rms expand and ex-
port, increasing their pro ts. For low-productivity rms, this reallocation process both reduces
the opportunity cost and increases the bene t of a new technology. Therefore, trade liberalization

leads to more frequent rm technology adoption, which in turn raises the economy's aggregate
rate of growth. In equilibrium, the privately-optimal rate of technology adoption is lower than
the socially-optimal rate of technology adoption, because rms only appropriate part of the re-

turn from technology adoption. As a result the acceleration of technology adoption induced by
trade liberalization generates dynamic welfare gains from trade that are again large relative to



                                               30
the conventional static welfare gains from trade.


Knowledge Spillovers       Buera and Ober eld (2020) develops a quantitative model of innova-
tion and technology di usion between heterogeneous producers. Innovation and di usion are

modelled as a process involving the combination of new ideas with insights from other industries
and countries. In a rst speci cation, insights are draw from those that sell goods to a country,
following Alvarez et al. (2013). In a second speci cation, insights are drawn from technologies

used domestically, as in Sampson (2016) and Perla et al. (2021). Openness to trade a ects the
quality of the insights drawn by producers because it determines the set of sellers to a country

and the set of technologies used domestically. Starting from autarky, opening to trade results in

a higher temporary growth rate, and a permanently higher level of the stock of knowledge, as

producers are exposed to more productive ideas.

   The overall welfare gains from trade can be decomposed into static and dynamic components.

The static component consists of the gains from increased specialization and comparative advan-

tage. The dynamic component consists of the gains that operate through the ow of ideas. The

magnitude of the dynamic welfare gains from trade relative to its static counterpart depends on

the rate of di usion of ideas (the relative importance of insights from others) and whether insights

are drawn from those that sell goods to a country or from the technologies used domestically. For

the preferred calibration of the model, both the overall welfare gains from trade and the fraction

of productivity growth explained by changes in trade costs are more than double those in a model
without technology di usion.


Product Cycle An in uential idea in international trade dating back at least to Vernon (1966) is
the idea of the product cycle. According to this view, products are typically rst produced where

they are invented in developed countries. As products mature, they become more standardized,
and can be produced in countries at lower levels of development. Eventually, products become
completely standardized and can be produced in the lowest cost location in less-developed coun-

tries. As a result of this product cycle, the developed country where the product is invented

                                                31
transitions from being an exporter of the product in the early stages of its lifecycle to being an

importer of the product in the late stages of its lifecycle.
    This product cycle was rst formalized in a general equilibrium model of international trade in
Krugman (1979b). The world consists of two countries: an innovating North and a non-innovating

South. Innovation is modelled as the exogenous rate of arrival of new products, which at rst can
only be produced in the North. Imitation also occurs at an exogenous rate, after which these prod-
ucts can be produced in the South. This lag in technological di usion gives rise to international

trade, with the North exporting new products and importing old products. In equilibrium, the
North enjoys higher per capita income, because of the quasi-rents from the Northern monopoly

of new products. The North must continually innovate, not only to maintain its relative income

per capita, but also to maintain its real income in absolute terms.

    In Krugman (1979b), the rates of arrival of innovation and imitation are exogenous. Using

a Schumpeterian approach Segerstrom et al. (1990) develops a general equilibrium model of the

product cycle, in which innovation is the result of endogenous investments in innovation. Again

using a Schumpeterian approach, Grossman and Helpman (1991b) considers a richer speci ca-

tion in which the rates of both innovation and imitation are endogenous.12 In the steady-state

equilibrium of the model, the average rates of imitation and innovation are constant, as are the

fraction of products manufactured in the North and the South, the North-South terms of trade,

and the average length of the product cycle. The model features a rich set of interactions between

innovation policies in the two countries. In particular, subsidies to innovation in the North can
either cause the steady-state rate at which products ow from the North to the South to decline or
increase, depending on the magnitude of the productivity advantage Northern innovators enjoy

over the next best technology.
    Extending this model of endogenous product cycles, Helpman (1993) explores the welfare
implications of stricter intellectual property rights protection (IPR). On the one hand, proponents

of stricter IPR argue that it encourages innovation in advanced countries from which all regions
  12
     For a model in which a product cycle emerges endogenously as a result of contractural incompleteness, see
Antràs (2005).


                                                     32
of the world bene t. On the other hand, critics of stricter IPR argue that it only strengthens the

monopoly power of companies based in developed countries to the detriment of less-developed
countries. One of the key results of the paper is to show that stricter IPR necessarily reduces
welfare in the South for economies that begin in steady-state. In contrast, the e ect of stricter

IPR on welfare in the North depends on the rate of imitation. For su ciently small rates of
imitation, stricter IPR necessarily reduces welfare in the North. Although this stricter IPR raises
rates of innovation in the North, its also increases monopoly power, which reduces consumer

welfare through higher prices.


7    Conclusions

Research on endogenous innovation and growth has delivered fundamental new insights about

the nature of economic growth and the role played by international trade. In the Schumpeterian

approach, the pace of innovation is endogenously determined by the expectation of future prof-

its, and growth is inherently a process of creative destruction. As international trade is a key

determinant of both rm pro tability and survival, it is natural to expect it to play a key role in

shaping incentives to innovate and the rate of creative destruction. In this paper, we review the

theoretical and empirical literature on trade and innovation.

    In the existing international trade literature, there is a good deal of consensus about the static

welfare gains from trade, de ned as the increase in the level of ow utility from country partic-

ipation in international markets. Traditional theories of international trade emphasize variation
in the opportunity cost of production across countries and sectors. New theories of international

trade incorporate product di erentiation and increasing returns to scale. More recent models of

heterogeneous rms in di erentiated product markets point towards within-industry realloca-
tions of resources across rms of di erent productivity.

    In contrast, theories of endogenous innovation and growth open up the possibility for dy-

namic welfare gains from trade, through changes in the rate of growth. However, there is much
less consensus about the existence and magnitude of these dynamic welfare gains, the mecha-


                                                 33
nisms through which they occur, and whether they correspond to permanent di erences in long-

run growth (endogenous growth) or di erences in growth along the transition to steady-state
(semi-endogenous growth).
   Four main mechanisms for these dynamic welfare gains from trade have been proposed. First,

international trade expands the market size accessible to rms, thereby raising the incentive to
incur the xed costs of innovation. Second, international trade increases product market com-
petition. While this heightened competition reduces the incentive to innovate in conventional

economic theory, Schumpeterian models have highlighted channels through which it may instead
raise the incentive to innovate, including in particular the motive to "escape competition." Third,

international trade induces specialization according to comparative advantage, which can change

aggregate rates of innovation and growth through changes in sectoral competition. Fourth, in-

ternational knowledge spillovers can directly a ect countries' rates of economic growth, and in-

ternational trade in goods itself can in uence technology di usion, where knowledge spillovers

can depend on either the set of rms selling in a market or the set of rms producing in a market.

   While there is a commonly-used framework for quantifying the welfare gains from trade in

a class of trade models that uses observed domestic trade shares and estimates of the elasticity

of trade ows with respect to trade costs, the quanti cation of these dynamic welfare gains from

trade is much more dependent on model structure. Going forward, discriminating between alter-

native mechanisms for dynamic welfare gains from trade and developing robust approaches to

quantifying their magnitude remain exciting areas for further research.




                                                34
References
A           , D., P. A            ,       F. Z                (2006): "Distance to Frontier, Selection and Economic
    Growth," Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 37­74.

A          , D.       J. V                     (2002): "The World Income Distribution," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 117, 659­694.

A       , P., A. B       , T. G    , M. L       ,     M. M                                    (2021a): "Exporting Ideas:
    Knowledge Flows from Expanding Trade in Goods," Mimeo.

A        , P., A. B                   , M. L               , M. M       ,          T. Z       (2021b): "Opposing Firm-
    Level Responses to the Chinashock: Downstream Competition Versusupstream Relationship?"
    Mimeo.

A        , P., A. B                   , M. L           ,          M. J. M          (2020): "The Heterogeneous Impact
    of Market Size on Innovation: Evidence from French Firm-Level Exports," Harvard University,
    mimeograph.

A        , P., N. B    , R. B         , R. G        ,      P. H        (2005): "Competition and
    Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 701­728.

A        , P., R. B              , R. G              , P. H         ,       S. P          (2004): "Entry and Productivity
    Growth: Evidence from Microlevel Panel Data," Journal of the European Economic Association,
    2, 265­276.

------ (2009): "The E ects of Entry on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity," Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 91, 20­32.

A        , P., M. D                        ,           P. R       (1999): "Competition, Financial Discipline and
    Growth," Review of Economic Studies, 66, 825­852.

A        , P., C. H          , P. H              ,         J. V         (2001): "Competition, Imitation and Growth
    with Step-by-Step Innovation," Review of Economic Studies, 68, 467­492.

A        , P., C. H          ,          J. V           (1997): "Competition and Growth with Step-by-Step In-
    novation: An Example," European Economic Review, 41, 771­782.

A        , P.         P. H              (1992): "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction," Econo-
    metrica, 60, 323­351.




                                                                  35
------ (1996): "Research and Development in the Growth Process," Journal of Economic Growth, 1,
    49­73.

------ (1997): Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

A        , U., P. A    ,     P. H     (2014): "What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian Growth
    Theory," in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf, Amsterdam:
    Elsevier North Holland, 609­625.

A        , U., S. T. A ,      G. I         (2021): "Innovation and Trade Policy in a Globalized
    World," University of Chicago, mimeograph.

A           , U.         M. J. M          (2021): "International Trade and Innovation," in Handbook of In-
    ternational Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , Amsterdam: Elsevier,
    North Holland, vol. forthcoming.

A        , F. E., F. L. B ,    R. E. L                  (2013): "Idea Flows, Economic Growth, and Trade,"
    NBER Working Paper, 19667.

A           , P. (2005): "Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle," American Economic Review, 95,
    1054­1073.

A           , P.     A.        G          (2020): "On the Geography of Global Value Chains," Econometrica,
    88, 1553­1598.

A           , P., T. F     ,       F. T             (2017): "The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and
    Evidence from US Firms," American Economic Review, 107, 2514­2564.

A          , K. (1962): "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention," in The Rate
    and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, ed. by R. R. Nelson, Chicago:
    Chicago University Press, 609­625.

A            , A.         A. B             (2010): "Innovation, Firm dynamics, and International Trade,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 118, 433­484.

A          , D., D. D      , G. H. H           , G. P      ,     P. S   (2020): "Foreign Competition and
    Domestic Innovation: Evidence from US Patents," American Economic Review: Insights, 2, 357­
    374.

B           , W. J. (1967): "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis,"
    American Economic Review, 57, 415­426.


                                                         36
B              , A. B., J. E            , J. B. J           ,     S. K          (2003): "Plants and Productivity in Inter-
    national Trade," American Economic Review, 93, 1268­1290.

B              , A. B., J. B. J                 , P. K. S         ,        S. J. R       (2007): "Firms in International
    Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 105­130.

------ (2018): "Global Firms," Journal of Economic Literature, 56, 565­619.

B       , N., M. D              ,              J. V. R          (2016): "Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact
    of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity," The Review of Economic Studies, 83,
    87­117.

B                  , M., B. L ,            R. W            (2017): "Import Competition and Innovation: Evidence from
    China," Mimeo.

B       , E., P. K                  ,           D. T            (1993): "Leapfrogging in International Competition: A
    Theory of Cycles in National Technological Leadership," American Economic Review, 83, 1211­
    1219.

B       , F. J.          E. O                     (2020): "The Global Di usion of Ideas," Econometrica, 88, 83­114.

B       , P. (2011): "Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
    Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms," American Economic Review, 101, 304­340.

C    , D. T.             E. H                   (1995): "International R&D Spillovers," European Economic Review,
    39, 859­887.

C    , D. T., E. H                  ,            A. W. H                   (2009): "International R&D Spillovers and In-
    stitutions," European Economic Review, 53, 723­741.

C                 , J.         M. M               (2008): "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liber-
    alization," in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. by E. Helpman, D. Marin, and
    T. Verdier, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

D                 , R., S. F               ,         P. A. S                (1977): "Comparative Advantage, Trade and
    Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," American Economic Review, 67,
    823­839.

E       , J.        S. K                (1999): "International Technology Di usion: Theory and Measurement,"
    International Economic Review, 40, 537­570.

F       , A. C.             A. H                         (2018): "Escaping Import Competition in China," Tech. Rep.
    w24527, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                                      37
G                      , Y., J. S           ,       K. T          (2010): "Globalization and Innovation in Emerg-
    ing Markets," 2, 194­226.

G            , R., S. R             ,       J. V     R          (2004): "Mapping the Two Faces of R&D: Produc-
    tivity Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries," Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 883­895.

G           , G.    E. H         (1990): "Comparative Advantage and Long-Run Growth," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 80, 796­815.

------ (1991a): Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

------ (1991b): "Quality Ladders and Product Cycles," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 557­
  586.

------ (1991c): "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth," Review of Economic Studies, 58, 43­61.

------ (1995): "Technology and Trade," in Handbook of International Economics, ed. by G. Grossman
    and K. Rogo , Amsterdam: Elsevier, North Holland, vol. 3, chap. 25, 1279­1337.

H               , E. F. (1919): "The E ect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of Income," in Heckscher-
    Ohlin Trade Theory, ed. by H. Flam and M. J. Flanders, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

H             , E. (1981): "International trade in the Presence of Product Di erentiation, Economies
    of Scale and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin Approach," Journal of
    International Economics, 11, 305­340.

------ (1993): "Innovation, Imitation and Intellectual Property Rights," Econometrica, 61, 1247­
    1280.

H             , E.        P. K              (1985): Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge MA: MIT
    Press.

H           , T. J.       J. A. S               (2010): "Competition and Productivity: A Review of the Evi-
    dence," Annual Review of Economics, 2, 619­642.

H          , J.   A. M        (2018): "Can Innovation Help U.S. Manufacturing Firms Escape
    Import Competition from China?" The Journal of Finance, 73, 2003­2039.

H      , C. T., P. J. K                 ,   I. N         (2020): "A Global View of Creative Destruction," Stanford
    University, mimeograph.

I               , G.       O. L                 (2018): "Trade, Firm Selection and Innovation: The Competition
    Channel," The Economic Journal, 128, 189­229.

                                                                38
J      , C. (1995a): "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy, 103,
    759­784.

------ (1995b): "Time Series Tests of Endogenous Growth Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    110, 495­525.

------ (1999): "Growth: With or Without Scale E ects?" American Economic Review, 89, 139­144,
  papers and Proceedings.

K          , W. (2004): "International Technology Di usion," Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 752­
    782.

K          , T. J.     J. K      ,S        (2004): "Innovating Firms and Aggregation Innovation,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 112, 986­1018.

K             , P. (1979a): "Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade,"
    Journal of International Economics, 9, 469­479.

------ (1979b): "A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer and the World Distribution of In-
    come," Journal of Political Economy, 87, 253­6.

------ (1980): "Scale Economies, Product Di erentiation, and the Pattern of Trade," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 70, 950­59.

------ (1987): "The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease and the Competitive Consequences
    of Mrs Thatcher," Journal of Development Economics, 27, 41­55.

L          , A.      D. T       (2010): "Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-level Pro-
    ductivity . . . For Some Plants," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1051­1099.

L      , N. V., H. R     ,    F. S        (2011): "Innovation and Trade with Heterogeneous Firms,"
    Journal of International Economics, 84, 149­159.

L      , R. E. (1988): "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 22, 3­42.

------ (1993): "Making a Miracle," Econometrica, 61, 151­272.

M                 , K. (1992): "Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage and Economic
    Growth," Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 317­334.

M          , M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Indus-
    try Productivity," Econometrica, 71, 1695­1725.

                                                   39
------ (2005): "When and How Should Infant Industries Be Protected?" Journal of International
    Economics, 66, 177­196.

M          , M. J.       S. J. R        (2014): "Heterogeneous Firms and Trade," in Handbook of In-
    ternational Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , Amsterdam: Elsevier,
    North Holland, vol. 4, chap. 1, 1­54.

M          , M. J.      D. T        (2012): "Gains from Trade When Firms Matter," Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 26, 91­118.

N           , S. J. (1996): "Competition and Corporate Performance," Journal of Political Economy,
    104, 724­746.

O          , B. (1924): "The Theory of Trade," in Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory, ed. by H. Flam and
    M. J. Flanders, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

P      , J., C. T    ,     M. E. W       (2021): "Equilibrium Technology Di usion, Trade and
    Growth," American Economic Review, 111, 73­128.

R              , S. J. (1999): "Dynamic Comparative Advantage," Oxford Economic Papers, 51, 15­39.

------ (2002): "Path Dependence, Endogenous Innovation and Growth," International Economic
    Review, 43, 1215­1248.

R              , D. (1817): On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, London: John Murray.

R          B    , L.     P. R      (1991): "Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth," Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 106, 531­555.

R          , P. (1990): "Endogenous Technical Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98, 71­102.

S              , T. (2016): "Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade and Growth,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 315­380.

S          T         , M. (1992): "Quality Ladders and Ricardian Trade," Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, 34, 225­243.

------ (1994): "Once-o and Continuing Gains from Trade," Review of Economic Studies, 61, 589­
    601.

S              , P. S., T. A  ,    E. D            (1990): "A Schumpeterian Model of the Product
    Life Cycle," American Economic Review, 80, 1077­1092.


                                                     40
S    , P.        C. S                 (2018): "The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Firm Productivity
    and Innovation," Innovation Policy and the Economy, 19, 39­68.

S       , A. (1776): An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, London: W.
    Strahan and T. Cadell.

S           , M. (2021): "Comparative Advantage in Innovation and Production," American Economic
    Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

U , T., K. M. Y ,    J. Z     (2012): "Structural Change in an Open Economy," Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 60, 667­682.

V             , J. (1997): "Growth and Interdependence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 57­84.

V            , R. (1966): "International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle," Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 80, 190­207.

Y     , M. J., N. L ,          K. L       (2021): "The Impact of Emerging Market Competition on In-
    novation and Business Strategy: Evidence from Canada," Journal of Economic Behavior & Or-
    ganization, 181, 117­134.

Y           , S. R. (2005): "A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages,"
    Journal of International Economics, 65, 1­20.

Y       , A. (1991): "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic E ects of International Trade," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 106, 396­406.

------ (1993): "Growth without Scale E ects," Journal of Political Economy, 106, 41­63.

Z                 , E., S. K          , M. P      ,        J. T   (2012): "Monopolistic Competition:
    Beyond the Constant Elasticity of Substitution," Econometrica, 80, 2765­2784.




                                                      41
