                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                OPTION-IMPLIED SPREADS AND OPTION RISK PREMIA

                                     Christopher L. Culp
                                       Mihir Gandhi
                                      Yoshio Nozawa
                                      Pietro Veronesi

                                     Working Paper 28941
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28941


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




For their comments, we thank Gerardo Manzo, Dmitriy Muravyev, and seminar participants at
Bocconi University, Leeds School of Business, University of Chicago, and the 2019 AFA
meetings. Veronesi acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center for Research
in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of any institution with which the authors are affiliated. Culp passed away in
June 2020. We dedicate this paper to his memory. He was a wonderful coauthor, colleague,
and friend. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christopher L. Culp, Mihir Gandhi, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Option-Implied Spreads and Option Risk Premia
Christopher L. Culp, Mihir Gandhi, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 28941
June 2021
JEL No. G12,G13

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose implied spreads (IS) and normalized implied spreads (NIS) as simple measures to
characterize option prices. IS is the credit spread of an option's implied bond, the portfolio long a
risk-free bond and short a put option. NIS normalizes IS by the risk-neutral default probability
and reflects tail risk. IS and NIS are countercyclical and predict implied bond returns, while
neither, like implied volatility, predicts put returns. These opposite predictability results are
consistent with a stochastic volatility, stochastic jump intensity model, as put premia increase in
volatility but decrease in jump intensity, while implied bond premia increase in both.


Christopher L. Culp                               Yoshio Nozawa
Johns Hopkins Institute                           Lee Shau Kee Business Building
for Applied Economics                             HKUST Business School
Global Health and Study                           Clearwater Bay Road
of Business Enterprise                            Hong Kong, China
3400 North Charles St.                            Sai Kung, NT
Baltimore, MD 21218                               Hong Kong
cculp@rmcsinc.com                                 ynchoir@gmail.com

Mihir Gandhi                                      Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago                             University of Chicago
Booth School of Business                          Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                        5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Chicago, IL 60637
mihir.a.gandhi@gmail.com                          and NBER
                                                  pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28941
1.      Introduction

We introduce two novel quantities that characterize the relative pricing of financial options
and that allow us to uncover the elusive nature of the dynamics of option risk premia. The
first is an option's implied spread (IS): this quantity builds on the seminal insight of Merton
(1974) that a zero-coupon corporate bond is economically equivalent to safe debt minus a
put option. We turn this insight on its head and from each traded put option we construct
an option's implied bond, a defaultable zero-coupon bond. The implied spread is the credit
spread of the implied bond. The second quantity is the normalized implied spread, which
normalizes the implied spread by its option-implied expected default frequency. We show
that looking at options from a defaultable bond perspective, i.e. by exploiting the notion of
implied bonds and implied spreads, allows us to uncover new dynamics of option risk premia
and explain several regularities observed in the data.

     To illustrate, consider the portfolio long a risk-free zero-coupon bond with unit face value
and short 1{K European put options with strike price K and value P pK, T q. The value of
this portfolio is B pK, T q " Z pT q ´ P pK, T q{K , where Z pT q is the risk-free discount factor
for horizon T . This portfolio pays $1 if the underlying stock price is above K at maturity
or the ratio of the stock price to the strike price otherwise. Because payoff structure of this
portfolio is bond-like (as in Merton 1974), we refer to it as the option's implied bond. Like any
zero-coupon bond, the implied bond has an annualized yield y pK, T q " ´ logpB pK, T qq{T .
The implied spread is the spread of the implied bond over risk-free Treasuries: IS pK, T q "
y pK, T q ´ rpT q, where rpT q is the risk-free rate for maturity T .

   As an example, Figure 1 plots option-implied surfaces for S&P 500 index (SPX) options
on October 6, 2017. Panel A plots implied spreads across the moneyness K {S and maturity T
plane. Implied spreads are well-behaved: they increase with moneyness as market leverage
and so default probabilities increase. These spreads measure the economic return on the
investment in the bond and are comparable to standard corporate bond spreads (see Culp,
Nozawa, and Veronesi 2018). For comparison, Panel C plots the underlying put option
prices, and Panel D plots the corresponding Black-Scholes-Merton implied volatilities (IVs).
As is well known, implied volatilities are not constant in the moneyness/maturity plane and
instead exhibit the usual smirk across moneyness.

     One shortcoming of the implied spread is that it increases to infinity for short-maturity,
in-the-money (ITM) options as the probability the option will be in-the-money, or the implied
bond will default, at maturity increases to one. To address this, we introduce our second
measure for the relative pricing of options: we normalize the implied spread IS pK, T q by the

                                                 1
                                        Figure 1: Option-Implied Surfaces on October 6, 2017
This figure plots implied spreads (Panel A), normalized implied spreads (Panel B), put option
prices (Panel C), and implied volatilities (Panel D) by moneyness and time-to-maturity on October
6, 2017.
                                  A. Implied Spread                                                        B. Normalized Implied Spread

          120                                                                                 14
          100                                                                                 12
           80                                                                                 10
Percent




                                                                                    Percent
           60                                                                                  8
           40                                                                                  6
           20                                                                                  4
                                                                                               2
            1                                                                                  1
                0.8                                                       1.1                      0.8                                                   1.1
                      0.6                                          1.05                                  0.6                                      1.05
                            0.4                               1                                                0.4                           1
                                  0.2                  0.95                                                           0.2             0.95
                                             0.9                                                                               0.9
                Maturity                                      Moneyness                            Maturity                                  Moneyness
                                        C. Put Price                                                                 D. Implied Volatility


          250                                                                                 18
          200                                                                                 16


                                                                                    Percent
          150                                                                                 14
                                                                                              12
          100                                                                                 10
           50                                                                                  8
                                                                                               6
            1                                                                                  1
                0.8                                                       1.1                      0.8                                                   1.1
                      0.6                                          1.05                                  0.6                                      1.05
                            0.4                               1                                                0.4                           1
                                  0.2                  0.95                                                           0.2             0.95
                                             0.9                                                                               0.9
                Maturity                                      Moneyness                            Maturity                                  Moneyness


implied bond's annualized, risk-adjusted default intensity IDF pK, T q. We refer to this as the
option's normalized implied spread (NIS). We can compute default intensities immediately
from neighboring put option prices, and so the normalization is in fact straightforward.

           Panel B of Figure 1 plots the normalized implied spreads that correspond to the implied
spreads in Panel A. The normalization indeed stabilizes spreads across strike prices and
maturities. The normalized implied spread in Panel B and implied volatility surface in
Panel D have somewhat similar shapes. Moreover, the misalignment in put option prices
(violation of no-arbitrage) is easily visible from the bulge in normalized implied spreads
among high strike prices. The misalignment is also evident from the put option prices in
Panel C.

           In this paper, we study the empirical properties of option-implied spreads and discuss
their relation to the variation of option risk premia. Consistent with the corporate bond
literature, we find that implied spreads strongly predict future implied bond returns. On the
other hand, neither implied volatility (as is well known) nor implied spreads predict future
option returns. We investigate these empirical regularities, discuss the relation between
implied bond returns and option returns, and finally propose a two-factor option pricing
model that reconciles our empirical findings.


                                                                                2
   More specifically, like IV, IS and NIS have appealing empirical properties. First, IS and
NIS are countercyclical, increasing in recessions and decreasing in booms. This empirical
regularity is similar to empirical findings in Culp, Nozawa, and Veronesi (2018), but we
provide further evidence from the cross-section of option prices. Tail risk, in particular, is
more acute during booms than during recessions.

   Second, IS and NIS both predict excess returns on implied bonds, portfolios long safe
bonds and short put options. This predictability highlights an important risk premium in
implied spreads analogous to that in corporate bond spreads. In good times, implied spreads
and risk premia are small, indicating low future returns on implied bonds. In bad times,
implied spreads and risk premia are large, indicating high future returns on implied bonds.
Our empirical results provide further evidence of a substantial time-varying risk premium as
a compensation for tail risk, which characterizes the payoff structure of implied bonds.

   Consistent with a time-varying premium for tail risk, we find that excess returns on
out-of-the-money (OTM) implied bonds, which have lower default probabilities, are more
predictable (larger t-statistics and higher R2 s) than those on at-the-money (ATM) implied
bonds, as tail risk affects the former more than the latter. This lines up with similar evidence
for corporate bonds: the excess returns on investment-grade bonds are more predictable than
those on high-yield bonds (see, for example, Nozawa 2017).

   That implied spreads predict implied bond returns is consistent with a standard option
pricing model with stochastic volatility and jumps (SVJ). In this model, higher IS and NIS
imply higher implied bond risk premia. The model also indicates predictability is stronger
for OTM implied bonds, as in the data.

   IV, IS, and NIS, however, do not predict put option excess returns. This empirical finding
is puzzling in light of the predictability of implied bond excess returns, as implied bonds are
just risk-free bonds minus put options. Indeed, the standard SVJ model mentioned above
also counterfactually implies that the put option risk premium is nonlinearly but positively
related to IV, IS, and NIS. The reason is that in the SVJ model the only source of time-
varying risk premium is time-varying volatility. But we find little evidence of a positive slope
and only mild evidence of nonlinearity in the data. In sum, while the standard SVJ model
is consistent with the evidence from implied bonds, it is at odds with the evidence from
options themselves.

   The counterfactual predictions of the one-factor SVJ model call for a two-factor model.
We show that a two-factor, stochastic volatility, stochastic jump intensity (SVSIJ) model
indeed rationalizes both implied bond and put option return predictability.

                                               3
   In the SVSIJ model, implied spreads, normalized implied spreads, and implied bond risk
premia all increase with both volatility and intensity, and thus, IS and NIS naturally predict
implied bond returns. However, volatility and intensity have opposite effects on put option
risk premia: while risk premia increase with volatility (as in SVJ), risk premia decrease with
intensity. Intuitively, put options are hedges against stock market crashes: as the probability
of a jump increases, the hedge becomes more valuable, and so the risk premium decreases.
Because of the asymmetric effect of volatility and intensity on put option risk premia, IV,
IS and NIS do not predict put option returns. We simulate the SVSIJ model under our
parameter estimates and confirm in artificial data that implied bond returns are predictable
while put option returns are not, as in the empirical data.

   Implied spreads and normalized implied spread also offer simple alternatives to implied
volatilities to gauge the relative pricing of options. While implied volatility surfaces are
widely used by both practitioners and researchers, they suffer from numerous shortcomings.
First, IV depends on a specific model ­ the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model ­
and its computation requires the numerical solution of an equation. Second, IVs are not
economically coherent across strike prices and maturities because the Black-Scholes-Merton
model assumes that volatility is constant. Third, while implied volatility roughly captures
the relative pricing of options across strike prices and maturities, it is difficult to quantify
and interpret the economic magnitude. For instance, if one option trades at 20% volatility
and another at 30%, the economic difference in these prices is unclear. Implied spreads, in
contrast, are economically meaningful as they represent credit spreads of the implied bonds.
Normalized implied spreads divide by the default frequency and thus have the interpretation
of a return-to-risk ratio.

   Finally, an additional contribution of the paper is to introduce a novel empirical method-
ology to estimate structural models, such as the SVSIJ model above. We exploit a maximum
likelihood methodology paired with a set of moment conditions that are designed to empha-
size the predictability of implied bond returns and the (lack of) predictability of put option
returns. This technique allows us to obtain parameter estimates that not only fit the dynam-
ics of options data, but also provide the proper conditional moments (return predictability)
observed in the data. The estimation reveals a modest market price of default-intensity risk,
but a large negative estimate of the risk-neutral mean jump. These parameter values induce
the negative relation between jump intensity and put option risk premia, which countervail
the positive relation between volatility and put option risk premia.

    In sum, looking at options from the lens of their defaultable bonds counterpart, that is,
as implied bonds, allows us to uncover new empirical regularities and better understand the


                                               4
nature of the variation in put option risk premia, which has evaded the empirical literature
so far.

Related Literature. Our work relates to several strands of literature. First, our paper
builds on Culp, Nozawa, and Veronesi (2018, CNV henceforth), who study the empirical
properties of option-implied spreads among deep OTM put options. The focus and the
empirical strategy of CNV differs from our own. CNV examine the sizes and time-series
properties of implied spreads ­ called pseudo spreads in their paper ­ and compare them to
corporate bond spreads. The goal of their paper is to learn about the sources of credit spreads
and the factors that drive their dynamics. CNV provide evidence that idiosyncratic tail risk
is an important component of pseudo spreads. They also show that an index of pseudo
spreads strongly predicts future economic growth. Given their focus is to compare pseudo
bonds with corporate bonds, CNV only use long-maturity, deep OTM options. In contrast,
in this paper, we consider the entire spectrum of options in the moneyness/maturity plane,
we introduce normalized implied spreads, and we focus on their empirical characteristics,
especially in relation to uncovering the elusive dynamics of option risk premia.

   Second, our work relates to the existing literature on covered call returns. The payoff
on a covered call ­ a position long the underlying stock and short an ATM call option ­ is
equivalent to that on an implied bond ­ a portfolio long a safe bond and short a put option
­ by put-call parity. Indeed, our empirical evidence provides an explanation for the covered
call anomaly, the empirical observation that the covered call generates high excess returns
(see Israelov and Nielsen 2015 for a discussion). Because a covered call is equivalent to an
implied bond, our empirical results show that these excess returns stem in part from a tail
risk premium, as it does for corporate bonds.

   Third, our paper relates to the literature that studies option return predictability and
forecasting with option-implied information (see Christoffersen, Jacobs, and Chang 2013 for
a survey). For instance, Israelov and Kelly (2017) use an elaborate Monte Carlo simulation
to forecast the distribution of option returns, and Cao, Goyal, Xiao, and Zhan (2019) use
singlename implied volatilities to forecast the cross-section of corporate bond returns. Unlike
this literature, we use option-implied spreads as predictors and identify option risk premia
from the difference between implied bonds and put options.

   Finally, our paper builds on existing stochastic volatility and stochastic jump inten-
sity models, such as Merton (1976), Heston (1993), Bates (2000, 2006, 2012), Duffie, Pan,
and Singleton (2000), Pan (2002), Eraker (2004), Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes (2009),
Santa-Clara and Yan (2010), Christoffersen, Jacobs, and Ornthanalai (2012), and David and


                                              5
Veronesi (2014), among others. We do not attempt a survey of this extensive literature here.
Although some of these papers document risk premia due to stochastic volatilities, jumps,
and stochastic jump intensities, none of these papers study implied bonds or implied spreads.

     The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 defines (normalized) im-
plied spreads and interprets their properties in benchmark option pricing models. Section
3 documents the cross-sectional, time-series, and business-cycle properties of option-implied
surfaces. Section 4 evaluates the predictive content of option-implied spreads for future
implied bond and put option returns. Section 5 analyzes return predictability in dynamic
option pricing models. Section 6 concludes. The appendix contains technical details and
additional results omitted from the text.



2.      Option-Implied Spreads

This section lays out the empirical methodology. We define implied spreads and normalized
implied spreads, examine their behavior in quiet and turbulent periods, and interpret these
dynamics within simple log-normal and jump diffusion environments.


2.1.     Implied Spreads

The foundation of our analysis is the option-implied bond: the implicit defaultable zero-
coupon bond given by the portfolio long a safe zero-coupon bond and short a European put
option. The implied spread is the credit spread of the implied bond.

     More specifically, consider a European put option with strike price K , maturity date T ,
and value Pt pK, T q. The portfolio long a safe zero-coupon bond with face value K and short
a put option with strike price K has bond-like payoff at maturity T . The portfolio pays the
strike price K if ST  K or the recovery value ST if ST  K . We divide by the face value
K to normalize the payoff to unity and obtain the following:

Definition: For a European put option Pt pK, T q with strike price K and maturity date T ,

 (a) The implied bond of a put option is

                                                             Pt pK, T q
                                    Bt pK, T q " Zt pT q ´                                 (1)
                                                                 K
       where Zt pT q is a risk-free zero-coupon bond with maturity T .


                                                6
  (b) The implied spread of a put option is the credit spread of its implied bond

                                          ISt pK, T q " yt pK, T q ´ rt pT q                                  (2)

         where yt pK, T q " ´log pBt pK, T qq{pT ´ tq is the continuously compounded yield of the
         risky zero-coupon bond and rt pT q " ´log pZt pT qq{pT ´ tq is that of the risk-free zero-
         coupon bond.

Substituting the expression for yt pK, T q into (2), a straightforward algebraic manipulation
yields a simple formula for the implied spread:
                                                 ^                     
                                         1                1 Pt pK, T q
                      ISt pK, T q " ´        log 1 ´                                      (3)
                                      T ´t             Zt pT q   K
For a put option, the implied spread is well-defined from weak no-arbitrage bounds on
European put options: Pt pK, T q  KZt pK q. For a call option, we first use put-call parity to
obtain the equivalent put option and then use (3) to compute its implied spread.

       Like implied volatility, the implied spread in (3) is an annualized percent, but it has the
clear interpretation of a bond's yield in excess of the risk-free rate. A high implied spread
indicates that the put option is expensive. Any analysis we might conduct on corporate
bonds and their credit spreads we can do with implied bonds and their implied spreads.


2.2.       Normalized Implied Spreads

One drawback of the implied spread is that the spread increases to infinity for short-maturity,
ITM options as the implied bond defaults at maturity almost surely. This behavior is
apparent in Panel A of Figure 1.

       To resolve this issue, we normalize the spread by the implied bond's probability of default.
Rather than turn to corporate bond default frequencies, our methodology relies only on
options for parsimony, and thus, we compute the implied default probability directly from
the surface of put option prices. In particular, the risk-neutral probability that ST  K is:1
                                                               1 dPt pK, T q
                                   Prob rST  K s "
                                                            Zt pT q dK
The annualized implied default frequency of the bond is
                                                  1
                           IDFt pK, T q " ´          log p1 ´ Prob rST  K sq                                  (4)
                                                T ´t
   1
                                K
   As is well known, P pK, T q " 0 Zt pT q max pK ´ S, 0q f ° pS qdS , where f ° pS q is the risk-neutral density.
                      K °
Thus, dP {dK " Zt pT q 0 f pS qdS " Zt pT qProb rST  K s.

                                                        7
Intuitively, Qt pT q " 1 ´ Prob rST  K s  1 is the survival probability between t and T
and thus, IDFt pK, T q is the average default intensity if default were to occur at any time
between t and T . That is, we simply translate the default probability into an annualized
average intensity in the same way we transform a zero-coupon bond return into an annualized
yield. Although a risky zero-coupon bond can only default at T , its payment in the event
of non-default also only occurs at T (as it is zero-coupon bond). And so just as the yield
yt pK, T q is an annualized average rate of return of a single payoff at T , the IDFt pK, T q is
an annualized average intensity of a single default event at T . Yields and default intensities
are analogous concepts.2

       Substituting, we obtain the simple expression
                                                  ^                    
                                           1             1 dPt pK, T q
                        IDFt pK, T q " ´      log 1 ´                                                         (5)
                                         T ´t         Zt pT q dK

There is an elegant symmetry between the expressions for the implied spread in (3) and for
the implied default frequency in (5). The expressions are identical except that the former is
in levels P {K and the latter is in first differences dP {dK .

    The calculation of dP {dK is straightforward from neighboring put option prices with
strike prices K1 and K2 and K1  K  K2 :
                                   dPt pK, T q   Pt pK2 , T q ´ Pt pK1 , T q
                                               «
                                      dK                 K2 ´ K1
To ensure implied default intensities are well-defined, we do not directly compute the slope
from the surface of raw put option prices. From (5), the implied default frequency is well-
defined for any put option from standard no-arbitrage bounds on European put options:
          1 dPt pK,T q
0       Zt pT q dK
                          1. Thus, as it is important that the put price is a monotone function of
the strike price, we first impose this shape restriction on the price surface and then compute
the slope. We describe the procedure in the appendix.

Definition: The normalized implied spread of a put option is the implied spread ISt pK, T q
in (2) divided by the annualized implied default frequency IDFt pK, T q in (4)

                                                             ISt pK, T q
                                        N ISt pK, T q "                                                       (6)
                                                            IDFt pK, T q
Panel B of Figure 1 shows that the normalization indeed stabilizes implied spreads across
strike prices and maturities. The normalized implied spread thus offers an economic measure
   2
    To further the intuition, consider a model with stochastic intensity"of default is . The risk-neutral survival
                                                                            T
                                                                      °   ´ t  s ds
probability is Pr rNo Default before T | No Default before ts " Et e                 . The average intensity of
default is thus t pT q " ´ log pPr rNo Default before T | No Default before tsq {pT ´ tq.

                                                        8
of the cross-sectional variation in put option prices. The economic quantity is the implied
bond's spread scaled by its annualized (risk-neutral) default intensity. As a point of reference,
the normalized implied spread is like a Sharpe ratio but in yield, not return, units. Just as
the Sharpe ratio is an excess return scaled by volatility risk, the normalized implied spread
is a credit spread scaled by default risk.3

       An equivalent formulation of the normalized implied spread is
                                             `               °
                                                                        
                                          log 1 ´ LGD ^ Ef     r1xT 1 s
                          N ISt pK, T q "        `      °
                                                                                                       (7)
                                              log 1 ´ Ef  r1xT 1 s
                              °                         °
where xT " ST {K , LGD " Ef     r1 ´ xT | xT  1s, and Ef  r.s denotes the expectation under
                                                      °
the forward risk-adjusted probability measure. Thus, Ef r1xT 1 s is the risk-adjusted default
probability, LGD is the risk-adjusted expectation of loss-given-default, and so the numerator
and denominator differ only in the size of LGD. It is clear from (7) that NIS is monotonically
related to the risk-adjusted LGD. If LGD " 0%, then N IS " 0%. If LGD " 100%, then
N IS " 100%. Indeed, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 1: The normalized implied spread in (7) has the following properties:

                                                                   °
 (a) N IS is increasing in the loss-given default LGD for a given Ef r1xT 1 s.
                                                                  °
 (b) N IS is decreasing in the risk-adjusted default probability Ef r1xT 1 s for a given LGD.

Part (a) shows that NIS measures the size of an implied bond's (risk-adjusted) tail risk. For
a given default probability, a high NIS implies the LGD is large.

       Part (b) shows that an increase in the default probability decreases NIS. Mechanically,
                                                 °
this follows directly from the definition. As Ef   r1xT 1 s converges to one, the denominator
diverges to negative infinity while the numerator converges to a negative finite number. Thus,
NIS converges to zero. Intuitively, the LGD ­ the size of tail risk ­ becomes relatively smaller
the higher the default probability. If the default probability increases but LGD remains the
same, then NIS declines. On the other hand, the default probability and LGD are positively
correlated in practice, and thus, NIS may as well increase.
   3
     To further the intuition, consider a simple model with constant default probability p, constant market
price of risk  , and constant loss-given-default LGD. Then, the credit spread is s " pLGD, and the
risk-neutral default intensity is p° " p . It follows that N IS " s{p° " LGD.




                                                    9
                        Figure 2: Option-Implied Quantities in Quiet and Turbulent Markets
This figure plots implied volatilities (top row), implied spreads (middle row), and normalized im-
plied spreads (bottom row) by moneyness in the Financial Crisis (left column) and Covid-19 Crash
(right column). Options have 60 days-to-maturity.

                     A. Financial Crisis: Implied Volatility                                     D. Covid-19 Crash: Implied Volatility
              80                                                                          80
                                  20070131            20090130                                                20200219           20200320
              60                                                                          60
    Percent




                                                                                Percent
              40                                                                          40

              20                                                                          20

               0                                                                           0
               0.9         0.95              1        1.05       1.1                       0.9         0.95              1       1.05       1.1
                                    Moneyness                                                                  Moneyness
                      B. Financial Crisis: Implied Spread                                         E. Covid-19 Crash: Implied Spread
          100                                                                         100
                                  20070131            20090130                                                20200219           20200320
Percent




                                                                            Percent
              50                                                                          50




               0                                                                           0
               0.9         0.95              1        1.05       1.1                       0.9         0.95              1       1.05       1.1
                                     Moneyness                                                                 Moneyness
               C. Financial Crisis: Normalized Implied Spread                              F. Covid-19 Crash: Normalized Implied Spread
              20                                                                          20
                                  20070131            20090130                                                20200219           20200320
              15                                                                          15
    Percent




                                                                                Percent




              10                                                                          10

               5                                                                           5

               0                                                                           0
               0.9         0.95              1        1.05       1.1                       0.9         0.95              1       1.05       1.1
                                      Moneyness                                                                   Moneyness


2.3.                 Case Study in Quiet and Turbulent Markets

To gauge the informational content of implied spreads and normalized implied spreads, we
examine their dynamics in the Financial Crisis and the more recent Covid-19 Crash.

Financial Crisis. We begin with the 2008 Financial Crisis on the left side of Figure 2.
Panel A plots implied volatilities in January 2007 and January 2009. The former is the calm
before the storm and represents quiet markets: the average implied volatility hovers around
10%. The latter is the midst of the crisis and represents turbulent markets: the average
implied volatility soars to 40%. That is, the failure of Lehman Brothers and the ensuing
financial turmoil increased hedging demand for put options, and so implied volatility likewise


                                                                       10
increased.

       Panel B plots implied spreads. In 2007, implied spreads are low, between 1% for OTM
options and 35% for ITM options. ITM options have high spreads because their implied
bonds are extremely likely to default. Implied spreads too rise in the crisis: in 2009, OTM
implied spreads jump to 25% and ITM implied spreads to 65%. Unlike implied volatility, the
economic interpretation of a 25% spread is clear: it is the promised yield on a defaultable
bond in excess of the risk-free rate.

       Panel C shows the analogous impact of the crisis on normalized implied spreads. Like
both implied volatilities and implied spreads, normalized implied spreads increase during the
crisis. Because the normalized implied spread scales the implied spread by the (annualized)
intensity of default, the increase between 2007 and 2009 suggests a substantial increase in
tail risk in spite of the increase in default probability.

Covid-19 Crash. We next turn to the 2020 Covid-19 Crash on the right side of Figure 2.
We compare option-implied quantities on February 19, the market peak before the crash,
with those on March 20, the market trough before the recovery. Not surprisingly, implied
volatilities, implied spreads, and normalized implied spreads largely rise, as in the Financial
Crisis.4 The concavity of normalized implied spreads along strike prices also increases. As
we see in Section 3, these properties not only characterize the Financial Crisis and Covid-19
Crash but also bad times more generally.


2.4.       Benchmark Option Pricing Models

To better understand the dynamics of spreads in quiet and turbulent markets, we turn to
two simple option pricing models.

Black-Scholes-Merton Model.                 The first benchmark is the canonical Black-Scholes-
Merton model with constant volatility and no jumps in returns. Under the assumption
                                                      ``      1 2
                                                                        
stock return dynamics are log-normal logpST {S0 q ,, N r ´  ´ 2  T,  2 T , the implied
   4
    From peak to trough, implied spreads increase among OTM and ATM options, but decrease among ITM
options. On February 19, volatility is low, the probability an ITM option is in-the-money at maturity is
relatively high, and so the implied spread is relatively high. On March 20, volatility is high, the probability
an ITM option is in-the-money at maturity is relatively low, and so the implied spread is relatively low.




                                                      11
                     Figure 3: Option-Implied Spreads in the Black-Scholes-Merton Model
This figure plots implied spreads (Panel A) and normalized implied spreads (Panel B) by moneyness
in the Black-Scholes-Merton model for diffusive volatility  " 0.05, 0.15, 0.25. Parameters: r " 0.03,
 " 0.02, T " 0.25.

                                                   A. Implied Spread
          50

          40

          30
Percent




          20

          10

              0
              0.9     0.92    0.94    0.96      0.98         1         1.02   1.04   1.06   1.08   1.1
                                                       Moneyness
                                             B. Normalized Implied Spread
              8

              6
    Percent




              4

              2

              0
              0.9     0.92    0.94    0.96      0.98         1         1.02   1.04   1.06   1.08   1.1
                                                       Moneyness


spread and normalized implied spread are
                                            ^                          
                                     1                        N p´d1 q
                     IS pM, T q " ´ log 1 ´ N p´d2 q `
                                     T                           M
                                   log p1 ´ N p´d2 q ` N p´d1 q{M q
                  N IS pM, T q "
                                           log p1 ´ N p´d2 qq
             `           
where M " K { S0 epr´qT is the option's forward moneyness, N p.q is the cumulative normal
density, and                           `          
                          log pS {K q ` r ´  ` 1
                                               2
                                                 2 T             ?
                    d1 "                ?            , d2 " d1 ´  T
                                        T
                        5
are the usual constants.

              Panel A of Figure 3 plots implied spreads for three levels of volatility. Under Black-
Scholes-Merton, implied spreads increase with moneyness and volatility. As moneyness (i.e.
market leverage) and volatility increase, the probability of default also increases, and so
implied spreads rise.

              Panel B plots normalized implied spreads. In the model, normalized implied spreads
          5
   The Black-Scholes-Merton dual delta is dP {dK " Z pT qN p´d2 q. With this, we compute normalized
implied spreads in the usual way.

                                                          12
                 Figure 4: Option-Implied Spreads in Merton's Jump Diffusion Model
This figure plots implied spreads (top row) and normalized implied spreads (bottom row) by mon-
eyness in Merton's jump diffusion model for diffusive volatility  " 0.10, 0.15 and jump volatility
J " 0.05, 0.15, 0.25. Parameters: r " 0.03,  " 0.02, T " 0.25.

          40                                                             40

          30                                                             30
Percent




                                                               Percent
          20                                                             20

          10                                                             10

           0                                                              0
           0.9    0.95       1       1.05           1.1                   0.9   0.95       1       1.05   1.1
                         Moneyness                                                     Moneyness


          10                                                             10

           8                                                              8
Percent




                                                               Percent
           6                                                              6

           4                                                              4

           2                                                              2

           0                                                              0
           0.9    0.95       1       1.05           1.1                   0.9   0.95       1       1.05   1.1
                         Moneyness                                                     Moneyness


increase with and are concave in moneyness. But in the data, normalized implied spreads
are in fact largely convex in moneyness, as seen in Figure 2 and as we show in Section
3. Intuitively, normalized implied spreads measure expected losses given default, but these
losses are much too small under the assumption of log-normal dynamics. In other words, the
Black-Scholes-Merton model does not capture the fat tails of the risk-neutral distribution
(as is well known) and so cannot match the convexity of normalized implied spreads.

Merton's Jump Diffusion Model. The second benchmark is the Merton (1976) jump
                                                                               2
diffusion model. Under the assumption that log-normal jumps logpJ q ,, N pµJ , J q arrive
with (risk-neutral) Poisson intensity , the put option price in closed form is
                                              8
                                              ÿ
                          P utM J pK, T q "         pn ^ P utBSM pS0 , K, rn , T, , n
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      q
                                              n"0

                   1 2                                        n                     n 2
where m " µJ ` 2    J , 1 " em , rn " r ´  pem ´ 1q ` T         m, and n  2
                                                                            " 2 ` T   J . p n "
1 ´ T1       n
n!
   e   p1 T q is the probability n jumps arrive over the life of the put option, and P utBSM p.q
is the corresponding Black-Scholes-Merton price. That is, with jumps, the put option price
is the probability weighted sum of conditional prices. With put option prices, we compute
(normalized) implied spreads in the usual way.


                                                          13
     Figure 4 plots implied spreads and normalized implied spreads for two levels of diffusive
volatility and three levels of jump volatility J . While the impact of jumps on implied spreads
is negligible, the impact on normalized implied spreads is substantial. This is unsurprising
because jumps fatten the tails of the risk-neutral distribution, and normalized implied spreads
measure tail risk. For OTM options, normalized implied spreads increase with J , and the
increase is larger the lower the diffusive volatility. Intuitively, the relative effect of the jump
component is larger the lower diffusive volatility. For ITM options, normalized implied
spreads also increase with J , but the increase is small. Intuitively, the probability the
implied bond defaults is so large that jumps have little impact on spreads (see Proposition
1). In short, the addition of jumps to the Black-Scholes-Merton model generates sufficient
tail risk to qualitatively match the convexity of normalized implied spreads in the data.



3.      Empirical Properties of Option-Implied Spreads

This section documents the cross-sectional and time-series properties of implied spreads and
normalized implied spreads.


3.1.     Data

Our focus is implied bonds on S&P 500 index put options. Option prices for the 1990 to
1995 period are from CBOE Market Data Express. Option prices for the 1996 to 2020 period
are from OptionMetrics Ivy DB. Stock prices are from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP). We use Treasury Bill rates and constant maturity Treasury Yields from the
Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED) to construct risk-free zero-coupon bonds. We
convert these into zero-coupon yields and linearly interpolate to match option maturities. To
filter clear violations of no-arbitrage and other quotation errors, we follow Constantinides,
Jackwerth, and Savov (2013). We enumerate the exact filters in the appendix.

     The main input for the empirical analysis is a panel of put option and implied bond
portfolios with target moneyness K {S " 0.90, 0.925, 0.95, 0.975, 1.00, 1.025, 1.05, 1.075,
1.10 and target maturity T " 30, 60, 91, 122, 152, 182, 273, 365 days from January 1990 to
December 2020. We discuss construction of this panel in the appendix.




                                                14
                                                Figure 5: Average Option-Implied Surfaces
This figure plots average implied volatilities (Panel A), average implied spreads (Panel B), aver-
age normalized implied spreads (Panel C), and average implied default intensities (Panel D) by
moneyness and time-to-maturity. The sample is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.
                                 A. Implied Volatility                                                                B. Implied Spread


                                                                                              40
          20
Percent




                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                              20
          15
           1                                                                                   1
               0.8                                                   1.1                           0.8                                                    1.1
                     0.6                                      1.05                                       0.6                                       1.05
                           0.4                           1                                                      0.4                           1
                                  0.2             0.95                                                                0.2            0.95
                                          0.9                                                                                 0.9
               Maturity                                  Moneyness                                 Maturity                                   Moneyness
                       C. Normalized Implied Spread                                                            D. Implied Default Intensity



                                                                                          600
Percent




                                                                                Percent
          10
                                                                                          400
                                                                                          200
           5
           1                                                                                   1
               0.8                                                   1.1                           0.8                                                    1.1
                     0.6                                      1.05                                       0.6                                       1.05
                           0.4                           1                                                      0.4                           1
                                  0.2             0.95                                                                0.2            0.95
                                          0.9                                                                                 0.9
               Maturity                                  Moneyness                                 Maturity                                   Moneyness


3.2.                 Cross-Sectional Properties

Unconditional Properties. Figure 5 plots unconditional average option-implied surfaces.
Panel A is the standard implied volatility surface, which features the usual decreasing smirk
across moneyness. Panel B shows the implied spread, which is instead increasing in money-
ness (i.e. market leverage) as the default probability increases.

           Panel C plots the normalized implied spread, the ratio of the implied spread in Panel B to
the implied default intensity in Panel D. Like implied spreads, the normalized implied spread
is mildly increasing across moneyness, although significantly less so than the implied spread.
Unlike implied spreads, the normalized implied spread is increasing across maturities, which
indicates that longer-term bonds have higher risk-adjusted credit spreads. Most important,
the average normalized implied spread is convex with respect to moneyness, which reflects
the tail risk embedded in put options (see discussion in Section 2.4).

    Panel D shows the implied default frequency. Like implied spreads in Panel B, the im-
plied default frequency is increasing in moneyness and decreasing in maturities. That is, the
likelihood the bond defaults at maturity is highest for short-maturity, levered bonds. Equiv-
alently, the likelihood the option ends in-the-money at maturity is highest for short-maturity,

                                                                           15
                           Figure 6: Average Option-Implied Surfaces in Booms and Recessions
This figure plots average implied volatilities (Panel A), average implied spreads (Panel B), average
normalized implied spreads (Panel C), and average implied default intensities (Panel D) by mon-
eyness and time-to-maturity in booms (orange) and recessions (blue). The sample is monthly from
January 1990 to December 2020.
                                 A. Implied Volatility                                                                B. Implied Spread


          30                                                                                  50
                                                                                              40
Percent




                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                              30
          20                                                                                  20
                                                                                              10
           1                                                                                   1
               0.8                                                   1.1                           0.8                                                    1.1
                     0.6                                      1.05                                       0.6                                       1.05
                           0.4                           1                                                      0.4                           1
                                  0.2             0.95                                                                0.2            0.95
                                          0.9                                                                                  0.9
               Maturity                                  Moneyness                                 Maturity                                   Moneyness
                       C. Normalized Implied Spread                                                            D. Implied Default Intensity

                                                                                                                  Recessions
          15                                                                              800                     Booms
                                                                                          600
Percent




                                                                                Percent
          10                                                                              400
                                                                                          200
           5
           1                                                                                   1
               0.8                                                   1.1                           0.8                                                    1.1
                     0.6                                      1.05                                       0.6                                       1.05
                           0.4                           1                                                      0.4                           1
                                  0.2             0.95                                                                0.2            0.95
                                          0.9                                                                                  0.9
               Maturity                                  Moneyness                                 Maturity                                   Moneyness


ITM options. Neither interpretation is surprising. The similarity between the implied spread
surface and implied default frequency surface reinforces the symmetry between their formulas
in (3) and (5), respectively.

Business-Cycle Properties. Figure 6 plots average option-implied surfaces in booms
and recessions. The difference between recessions and booms is largely positive along the
full moneyness/maturity plane, as implied volatilities, implied spreads, normalized implied
spreads, and implied default frequencies are higher in bad times. As is such, Panel A shows
that implied volatilities increase across the board in recessions and especially so for short-
maturity options. The same holds for implied spreads in Panel B. Short-maturity implied
spreads increase the most in recessions.

           Panel C shows the impact on normalized implied spreads. Like implied spreads, normal-
ized implied spreads increase in recessions. Unlike implied spreads, the increase is greatest
among long-maturity, OTM options. Intuitively, while implied default intensities (Panel
D) increase in recessions, so do implied spreads (Panel B): at long maturities, the latter
outweighs the former, and so normalized implied spreads increase.



                                                                           16
   In contrast, implied default intensities decrease in recessions among short-maturity, ITM
options. In booms, volatility is low, the probability an ITM option is in-the-money at matu-
rity is high, and so the implied default intensity is relatively high. In recessions, volatility is
high, the probability an ITM option is in-the-money at maturity is low, and so the implied
default intensity is relatively low. In other words, the same risk premium that drives implied
spreads higher in recessions also drives implied default intensities and especially so at short
maturities.


3.3.    Time-Series Properties

Figure 7 plots the time-series of option-implied quantities. On the left are the time-series
across strike prices for a single maturity T " 2 months. On the right are the time-series across
maturities for a single moneyness K {S " 1.00. First, Panels A and B show the time-series
of implied volatilities. As is well known, implied volatilities increase in bad times.

   Second, Panels C and D show the time-series of implied spreads. Like implied volatilities,
implied spreads increase in recessions and decrease in booms. The cross-sectional difference
between spreads on ITM options (higher spreads) and OTM options (lower spreads) in Panel
C is unconditionally large, which reflects the large default premium (see earlier discussion).
In contrast, the cross-sectional difference across maturities in Panel D is relatively small.

   Third, Panels E and F further highlight the time-series variation in normalized implied
spreads. Since normalized implied spreads adjust for the default intensity, their time-series
variation is akin to variation in the market price of risk implicit in put options. Unlike
implied spreads, the cross-sectional variation in normalized implied spreads across strike
prices is small, but across maturities it is large (see earlier discussion).

   Finally, the cross-sectional variation over time is most interesting for implied volatilities
across maturities (Panel B) and normalized implied spreads across strike prices (Panel E).
The implied volatility term structure slopes upward in good times and downward in bad
times, which reflects mean reversion. The dynamics of normalized implied spreads are less
straightforward but in short reflect the time-varying role of tail risk (we dig more deeply into
tail risk later). The cross-sectional variation for the remainder of the cuts is largely time
invariant, and so their time variation is uninteresting.

   To summarize the time variation in surface dynamics, Figure 8 plots the first principal
component of each option-implied surface. The first principal component of implied volatil-
ities and implied spreads nearly coincide, and just under this is that of normalized implied

                                                17
                                 Figure 7: Time-Series of Option-Implied Quantities
This figure plots the time-series of implied volatilities (top row), implied spreads (middle row),
and normalized implied spreads (bottom row) by moneyness (left column) and time-to-maturity
(right column). Grey bands are NBER recessions. The sample is monthly from January 1990 to
December 2020.
                 A. Implied Volatility (T = 2 Months)                                             B. Implied Volatility (K/S = 1)

                                                                                      40
          40
Percent




                                                                            Percent
          20                                                                          20


           0                                                                           0
               1993    1998      2004       2009    2015        2020                       1993      1998     2004      2009        2015       2020

                 C. Implied Spread (T = 2 Months)                                                 D. Implied Spread (K/S = 1)
          80                                                                          60

          60                                                                          40
Percent




                                                                            Percent
          40
                                                                                      20
          20
           0                                                                           0
               1993    1998      2004       2009    2015        2020                       1993      1998     2004      2009        2015       2020

           E. Normalized Implied Spread (T = 2 Months)                                     F. Normalized Implied Spread (K/S = 1)
          15                                                                          20
Percent




                                                                            Percent



          10
                                                                                      10
           5

           0                                                                           0
               1993    1998      2004       2009    2015        2020                       1993      1998     2004      2009        2015       2020

                      Moneyness Legend (Left)                                                        Maturity Legend (Right)

                                        0.900           1.025                                                 30 days               152 days
                                        0.925           1.050                                                 60 days               182 days
                                        0.950           1.075                                                 91 days               273 days
                                        0.975           1.100                                                122 days               365 days
                                        1.000




spreads. The following table shows that the correlations among these principal components
are large, both in levels and first differences. The lone exception is the correlation between
implied spreads and normalized implied spreads in first differences, which is only 33% but still
positive. These correlations further support the strong comovement among the time-series
dynamics shown in Figure 7.

                                                   Levels                   First Differences
                                                        IS      NIS                         IS      NIS
                                             IV 0.92 0.84                    IV 0.82 0.66
                                            NIS 0.79                        NIS 0.33

           Finally, Figure 9 plots the convexity of normalized implied spreads in blue. The proxy for

                                                                       18
                   Figure 8: First Principal Component of Option-Implied Quantities
This figure plots the first principal component of implied volatilities (blue), implied spreads (red),
and normalized implied spreads (yellow) in levels. Grey bands are NBER recessions. The sample
is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.


3.5                IV
                   IS
  3                NIS

2.5

  2

1.5

  1

0.5

  0
                 1993            1998             2004            2009             2015               2020



convexity is the butterfly spread across options with 30 days-to-maturity: NISp0.90, 30q´ 2 ^
NISp1.00, 30q ` NISp1.10, 30q. Over the sample, convexity is largely positive, in contrast with
the negative prediction from the Black-Scholes-Merton model (see discussion in Section 2.4).
Interestingly, normalized implied spreads are especially convex in good times but concave or
near concave in bad times. For instance, the convexity is negative in every recession and in
crises (e.g. the LTCM crisis in 1998 and the debt-ceiling crisis in 2013).

          Figure 9 also plots the CBOE Skew index, the skewness of the risk-neutral distribution
implied by SPX options, in orange.6 There is a clear association between convexity and
skewness: the correlation between the two is 27% and significantly different from zero (not
tabulated). The positive correlation furthers the intuition that normalized implied spreads
capture some tail risk embedded in put option prices. In good times, returns are more
negatively skewed, tail risk is high, and normalized implied spreads are more convex. In bad
times, returns are less negatively skewed, tail risk is low, and normalized implied spreads are
less convex.

   In short, there are three key properties of option-implied spreads. First, (normalized)
implied spreads are countercyclical, low in booms and high in recessions. Second, implied
spreads increase with moneyness as market leverage and so the default probability increase.
Finally, the convexity of normalized implied spreads is procyclical: convexity is high in
booms when tail risk is high and low in recessions when tail risk is low.
      6
          See https://www.cboe.com/micro/skew/documents/skewwhitepaperjan2011.pdf for more details.




                                                         19
                                           Figure 9: Convexity of Normalized Implied Spreads
This figure plots the convexity of normalized implied spreads (blue) and the CBOE Skew index
(orange). The convexity of normalized implied spreads is the butterfly spread NISp0.90, 30q ´ 2 ^
NISp1.00, 30q ` NISp1.10, 30q, where NISpM, H q is the normalized implied spread of a put option
with moneyness M " K {S and H days-to-maturity. The convexity is -4.2% in March 1998 and
-13.0% in February 2009. The CBOE Skew index is the 30-day ahead risk-neutral expectation of
S&P 500 index skewness: a higher skew index indicates more negative skewness. The skew index is
standardized to have mean zero and variance one. Grey bands are NBER recessions. The sample
is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.
                          6
                                                                                                                 3
                          4




                                                                                                                      CBOE Skew (Standardized)
NIS Convexity (Percent)




                                                                                                                 2

                          2
                                                                                                                 1

                          0
                                                                                                                 0

                          -2
                                                                                                                 -1


                                 1993           1998           2004              2009            2015     2020



4.                             Time-Varying Risk Premia

This section evaluates the predictive content of option-implied spreads for put option and
implied bond excess returns. As is usual, the economic content of return predictability is
evidence of time-varying risk premia. We begin with the one-month horizon and then turn
to long horizons.


4.1.                           Monthly Returns

Our empirical analysis considers three excess returns, two for put options and one for implied
bonds. The first is the put option excess return, the monthly return to a long put option
position in excess of the risk-free rate:

                                              P ut            f     Pt`1 pK, T q ´ Pt pK, T q    f
                                             Rt `1 pK, T q ´ Rt "                             ´ Rt                    (8)
                                                                           Pt pK, T q

The second is the delta-hedged put option return, the monthly return to a long put option
position in excess of the delta-hedged stock position:

                                         P ut              SP X     Pt`1 pK, T q ´ Pt pK, T q      SP X
                                        Rt `1 pK, T q ´ t Rt`1 "                              ´ t Rt `1               (9)
                                                                           Pt pK, T q

                                                                       20
                          Table 1: Monthly Returns: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for put option excess returns RP ut ´ Rf , delta-hedged put option
returns RP ut ´ RSP X , and implied bond excess returns RIB ´ Rf by moneyness and time-to-maturity.
OTM is moneyness K/S  0.95, ATM is 0.975  K/S  1.025, and ITM is K/S  1.05. The sample is
monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.

                   RP ut ´ Rf                     RP ut ´ RSP X                    RIB ´ Rf
          T  122 days      T  152 days     T  122 days     T  152 days     T  122 days   T  152 days
  Panel A: Average Excess Return (Percent)
  OTM            -37.05           -10.75          -36.69          -10.32          0.42           0.43
  ATM            -20.64            -7.97          -20.04           -7.42          0.64           0.52
   ITM            -9.43            -5.61           -8.60           -4.88          0.70           0.62
  Panel B: Standard Deviation (Percent)
  OTM             81.03           46.35            80.37          45.39           1.33           1.77
  ATM             76.83           38.63            75.19          36.93           2.47           2.34
   ITM            48.29           31.69            45.13          29.06           3.66           3.10
  Panel C: Sharpe Ratio
  OTM             -0.46            -0.23           -0.46           -0.23          0.32           0.24
  ATM             -0.27            -0.21           -0.27           -0.20          0.26           0.22
   ITM            -0.20            -0.18           -0.19           -0.17          0.19           0.20


where t is the Black-Scholes-Merton delta. The delta-hedge ensures stock price dynamics
do not drive option return dynamics. The third is the implied bond excess return, the
monthly return to a long implied bond position in excess of the risk-free rate:

                           IB              f     Bt`1 pK, T q ´ Bt pK, T q    f
                          Rt `1 pK, T q ´ Rt "                             ´ Rt                    (10)
                                                        Bt pK, T q

   Table 1 reports the mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio for each of the returns.
As is well known, put options earn negative returns on average, as they are levered, short
positions in the stock. Returns are more negative among longer-maturity, deeper OTM
options. The hedged put option return exhibits properties similar to the unhedged return.
That is, at the monthly horizon, there is little impact of delta hedging on the return.

   In contrast, the excess return on implied bonds is positive and an order of magnitude
smaller than that on put options. Consistent with their bond-like payoff at maturity, implied
bonds behave less like options and more like corporate bonds. OTM implied bonds, which
have low default probability, earn smaller average returns than ITM implied bonds, which
have high default probability. But implied bond volatilities increase with moneyness (Panel
B), and so it turns out that OTM implied bonds have larger Sharpe ratios despite the lower
average returns (Panel C).


                                                    21
4.2.       One-Month Return Predictability

We forecast each one-month excess return with current option-implied quantities as pre-
dictors, pooling all options across strike prices and maturities. For instance, we run the
following regression to predict future put option returns with implied volatility:

                  P ut               f                             1
                 Rt `1 pKi , Ti q ´ Rt " a ` b ^ IVt pKi , Ti q ` c ^ Controlsi,t ` i,t`1


We likewise run the same regression with the implied spread ISt pKi , Ti q and the normalized
implied spread N ISt pKi , Ti q as predictors. We repeat the process for hedged put option
returns and implied bond excess returns. In each of these regressions, we cluster standard
errors by month to correct for the strong cross-sectional correlation among option prices.

Return Predictability Results. Table 2 reports results from pooled predictive regressions.
In Panel A are regressions without controls. First, columns 1 to 3 predict the put option
excess return in (8), the hedged put option return in (9), and the implied bond excess return
in (10) with implied volatility, respectively. Implied volatility predicts neither put option
returns (as is well known) nor implied bond returns. Second, columns 4 to 6 predict returns
with the implied spread. The coefficient on the implied spread is significant for both put
options and implied bonds. But the R2 s are near zero, which suggests the regression power
stems from the large sample size. Finally, columns 7 to 9 predict returns with the normalized
implied spread. Like the implied spread, the normalized implied spread is a significant
predictor of future excess returns. The lone exception is the coefficient for implied bond
returns (column 9), which is only marginally significant.

      In Panel B are regressions with controls. The controls are standard option characteristics:
moneyness, time-to-maturity, and Greeks. Like the previous regressions, implied volatilities
are insignificant and implied spreads are significant for each return. Unlike the previous
regressions, normalized implied spreads are insignificant for put options but significant for
implied bonds.

   In Panel C are the same pooled predictive regressions as in Panel A by moneyness/maturity
bin. First, the predictive power of the implied spread and normalized implied spread con-
centrates among OTM options, which is consistent with the regressions in Panel B. Second,
the coefficient on the implied spread is no longer significant for put option returns but re-
mains significant for OTM and ATM implied bond returns. This reinforces the role of the
large sample size in Panel A. Third, normalized implied spreads predict future implied bond
returns especially well at both short and long horizons.7
  7
      In the appendix, we show that most of the predictive content of normalized implied spreads comes from

                                                     22
                                    Table 2: One-Month Return Predictability
This table reports estimates from pooled regressions of the form

                  Excess Returni,t`1 " a ` b ^ Implied Quantityi,t ` c1 ^ Controlsi,t ` i,t`1

The excess return is either the put option return in excess of the risk-free rate, the put option return in excess
of a delta-hedged position in the S&P 500 index, or the implied bond return in excess of the risk-free rate.
The implied quantity is either the put's implied volatility, implied spread, or normalized implied spread.
Controls are the put's moneyness (Mon), time-to-maturity (Dtm), and Greeks (Gamma, Vega, and Theta).
OTM is moneyness K/S  0.95, ATM is 0.975  K/S  1.025, and ITM is K/S  1.05. Standard errors are
clustered by month. The sample is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.

                            (1)          (2)           (3)    (4)           (5)         (6)    (7)       (8)        (9)

                                  Implied Volatility                   Implied Spread         Normalized Implied Spread
                                      Hedged     Implied                  Hedged    Implied             Hedged    Implied
                            Put        Put        Bond        Put          Put       Bond      Put       Put       Bond

     Panel A: Pooled Regressions without Controls

                  b        -0.42        -0.42      0.03       0.14         0.15      0.01      1.57      1.58      0.04
                   t      (-1.23)      (-1.29)    (1.37)     (2.29)       (2.60)    (2.85)    (4.37)    (4.57)    (1.75)
                  R2        0.00         0.00      0.01       0.00         0.00      0.01      0.01      0.01      0.00
                  N        26460        26460     26460      26460        26460     26460     26460     26460     26460

     Panel B: Pooled Regressions with Controls

                   b        0.14         0.15       0.03       0.19         0.20      0.02      0.07      0.11      0.08
                   t      (0.31)       (0.36)     (1.05)     (2.09)       (2.29)    (2.64)    (0.10)    (0.17)    (1.89)
                 Mon        1.07         1.11       0.03       0.72         0.73      0.00      1.03      1.05      0.02
                   t      (5.57)       (5.98)     (2.14)     (5.26)       (5.45)    (0.11)    (8.06)    (8.41)    (1.85)
                 Dtm        0.10         0.11       0.01       0.15         0.15      0.01      0.11      0.11     -0.00
                   t      (1.49)       (1.60)     (1.82)     (1.64)       (1.77)    (2.45)    (1.51)    (1.59)    (-0.01)
                Gamma      -0.05        -0.05       0.00      -0.04        -0.03      0.00     -0.05     -0.05      0.00
                   t      (-0.77)      (-0.72)    (1.16)     (-0.52)      (-0.46)   (1.33)    (-0.79)   (-0.74)   (1.30)
                 Vega       0.03         0.03      -0.00       0.03         0.03     -0.00      0.02      0.02     -0.00
                   t      (3.26)       (3.32)     (-2.16)    (2.72)       (2.78)    (-1.98)   (2.15)    (2.18)    (-2.26)
                 Theta      0.07         0.07      -0.00       0.07         0.07     -0.01      0.06      0.06     -0.00
                   t      (1.29)       (1.32)     (-1.57)    (1.42)       (1.44)    (-2.02)   (1.22)    (1.24)    (-1.77)
                  R2        0.04         0.04       0.02       0.04         0.04      0.02      0.03      0.04      0.02
                  N        26460        26460      26460      26460        26460     26460     26460     26460     26460

     Panel C: Pooled Regressions by Moneyness and Maturity

      OTM         b         0.25        0.26       0.04       0.59         0.60      0.06      3.24      3.26      0.08
     T  122        t       (0.50)      (0.53)     (2.56)     (0.94)       (0.98)    (2.53)    (3.18)    (3.27)    (2.38)
                  R2        0.00        0.00       0.04       0.00         0.00      0.05      0.01      0.01      0.02
                  N         4452        4452       4452       4452         4452      4452      4452      4452      4452

      ATM         b          0.07       0.08       0.04       -0.20        -0.19     0.04      0.82      0.84      0.08
     T  122        t       (0.14)      (0.16)     (1.34)     (-0.82)      (-0.77)   (2.83)    (0.80)    (0.85)    (1.67)
                  R2        -0.00       -0.00      0.01       0.00          0.00     0.02      0.00      0.00      0.01
                  N         4452        4452       4452       4452         4452      4452      4452      4452      4452

      ITM         b        -0.25        -0.23      0.05       -0.08        -0.07     0.01       0.01     -0.01     0.04
     T  122        t      (-0.60)      (-0.60)    (1.25)     (-1.37)      (-1.35)   (2.50)    (0.01)    (-0.01)   (0.63)
                  R2        0.00         0.00      0.01        0.00         0.00     0.00      -0.00     -0.00     0.00
                  N        4430         4430       4430       4430         4430      4430      4430      4430      4430

      OTM         b        -0.11        -0.10      0.05       -0.30        -0.29     0.09      0.16      0.19      0.07
     T  152        t      (-0.32)      (-0.29)    (2.19)     (-0.49)      (-0.49)   (2.16)    (0.39)    (0.48)    (3.00)
                  R2       -0.00        -0.00      0.03       0.00          0.00     0.03      -0.00     0.00      0.02
                  N        4310         4310       4310       4310         4310      4310      4310      4310      4310

      ATM         b        -0.08        -0.06      0.05       -0.27        -0.26     0.06       0.05      0.07     0.07
     T  152        t      (-0.23)      (-0.20)    (1.60)     (-0.71)      (-0.74)   (1.66)    (0.14)    (0.21)    (2.34)
                  R2       -0.00        -0.00      0.01       0.00          0.00     0.01      -0.00     -0.00     0.01
                  N        4402         4402       4402       4402         4402      4402      4402      4402      4402

      ITM         b        -0.06        -0.05      0.04       -0.22        -0.21     0.03       0.07     0.07      0.06
     T  152        t      (-0.20)      (-0.19)    (1.13)     (-1.39)      (-1.47)   (1.68)    (0.22)    (0.26)    (1.47)
                  R2       -0.00        -0.00      0.01       0.00          0.00     0.00      -0.00     -0.00     0.00
                  N        4414         4414       4414       4414         4414      4414      4414      4414      4414




                                                              23
               Table 3: One-Month Return Predictability: Economic Significance
This table reports the standard deviation of the fitted value (left column) and the ratio of this
standard deviation to the unconditional average return (right column) from regressions of one-
month excess returns on implied spreads by moneyness and time-to-maturity. The corresponding
regressions are in Table 2.

                                                                                 e
                                                                           rEt pRt `1 qs
                                           " ` e 
                                            Et Rt `1                            e
                                                                            E pRt `1 q

                                       Put    Implied Bond          Put     Implied Bond
                    OTM T  122         3.16               0.30     0.09                    0.72
                    OTM T  152         0.96               0.29     0.09                    0.67


    In sum, Table 2 shows that while there is evidence of predictability of implied-bond excess
returns, there is little evidence, if any, of predictability of put option excess returns.

    To drive home the main point, Table 3 shows that the economic significance of the
implied spread is large for implied bonds and small for put options, following the calculation
in Cochrane (2011). For implied bonds, the variation in conditional expected
                                                                           ´ returns¯­ the
                                                          " ` e 
standard deviation of the fitted value in the regression  Et Rt`1 "  p       b ^ ISt ­ is
                                                             ` e 
more than half as large as unconditional expected returns E Rt`1 . In contrast, for put
options, the variation in conditional expected returns is no more than one-tenth as large
as unconditional expected returns. In other words, there is evidence of a substantial time-
varying risk premium for implied bonds but not for put options. Similar calculations hold
for normalized implied spreads (not tabulated).8

Interpreting the Coefficients. Interestingly, the slope coefficient on IV, IS, and NIS are
mostly positive for both put options and implied bonds (the only few exceptions are for
specifications in which the coefficients are not significant). That both slopes are positive
may at first appear puzzling because implied bonds are short put options. In Section 5, we
show that a two-factor option pricing model can in fact generate these signs. In this section,
we develop simple intuition for these slope coefficients via an identity. By definition, the
expected excess return on the implied bond is the weighted average of the expected excess
return on the zero-coupon bond and that on the put option:
       "                     i        "                  i                  "                      i
          IB               f              Z            f                       P ut              f
     Et Rt `1 p K, T q ´ Rt    "   E
                                  t t   Rt`1 p T q ´ Rt    ` p 1 ´  t q E t  Rt`1   p K, T q ´ R t      (11)

implied spreads, not implied default frequencies.
   8
     Campbell and Thompson (2008) quantify the economic significance of predictive regressions via portfolio
choice. If the R2 is large relative to the squared Sharpe ratio, then a mean-variance investor can use the
predictive regression to substantially increase in his single-period portfolio return. For implied bonds, the
proportional increase from observing the current implied spread is at least 48% (not tabulated). In contrast,
for put options, the proportional increase is at most 1% (not tabulated). This is further evidence the
regression R2 s are economically meaningful for implied bonds but not for put options.

                                                     24
where the weight satisfies

                            Zt pT q             1
            t "                           "                " exptISt pK, T qpT ´ tqu  1
                   Zt pT q ´ Pt pK, T q{K   1 ´ ZttppK,T
                                                P
                                                     T qK
                                                         q



This identity is the Merton insight ­ that a corporate bond is economically equivalent to a safe
bond and a put option ­ but in return, not price, units. The positive relation between implied
spreads and implied bonds returns is in fact intuitive. Implied bonds and implied spreads are
analogous to corporate bonds and corporate bond spreads, respectively. The positive relation
follows directly from the strong evidence that corporate bond spreads predict corporate bond
returns (see, for example, Nozawa 2017).

   As the puzzle is in fact the put option slope, we turn (11) on its head
       "                      i         "                     i                  "                  i
          P ut              f               IB              f                        Z            f
    Et Rt  `1  p K, T q ´ Rt    " a  E
                                    t t   Rt`1 p K, T q ´ Rt    ` p 1 ´ a t q Et   Rt`1 p T q ´ Rt      (12)

where the weight now satisfies
                              1               1                                 Ba
                     at "         "                   0              with           0
                            1 ´ t   1 ´ e K,T qpT ´tq
                                         IS t p                                B IS
That is, a put option is equivalent to a short position in an implied bond and a long position
in a risk-free bond. From (12), when implied spreads increase, there are two effects on
expected returns. The direct effect is on the implied bond excess return: higher implied
spreads predict higher implied bond returns from the usual risk premium channel. For a
given weight at , the direct effect implies a negative relation between implied spreads and
put option returns because at  0. The indirect effect is on the weight at ­ the weight is
in fact a function of the current implied spread and so not constant ­ and higher implied
spreads push the weight towards zero. If latter outweighs the former, higher implied spreads
would predict higher (less negative) put option returns. The data in Table 2 and stochastic
volatility, stochastic jump intensity model in Section 5 support this channel.


4.3.    Uncovering Time-Varying Risk Premia: The Joint Return
        Predictability of Put Options and Implied Bonds

The link between put option and implied bond returns in (11) helps assess statistical sig-
nificance of our estimates and thus provides further evidence on the time-varying nature
of option risk premia. In particular, because the implied spread ISt is time-varying in the
data, the weight t " eISt pT ´tq is also time-varying. This implies that some predictability of
either implied bonds, put options, or the risk-free bond must be in the data. In other words,


                                                      25
denoting by RP X the risk premium of asset X , we cannot have the identity

                                   RP IB " t RP Z ` p1 ´ t q RP P ut                                       (13)

with RP IB , RP Z , and RP P ut all independent of ISt , except for knife-edge cases based on
their numerical values. In particular, note that if RP IB and RP P ut were both unpredictable
and independent of ISt , then RP Z would have to strongly depend on the option-implied
spread ISt , which is unlikely on an ex-ante basis and in fact finds little support in the data.

       More specifically, assuming that the risk premium of zero-coupon Treasury bonds does
not depend on the implied spread, then there is no logical null hypothesis in which put options
and implied bonds are both unpredictable.9 Most important, whether implied spreads predict
put option returns or implied bond returns are not separate questions. They are, in fact,
the same question. A null hypothesis in which put options are unpredictable, i.e. RP P ut in
(13) is constant, also specifies that implied bonds are predictable

                                 RPtIB " RP P ut ` t pRP Z ´ RP P ut q

A null hypothesis in which implied bonds are unpredictable, i.e. RP IB in (13) is constant,
also specifies that put options are predictable
                                                        t
                               RPtP ut " RP IB `            pRP IB ´ RP Z q
                                                      1 ´ t
When we evaluate either null, we simultaneously address the joint predictability of put
options and implied bonds, whether we acknowledge it or not.

       We evaluate joint predictability under each null hypothesis by using Monte Carlo simula-
tions. Denote by bP ut and bIB the slope coefficients from predictability regressions of excess
returns of put options and implied bonds, respectively, on implied spreads. We begin with
the null bP ut " 0. Consider the representation of implied spreads, zero-coupon bond returns,
and put option returns:
                    log ISt`1 pK, T q " p  aIS ` p  bIS log ISt pK, T q ` ISt`1
                               Z             Z        Z                     Z                              (14)
                             Rt `1 p T q " a
                                           p      ` b
                                                    p   IS  t p K, T q   `  t`1
                          P ut               P ut     P ut                  P ut
                         Rt `1 p K, T  q " a
                                           p      ` b
                                                    p      IS  t pK, T q `  t`1

We use the sample estimates of p  bIS , p
                                        bZ , and the error covariance matrix. We set p
                                                                                     bP ut to the
zero null. We initialize the system from the unconditional density:
                                          ^            ^     ´ ¯2 
                                               ` IS 2
                           log IS0 ,, N 0,      p     { 1´ p  bIS

   9
    The argument is reminiscent of analogous argument for stock returns and dividend growth based on the
Campbell and Shiller decomposition. If both stock returns and dividend growth are unpredictable, then the
price-dividend ratio is constant. Since it is not, there is no logical null hypothesis in which stock returns and
dividend growth are both unpredictable. See Cochrane (2008) for more details.

                                                       26
               Table 4: Joint Put Option and Implied Bond Return Predictability
The table summarizes the joint distribution of slope coefficients and t-statistics from regressions
of one-month put option excess returns and one-month implied bond excess returns on implied
spreads in Monte Carlo simulations under the null that put option returns are unpredictable (left
column) and the null that implied bond returns are unpredictable (right column). The percentage
is the fraction of 10,000 simulations with estimates at least as extreme as the sample estimates by
moneyness and time-to-maturity. The corresponding regressions are in Table 2.

                                              H0 : bP ut " 0       H0 : bIB " 0
                                              Slope    t-stat     Slope    t-stat
                           OTM T  122          3.35     8.96        0.00     0.01
                           OTM T  152         28.37    36.33        0.03     2.93


We then draw the shocks IS     Z       P ut
                           t , t , and t    from a multivariate normal distribution and
simulate the system forward. We derive the implied bond return via the identity in (11).
We produce 10,000 artificial datasets of length T " 371 months. In each artificial dataset,
we run pooled predictive regressions as in Table 2 by moneyness/maturity bin.

       The first null is that put option returns are unpredictable bP ut " 0. Under this null,
implied bond returns are predictable. To evaluate the null, we examine the joint distribution
of put option and implied bond coefficients and t-statistics. The left side of Table 4 reports
the simulation results. The simulation produces coefficients at least as large as the sample
estimates 3% (for short-term options) to 30% (for long-term options) of the time and t-
statistics at least 9% of the time. At conventional significance levels, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that bP is zero and bIB is not.

       The second null is that implied bond returns are unpredictable bIB " 0. Under this
null, put option returns are predictable. The simulation is analogous to that in (14), but we
replace put options with implied bonds in the system and derive the put option return via
the identity in (12). The right side of Table 4 reports the simulation results. The simulation
produces coefficients at least as large as the sample estimates less than 1% of the time and
t-statistics nearly 0%. At conventional significance levels, we can reject the hypothesis that
bIB is zero and bP ut is not.

       In sum, the joint distribution of put option and implied bond estimates under each null
strengthens our results. The failure to reject the null bP ut " 0 reinforces implied bond returns
are predictable. The rejection of the null bIB " 0 reinforces our argument that put option
returns are unpredictable.10
  10
    The evidence that implied spreads predict implied bond returns is subject to the usual statistical biases
in predictive regressions. Our sample is relatively short and our predictors extremely persistent. Thus, we


                                                      27
4.4.     Long-Horizon Return Predictability

Slow-moving risk premia are easier to detect by running long-horizon return predictability
regressions. We begin with implied bonds and then turn to put options.

Implied Bonds. We forecast long-horizon excess returns with current option-implied quan-
tities as predictors by moneyness/maturity bin. For OTM and ATM options with quarterly
maturities, we run the following regression to predict future implied bond returns
                   H
                   ÿ                              f
                            `     IB
                                                               1
                         log 1 ` Rt `i pM, H q ´ rt´1`i " a ` b Xt pM, H q ` t`i
                   i"1

where the left-hand side is the monthly excess return from t ` i ´ 1 to t ` i of an implied
bond with moneyness M " K {S and time-to-maturity H , and the right-hand side predictor
is either the implied volatility IV, implied spread IS, or normalized implied spread NIS of
the corresponding put option. In other words, the regressions hold constant the money-
ness/maturity of the left-hand side portfolio over the horizon.

    Table 5 reports results from long-horizon predictive regressions. In Panel A are univariate
regressions. With large t-statistics and high R2 s, both implied spreads and normalized
implied spreads strongly predict future implied bond returns. However, as implied default
intensities are noisy, normalized implied spreads display lower R2 s than implied spreads but
remain significant. Relative to either implied spreads or normalized implied spreads, implied
volatilities are less effective predictors, especially among long-horizon, ATM options.

    In Panel B are multivariate regressions. On the one hand, implied spreads always subsume
any predictive content from implied volatilities. On the other hand, normalized implied
spreads only sometimes subsume implied volatilities. As before, normalized implied spreads
contain measurement error, which may diminish their predictive power.

    That the Financial Crisis drives the predictability in Table 5 is a source of concern.
To address this, we run the same long-horizon regressions in subsamples: January 1990 to
June 2005 and July 2005 to December 2020. We report these regressions in the appendix.
The coefficients are similar in each sample. In the earlier sample, some coefficients are
insignificant due to the lack of power, but the magnitudes are largely consistent with those
in the full sample.

Put Options. That implied spreads predict implied bond returns may not be surprising
given similar results for corporate bond spreads and corporate bond returns. But the pre-
have a textbook case of Stambaugh bias. However, the estimate of bIB in simulated data accounts for small
sample bias, and so the simulations provide further empirical support to implied bond return predictability.

                                                    28
                         Table 5: Long-Horizon Implied Bond Return Predictability
This table reports estimates from predictive regressions of the form
                                   H
                                   ÿ        `     IB
                                                                  f            1
                                         log 1 ` Rt `i pM, H q ´ rt´1`i " a ` b Xt pM, H q ` t`i
                                   i"1

 f                                                                   IB
rt´1`i is the continuously compounded risk-free rate at t ´ 1 ` i. Rt`i pM, H q is the monthly return from
t ` i ´ 1 to t ` i of an implied bond with moneyness M " K {S and time-to-maturity H . Xt pM, H q is
either the implied volatility IV, implied spread IS, or normalized implied spread NIS of a put option with
moneyness M and time-to-maturity H . Test statistics are calculated with the Hansen and Hodrick standard
error correction for overlapping data. The sample is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.

 Panel A: Univariate Regressions

                        Implied Volatility                              Implied Spread                       Normalized Implied Spread
                        Horizon (Months)                               Horizon (Months)                             Horizon (Months)
 K/S            3          6       9            12              3         6      9           12              3         6      9          12

 0.900   b     0.13       0.27        0.37     0.41            0.19     0.51      0.81      1.02            0.31      0.45     0.48     0.49
          t   (3.73)     (5.24)      (4.19)   (4.12)          (2.31)   (3.89)    (4.37)    (5.58)          (4.94)    (4.90)   (3.66)   (2.95)
         R2    0.15       0.19        0.17     0.15            0.13     0.19      0.19      0.19            0.12      0.15     0.11     0.09
         N     366        348         322      294             366      348       322       294             366       348      322      294

 0.950   b     0.14       0.27        0.35     0.42            0.17     0.46      0.67      0.98            0.39      0.49     0.52     0.57
          t   (2.67)     (3.38)      (3.02)   (2.99)          (2.11)   (3.56)    (3.39)    (4.01)          (3.86)    (4.19)   (3.34)   (2.98)
         R2    0.09       0.11        0.10     0.10            0.08     0.12      0.10      0.12            0.09      0.10     0.09     0.08
         N     366        360         351      343             366      360       351       343             366       360      351      343

 0.975   b     0.14       0.26        0.33     0.39            0.19     0.45      0.75      0.98            0.41      0.46     0.52     0.56
          t   (2.28)     (2.97)      (2.48)   (2.41)          (2.44)   (3.16)    (3.42)    (3.62)          (3.47)    (3.26)   (2.75)   (2.68)
         R2    0.07       0.08        0.07     0.07            0.08     0.10      0.11      0.11            0.07      0.07     0.07     0.07
         N     366        360         354      348             366      360       354       348             366       360      354      348

 1.000   b     0.14       0.24        0.32     0.37            0.15     0.41      0.72      0.94            0.32      0.50     0.55     0.60
          t   (1.78)     (2.14)      (2.06)   (2.02)          (1.72)   (2.94)    (2.83)    (3.42)          (2.15)    (2.93)   (2.62)   (2.70)
         R2    0.04       0.05        0.06     0.05            0.04     0.08      0.09      0.09            0.03      0.06     0.06     0.06
         N     366        366         354      348             366      366       354       348             366       366      354      348

 Panel B: Multivariate Regressions

                            IS and IV                                       NIS and IV                                 IS and NIS
                        Horizon (Months)                               Horizon (Months)                             Horizon (Months)
 K/S            3          6       9            12              3         6      9           12              3         6      9          12

 0.900   IS    0.02       0.33        0.67     1.31     NIS    0.08     0.12      -0.00     -0.08     IS    0.13      0.41     0.79     1.24
          t   (0.13)     (1.01)      (2.05)   (2.86)     t    (1.10)   (0.89)    (-0.01)   (-0.32)     t   (0.99)    (1.86)   (3.03)   (5.05)
         IV    0.12       0.11        0.07     -0.15    IV     0.11     0.22      0.37      0.46     NIS    0.15      0.14     0.02     -0.20
          t   (1.46)     (0.89)      (0.60)   (-0.64)    t    (2.09)   (2.46)    (2.48)    (2.78)      t   (1.20)    (0.95)   (0.18)   (-0.80)
         R2    0.15       0.20        0.19      0.19    R2     0.15     0.19      0.17       0.15    R2     0.14      0.20     0.19     0.20
         N     366        348         322       294      N     366      348        322       294      N     366       348      322       294

 0.950   IS    -0.05      0.43        0.43      1.12    NIS    0.20     0.19      0.19      0.15      IS    0.07      0.35     0.47     0.93
          t   (-0.26)    (1.53)      (1.23)   (1.48)     t    (1.27)   (0.83)    (0.68)    (0.46)      t   (0.54)    (1.61)   (1.82)   (3.72)
         IV    0.18       0.02        0.14     -0.08    IV     0.08     0.19      0.25      0.34     NIS    0.26      0.17     0.22     0.05
          t   (1.85)     (0.11)      (0.66)   (-0.20)    t    (0.92)   (1.21)    (1.08)    (1.25)      t   (1.51)    (0.93)   (1.44)   (0.30)
         R2     0.09      0.12        0.10      0.12    R2     0.09     0.11      0.10      0.10     R2     0.09      0.12     0.10     0.12
         N      366       360         351       343      N     366      360       351       343       N     366       360      351      343

 0.975   IS    0.28        0.47       1.18      1.49    NIS    0.27     0.13      0.24      0.27     IS     0.12      0.38     0.69      0.99
          t   (2.37)     (1.67)     (2.34)    (1.87)     t    (1.48)   (0.58)    (0.76)    (0.70)     t    (1.06)    (1.87)   (2.76)   (3.45)
         IV    -0.08      -0.01      -0.25     -0.28    IV     0.06     0.20      0.21      0.23     NIS    0.20      0.10     0.06     -0.01
          t   (-0.92)    (-0.09)    (-0.91)   (-0.68)    t    (0.61)   (1.36)    (0.83)    (0.76)     t    (1.34)    (0.52)   (0.36)   (-0.04)
         R2     0.08       0.09       0.11      0.11    R2     0.07     0.08      0.08      0.07     R2     0.08      0.10     0.11      0.11
         N      366        360        354       348      N     366      360       354       348       N     366       360      354       348

 1.000   IS    0.07        0.54       0.89      1.25    NIS    0.13     0.34      0.36      0.45     IS     0.11      0.31     0.60     0.86
          t   (0.55)     (3.54)     (1.97)    (1.72)     t    (0.83)   (1.45)    (1.05)    (1.08)     t    (1.05)    (1.94)   (1.80)   (2.54)
         IV    0.08       -0.10      -0.11     -0.18    IV     0.10     0.11      0.16      0.13     NIS    0.14      0.19     0.14     0.08
          t   (0.75)     (-0.73)    (-0.42)   (-0.46)    t    (1.07)   (0.67)    (0.61)    (0.38)     t    (0.96)    (1.04)   (0.63)   (0.33)
         R2    0.04        0.08       0.08      0.10    R2     0.04     0.06      0.07      0.06     R2     0.04      0.08     0.09     0.09
         N     366         366        354       348      N     366      366       354       348       N     366       366      354      348




                                                                       29
dictability of implied bonds stands in stark contrast to that of put options. Table 6 reports
long-horizon regressions for put option returns, as in Table 5 for implied bond returns. Nei-
ther IV (as is well known), IS, nor NIS predict future put option returns. No coefficient
is significant, and the coefficient signs are not consistent across strike prices or horizons.
Therefore, put option returns are not predictable.

       In a recent paper, Israelov and Kelly (2017) propose an elaborate Monte Carlo simulation
to forecast the distribution of option returns. Their methodology successfully predicts very
short-horizon option returns (at the one-day, one-week, and two-week horizons).11 But long-
horizon option return predictability is difficult, if not impossible, to pull off.

       The dichotomy between strong implied bond return predictability in Table 5 and weak
put option return predictability in Table 6 is intriguing. We next turn to two dynamic option
pricing models to rationalize these results.



5.        Risk Premia in Dynamic Option Pricing Models

In this section, we build a model that rationalizes the empirical patterns we documented
in the previous sections. Section 2.4 examines option-implied spreads in log-normal and
jump diffusion models. It is difficult, however, to assess return predictability in these models
because neither has a dynamic state variable. This section instead considers two dynamic
models: the first is a model with stochastic volatility and jumps and the second is a model
where jumps also arrive with stochastic intensity.


5.1.       Stochastic Volatility Jump Model (SVJ)

Dynamics. We begin with the simpler, stochastic volatility jump (SVJ) model to discuss its
virtues and its shortcomings. The SVJ model is a standard, one-factor model. Specifically,
the stock return follows a jump-diffusion process and volatility follows a square-root process
                                                            ?
                 dSt {St " rµS ´  ´ E pJS ´ 1qs dt `            vt dWS,t ` pJS ´ 1qdQt             (15)
                                            ?
                     dvt " v pv ´ vt qdt ` v vt dWv,t                                              (16)

where  " E rWS,t Wv,t s is the correlation between return and volatility shocks, JS , a random
                                `                        
variable with logp1 ` JS q ,, N logp1 ` µJ q ´ 1
                                               2
                                                  2
                                                  J , J
                                                       2
                                                          , determines the stochastic jump size,
  11
   Because conventional returns on deep OTM options are often extreme, Israelov and Kelly predict delta-
hedged option returns relative to the initial underlying stock price, not the initial option price.

                                                  30
                           Table 6: Long-Horizon Put Option Return Predictability
This table reports estimates from predictive regressions of the form
                                  H
                                  ÿ        `     P ut
                                                                 f            1
                                        log 1 ` Rt `i pM, H q ´ rt´1`i " a ` b Xt pM, H q ` t`i
                                  i"1

  f                                                                  P ut
rt ´1`i is the continuously compounded risk-free rate at t ´ 1 ` i. Rt`i pM, H q is the monthly return from
t ` i ´ 1 to t ` i of a put option with moneyness M " K {S and time-to-maturity H . Xt pM, H q is either the
implied volatility IV, implied spread IS, or normalized implied spread NIS of a put option with moneyness
M and time-to-maturity H . Test statistics are calculated with the Hansen and Hodrick standard error
correction for overlapping data. The sample is monthly from January 1990 to December 2020.

Panel A: Univariate Regressions

                       Implied Volatility                               Implied Spread                         Normalized Implied Spread
                       Horizon (Months)                                Horizon (Months)                               Horizon (Months)
 K/S           3          6       9            12              3          6       9           12              3          6       9           12

0.900   b     -0.45      -0.29      -0.77     -0.78           -0.29      -1.85     -3.11     -3.66            2.73      0.46      0.32      1.04
         t   (-0.27)    (-0.19)    (-0.42)   (-0.37)         (-0.10)    (-0.54)   (-0.82)   (-0.75)         (0.80)     (0.18)    (0.13)    (0.31)
        R2    -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00           -0.00      -0.00     0.00       0.00           -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
        N      366        348        322       294             366        348       322       294             366        348       322       294

0.950   b     -0.54      -0.27      -0.24     -0.35           -0.20      -1.09     -0.42     -2.65            0.51      -0.15     -0.68     -0.78
         t   (-0.31)    (-0.18)    (-0.12)   (-0.17)         (-0.09)    (-0.43)   (-0.11)   (-0.61)         (0.14)     (-0.06)   (-0.27)   (-0.29)
        R2    -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00           -0.00      -0.00     -0.00      0.00           -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
        N      366        360        351       343             366        360       351       343             366        360       351       343

0.975   b     -0.26      -0.37      0.11      -0.32           -0.64      -1.17     -1.88     -3.48           -0.46      -0.13     -0.52     -0.96
         t   (-0.16)    (-0.23)    (0.06)    (-0.15)         (-0.33)    (-0.46)   (-0.53)   (-0.80)         (-0.14)    (-0.05)   (-0.20)   (-0.33)
        R2    -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00           -0.00      -0.00     0.00       0.01           -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
        N      366        360        354       348             366        360       354       348             366        360       354       348

1.000   b     -0.89      -0.16      0.03      -0.10           -0.77      -1.47     -1.75     -3.25           -0.65      -1.12     -1.24     -1.31
         t   (-0.54)    (-0.10)    (0.02)    (-0.05)         (-0.41)    (-0.70)   (-0.49)   (-0.83)         (-0.19)    (-0.43)   (-0.47)   (-0.45)
        R2    -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00           -0.00       0.00     0.00       0.01           -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
        N      366        366        354       348             366        366       354       348             366        366       354       348

Panel B: Multivariate Regressions

                          IS and IV                                       NIS and IV                                     IS and NIS
                       Horizon (Months)                                Horizon (Months)                               Horizon (Months)
 K/S           3          6       9            12              3          6       9           12              3          6       9           12

0.900   IS     2.09      -8.23     -10.71    -14.14    NIS    10.31       2.60      3.79      5.99     IS    -3.42      -5.13     -7.87    -12.36
         t   (0.30)     (-1.04)    (-1.72)   (-1.41)    t    (2.10)     (0.53)    (0.83)    (0.98)      t   (-0.78)    (-0.91)   (-1.64)   (-2.03)
        IV    -1.72       3.70       3.97     5.27     IV     -3.58      -1.39     -2.68     -3.97    NIS    7.26       4.38       4.87     7.89
         t   (-0.45)    (1.15)     (1.52)    (1.41)     t    (-1.45)    (-0.48)   (-0.82)   (-1.09)     t   (1.63)     (1.03)    (1.68)    (1.70)
        R2    -0.00       0.00      0.01       0.01    R2      0.01      -0.00      0.00      0.01    R2      0.00      0.00       0.01      0.03
        N      366        348        322       294      N      366        348       322       294      N      366        348       322       294

0.950   IS     5.43      -6.93      -0.04    -12.84    NIS     6.09       1.03     -1.27     -1.20     IS    -1.12      -2.60      0.48     -4.80
         t   (1.05)     (-1.03)    (-0.00)   (-0.88)    t    (0.94)     (0.19)    (-0.23)   (-0.20)     t   (-0.28)    (-0.61)   (0.09)    (-0.84)
        IV    -4.70       3.78      -0.22      5.35    IV     -2.40      -0.73      0.45     0.34     NIS    2.51        2.27     -0.98     1.94
         t   (-1.46)    (0.91)     (-0.05)   (0.78)     t    (-0.76)    (-0.23)   (0.10)    (0.07)      t   (0.42)     (0.54)    (-0.31)   (0.58)
        R2    -0.00       0.00      -0.01      0.01    R2     -0.00      -0.01     -0.01     -0.01    R2     -0.00      -0.00     -0.01     0.00
        N      366        360        351       343      N      366        360       351       343      N      366        360       351       343

0.975   IS    -4.69      -5.53     -14.05    -16.71    NIS     0.36       1.48     -2.14     -1.95    IS     -1.31      -2.82     -3.49     -6.65
         t   (-1.25)    (-0.95)    (-1.53)   (-1.25)    t    (0.07)     (0.30)    (-0.38)   (-0.31)    t    (-0.47)    (-0.75)   (-0.78)   (-1.29)
        IV     3.55       2.87       7.09     7.10     IV     -0.37      -0.99      1.24      0.79    NIS     1.91       2.56     1.78       2.90
         t   (1.10)     (0.83)     (1.44)    (1.11)     t    (-0.14)    (-0.34)   (0.30)    (0.17)     t    (0.43)     (0.70)    (0.61)    (0.86)
        R2    -0.00      -0.00      0.02       0.03    R2     -0.01      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00    R2     -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     0.01
        N      366        360        354       348      N      366        360       354       348      N      366        360       354       348

1.000   IS     1.56      -5.99      -7.97    -11.82    NIS     2.32      -2.07     -3.04     -3.40     IS    -1.18      -1.77     -1.66     -5.03
         t   (0.44)     (-1.97)    (-1.08)   (-1.18)    t    (0.56)     (-0.49)   (-0.59)   (-0.59)     t   (-0.53)    (-0.68)   (-0.34)   (-1.22)
        IV    -2.18       3.61       3.83     5.15     IV     -1.53       0.64      1.42      1.72    NIS     1.31       0.60     -0.10      1.76
         t   (-0.72)    (1.59)     (1.02)    (0.98)     t    (-0.73)    (0.26)    (0.41)    (0.40)      t   (0.37)     (0.19)    (-0.03)   (0.58)
        R2    -0.00       0.01      0.01       0.02    R2     -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00    R2     -0.00      -0.00     -0.00      0.00
        N      366        366        354       348      N      366        366       354       348      N      366        366       354       348




                                                                       31
                              Table 7: SVJ Parameter Estimates
The table reports parameter estimates for the SVJ model from Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes
(2009) and Chambers, Foy, Liebner, and Lu (2014).

            r              µS      P       µPJ           JP     P        P       v        ´
         3.70%   2.00%   5.83%    1.29   -1.22%        8.94%   2.192   0.0171   0.258   -0.760
                                   Q       µQJ           JQ
                                                                 v
                                  1.29   -1.22%        8.94%     0


and dQt , the increment of a Poisson process with constant intensity , determines jump
arrivals. We relax the assumption of constant intensity when we turn to the stochastic
intensity model next.

   The state price density Mt follows the process
                                                         ?
      dMt {Mt " r´r ´ E pJM ´ 1qs dt ´ M,S pvt qdWS,t ´ v vt dWv,t ` pJM ´ 1q dQt
          ?
where v vt is the market price of volatility risk. Standard arguments imply that the risk
premium of any security V pS, v, tq is
      ,,                                    ^                          ^         
         dVt                          dif f   dVt dMt             jump   dVt dMt
   Et         {dt ´ rt " µV,t " ´Cov             ,      {dt ´ Cov           ,     {dt (17)
         Vt                                   Vt Mt                      Vt Mt
                                 V          V
                              " S  µS ` v     v v vt ´ Et rpJV ´ 1q pJM ´ 1qs         (18)
              log V                                              ?
where SV
         "B B log S
                     is the loading on stock risk, µS " M,S pvt q vt is the stock risk premium,
and vV
        " B log
             Bv
                V
                    is the loading on volatility risk. As in Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes
(2009) we assume µS constant and independent of stock volatility.

   Table 7 reports baseline parameter estimates from Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes
(2009) and Chambers, Foy, Liebner, and Lu (2014) with one exception. These papers esti-
mate the model with futures options and set the dividend yield  to the risk-free rate. Since
we are interested in predictions for the spot market, we set  " 2%.

Monte Carlo Simulations. Figure 10 plots the relation between option-implied quantities
and risk premia from Monte Carlo simulations of the SVJ model. We simulate the model
under the physical measure P and price options under the risk-neutral measure Q.

    Consider first the put options on the left panels of Figure 10. There is a positive associa-
tion between implied volatilities (top panel), implied spreads (middle panel), and normalized
implied spreads (bottom panel) and put risk premia. The main reason is the well-known
                              V           B log V
fact that the put option beta S,t "       B log S
                                                  ,   which is negative, becomes less negative for
higher volatility vt . Intuitively, a high volatility of stock returns decreases the impact of the

                                                  32
                                                 Figure 10: Expected Excess Returns in SVJ
This figure plots one-month expected excess returns on put options (left column) and implied bonds
(right column) by implied volatilities (top row), implied spreads (middle row), and normalized
implied spreads (bottom row) from Monte Carlo simulations of the SVJ model. Options have 365
days-to-maturity.

                                   A. Put Excess Return                                                           B. Implied Bond Excess Return
          -1
                                                                                              0.25
          -2
Percent




                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                               0.2
          -3
                                                                                              0.15
          -4
                       10         20        30         40            50                                      10         20        30         40        50
                             Implied Volatility (Percent)                                                           Implied Volatility (Percent)
                                C. Put Excess Return                                                              D. Implied Bond Excess Return
          -1
                                                                                              0.25
          -2
Percent




                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                               0.2
          -3
                                                                                              0.15
          -4
                   0         5         10        15         20            25                             0          5        10        15         20        25
                               Implied Spread (Percent)                                                               Implied Spread (Percent)
                                 D. Put Excess Return                                                             E. Implied Bond Excess Return
          -1
                                                                                              0.25
          -2
Percent




                                                                                    Percent




                                                                 K/S = 0.94
                                                                                               0.2
          -3                                                     K/S = 1
                                                                 K/S = 1.06                   0.15
          -4
               5             10          15           20            25                               5             10         15            20         25
                        Normalized Implied Spread (Percent)                                                   Normalized Implied Spread (Percent)


current stock price on the value of the option, as a high volatility makes it similarly likely
for the stock to end up in-the-money at maturity for similarly situated stock prices. We
note that in Table 7 the market price of volatility risk v " 0 as in Broadie, Chernov, and
Johannes (2009) and Chambers, Foy, Liebner, and Lu (2014). A large negative value of v
                                         V
can potentially overturn this result, as v,t " B log
                                                  Bv
                                                     V
                                                        0. However, only a knife-edge value
would make the pattern flat, as suggested by the lack of predictability of option returns
documented in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 (see the appendix for robustness checks with respect to
the market prices of risk).

           We next examine implied bonds on the right of Figure 10. Even in this case, we find a
positive association between implied volatilities, implied spreads, normalized implied spreads
and implied bond risk premia. The positive slope is smaller for ATM and ITM bonds. That
is, the SVJ model is qualitatively consistent with implied bond return predictability in the
data. Economically, the risk premium of implied bonds can be written as

                                                                  µB,t " t µZ ` p1 ´ t q µP,t


                                                                               33
                                                                      ?
where t " p1 ´ Pt pK, T q{Zt pT qq´1  1 is increasing in volatility       vt , µZ is the risk premium
on the zero-coupon bond, and µP,t is the risk premium on the put option (see discussion in
                                                     ?
Section 4.2). On the one hand, higher volatility vt implies a less negative µP,t , which
                                                                   ?
decreases µB,t for a given t . On the other hand, higher volatility vt increases t and hence
decreases the weight on µP,t  0 and gives more weight to µZ,t  0. Under the parameters
in Table 7 the second channel dominates. Note that a negative market price of volatility
                                                                           V           B log V
risk v in this case would reinforce the predictability of bond returns, as v,t "          Bv
                                                                                                  0 for
implied bonds.

    In sum, the SVJ model is consistent with the predictability of implied bond returns, but
it also implies predictability of option returns. As is well known for IV and as we show for
IS/NIS, this relation is not in the data. As evidence, none of the put option coefficients in
binned regressions (Panel C of Table 2) or long-horizon regressions (Panel A of Table 6) are
significant. Neither IV, IS, nor NIS predicts put option returns. Although the relation may
be nonlinear ­ some coefficients are significant in multivariate regressions (Panel B of Table
2) ­ put option risk premia are generally not in line with the simple SVJ model.


5.2.    Stochastic Volatility, Stochastic Jump Intensity Model (SVSIJ)

The counterfactual predictions of the SVJ model suggest a two-factor model to rationalize
theory with data. In particular, the model needs to simultaneously generate predictable
implied bond returns and unpredictable put option returns. We examine here a two-factor,
stochastic volatility, stochastic jump intensity model (SVSIJ).

Dynamics. Under SVSIJ, the stock price, volatility, and jump intensity follow the processes
                    ,,                               
                                1                          ?
         d log St " µS ´  ´ vt ´ t E pJS ´ 1q dt ` vt dWS,t ` JS dQ          t
                                                                               t
                                                                                       (19)
                                2
                                        ?
              dvt " kv pv ´ vt q dt ` v vt dWv,t                                       (20)
                                         a
             dt " k p ´ t q dt `  t dW,t                                               (21)

where  " E rWS,t Wv,t s is the correlation between return and volatility shocks, JS , a random
variable with JS ,, N pµJ , J2
                               q, determines the stochastic jump size, and dQt , the increment
                                                                              t


of a Poisson process with intensity t , determines jump arrivals.

    Like SVJ, there is stochastic volatility (20) and jumps in returns. But unlike SVJ, jumps
arrive with stochastic intensity (21). In particular, volatility and intensity follow independent
stochastic processes as E rWS,t W,t s " E rWv,t W,t s " 0. In contrast, many (but not all)
existing models with stochastic intensity parametrize intensity as a deterministic function of

                                               34
                                  Table 8: SVSIJ Parameter Estimates
This table reports parameter estimates for the SVSIJ model.

            r                   µS      µPJ      JP      v        v          v        v        
         3.70%     2.00%      5.83%   -4.01%   8.94%    1.540   0.0192     0.2433   -3.79   -0.8510
                                        µQJ      JQ
                                                                                      
                                      -6.58%   8.94%    1.562   0.3412     0.3620   -2.01


volatility. In other words, our model is indeed a two-factor model and not simply a one-factor
model with stochastic volatilities, jumps, and stochastic jump intensities.

   The state price density Mt follows the process
                                                   ?         a
dMt {Mt " r´r ´ t E pJM ´ 1qs dt ´ M,S dWS,t ´ v vt dWv,t ´  t dW,t ` pJM ´ 1q dQ      t
                                                                                         t


        ?                                             ?
where v vt is the market price of volatility risk and  t is that of intensity risk. Then
the risk premium of any security V pS, v, , tq is
     ,,                                    ^                           ^         
        dVt                          dif f   dVt dMt              jump   dVt dMt
  Et         {dt ´ rt " µV,t " ´Cov             ,       {dt ´ Cov           ,     {dt  (22)
        Vt                                   Vt Mt                       Vt Mt
                                V          V          V
                             " S  µS ` v     v v vt `     t ´ t Et rpJV ´ 1q pJM ´ 1qs (23)
      V          B log V                                 V      B log V                       V       B log V
where S "        B log S
                           is the loading on stock risk, v "       Bv
                                                                          on volatility risk,   "        B
on intensity risk. Although both volatility and intensity increase IV, IS, and NIS, they may
have opposite effects on put option risk premia. If put risk premia increase with volatility (as
in SVJ) but decrease with intensity, then put option returns may not be predictable under
SVSIJ.

   Table 8 reports parameter estimates for the SVSIJ model. We estimate parameters via
maximum likelihood (estimation) subject to a return predictability constraint (calibration).
The constraint incorporates implied bond and put option return predictability (moment
conditions) into the estimation in the spirit of indirect inference (Gourieroux, Monfort, and
Renault 1993) and simulated method of moments (Duffie and Singleton 1993). We relegate
further discussion of the estimation, calibration, and parameters to the appendix (see Figures
D2 to D4 and Tables D6 to D7) and focus on return predictability in this section. We begin
with the qualitative predictions from Monte Carlo simulations and then turn to quantitative
predictions from simulated data.

Monte Carlo Simulations. Figure 11 plots option-implied spreads and risk premia by
volatility and intensity from Monte Carlo simulations of the SVSIJ model. As before with
SVJ, we simulate the model under the physical measure P and price options under the risk-
neutral measure Q. To evaluate the predictions of the SVSIJ model, we examine a single

                                                   35
                           Figure 11: Expected Excess Returns by Volatility/Intensity in SVSIJ
This figure plots implied spreads (Panel A), normalized implied spreads (Panel B), one-month
expected excess returns on put options (Panel C), and one-month expected excess returns on
implied bonds (Panel D) by volatility and intensity from Monte Carlo simulations of the SVSIJ
model. Options are out-of-the-money with 365 days-to-maturity.
                               A. Implied Spread                                                      B. Normalized Implied Spread


              10                                                                           20
    Percent




                                                                                 Percent
               5                                                                           15


               0                                                                           10
               2                                                                            2
                                                                  40                                                                          40
                           1                         20                                                  1                       20
                                    0   0                                                                        0   0
                   Intensity                        Volatility (Percent)                         Intensity                      Volatility (Percent)
                               C. Put Risk Premia                                                      D. Implied Bond Risk Premia



              -6                                                                           0.5
Percent




          -6.5                                                                  Percent
              -7
                                                                                             0
               2                                                                             2
                                                                  40                                                                          40
                           1                         20                                                  1                       20
                                    0   0                                                                        0   0
                   Intensity                        Volatility (Percent)                         Intensity                      Volatility (Percent)


OTM option with 365 days-to-maturity. We show all predictions hold for shorter-maturity
options in the appendix.

              In Panel A are implied spreads, Panel B normalized implied spreads, and Panel D implied
bond risk premia. Each increases with volatility and intensity. Implied spreads increase
because put option prices rise. Normalized implied spreads rise because the increase in
implied spreads outweighs that of implied default intensities. Implied bond risk premia
increase because default probabilities rise and default carries a risk premium. As spreads
and risk premia move together, IS and NIS unsurprisingly predict implied bond returns.

              In Panel C are put option risk premia. As with SVJ in Figure 10, put option risk premia
increase with volatility. But Panel C shows that risk premia decrease with intensity at low
volatilities and are flat at high volatilities. The intuition is that put options hedge stock
market jumps. As the last term t Et rpJV ´ 1q pJM ´ 1qs in (23) is positive, these hedging
services command a negative risk premium. As the jump intensity t increases, the hedge
becomes more valuable, the hedge risk premium becomes more negative, and so the total risk
premium decreases. The estimated mean jump size is sufficiently negative and the market
price of intensity risk  is sufficiently small that the decrease in the hedge risk premium


                                                                           36
                     Table 9: One-Month Return Predictability in SVSIJ
This table reports estimates from predictive regressions of one-month put option excess returns and
one-month implied bond excess returns on implied spreads (left column) and normalized implied
spreads (right column) in simulations of the SVSIJ model. The standalone value is the approximate
population value in a single, long sample. The brackets contain the 5th and 95th percentile from
100,000 samples of 371 months. Options are out-of-the-money with 365 days-to-maturity. Table 2
reports analogous regressions in the data.

                            Implied Spread                Normalized Implied Spread
                         Put         Implied Bond             Put         Implied Bond
                 b       0.02             0.06                 0.02            0.04
                     [-0.08, 0.11]    [0.03, 0.10]        [-1.38, 1.39]    [0.02, 0.07]
                R2        0.00            0.03                 0.00            0.02
                     [-0.00, 0.01]    [0.00, 0.06]        [-0.00, 0.01]    [0.00, 0.05]

                                                                     V
overpowers any potential increase in the diffusive intensity premium     t . As spreads
and risk premia do not necessarily move together, IS and NIS ­ and IV, although not shown
­ may not predict put option returns.

Simulated Data. To quantitatively validate the SVSIJ model, Table 9 reports results from
predictive regressions in simulated data. The standalone value is the population value from
a single long sample. The brackets contain the 5th and 95th percentiles from many short
samples. We again relegate details to the appendix and focus on return predictability in this
section.

   First, on the left are regressions with implied spreads. While the slope for implied bond
returns is positive in small samples, the slope is smaller than that in the data (0.15, not
tabulated). In contrast, the slope for put option returns is not significant in small samples,
as in the data. Second, on the right are regressions with normalized implied spreads. Again,
the implied bond slope is significant in small samples, but the put option slope is not. Third,
the R2 s for implied bonds dwarf those of put options. But the 5th percentile in regressions of
implied bond returns on normalized implied spreads is 0%, which is again smaller than that
in the data (2%, not tabulated). While the quantitative differences in moments is evidence
of either imprecise regression estimates or model misspecification, the simulated data are
generally consistent with the data.

   In short, a two-factor SVSIJ model matches the predictability of implied bond returns
and the lack of predictability of put option returns as evident in the data. Under SVSIJ,
volatility and intensity have opposite effects on put option risk premia, and so put option
returns are not predictable.


                                                     37
     Of course, we are not the first to propose a two-factor model with time-varying volatility
and time-varying jump intensity for derivatives pricing. In the context of index options,
Santa-Clara and Yan (2010) and Christoffersen, Jacobs, and Ornthanalai (2012) show that
a two-factor model outperforms (in terms of fit) a standard one-factor model. In the context
of singlename credit default swaps, Kelly, Manzo, and Palhares (2019) show that the cross-
sectional dynamics of spreads across firms and maturities requires a two-factor model. Our
contribution is to show that time-varying jump intensity resolves the shortcomings of the SVJ
model in explaining the puzzling dynamics of option risk premia. In sum, implied spreads
(or implied volatility) can increase for two reasons, either return volatility increases or jump-
intensity increases. Higher volatility makes put option premia higher (less negative) while
higher intensity makes put option premia lower (more negative) because of puts' hedging
properties. Thus, IV or IS/NIS do not predict option returns. In contrast, because put
option risk premia are negative, higher implied spreads always decreases the weight given to
put option returns in the implied bond (see (11)) and thus always increase its risk premium.



6.      Conclusions

We propose option-implied bonds and the related option-implied spreads and normalized
implied spreads as informative measures to uncover the hidden properties of option price
dynamics and their risk premia. The implied spread is the credit spread implicit in an
option-implied bond, a simple portfolio long a risk-free bond and short a put option and
economically equivalent to a corporate bond. The normalized implied spread scales the
implied spread by the bond's implicit default intensity. We can readily compute all of these
quantities from option prices and risk-free rates alone.

   The surface of (normalized) implied spreads is countercyclical: spreads are high in bad
times and low in good times. In particular, the shape of the normalized implied spread
surface captures the tails of the underlying stock (risk-neutral) distribution. The curvature
is instead procyclical: the normalized implied spread surface is convex in good times and
concave in bad times. That is, jump risk is more important during good times, as the
likelihood of a market crash is high and volatility is low.

   Just as corporate bond spreads predict corporate bond returns, we find that implied
spreads strongly predict implied bond returns. High implied spreads reliably precede high
implied bond returns. Low spreads precede low returns. Implied bond predictability persists
up to one-year into the future. In contrast, implied spreads do not predict put option returns.
Option returns, especially at long horizons, are difficult to predict.

                                               38
   We find that a standard, one-factor, stochastic volatility jump model cannot simultane-
ously match implied bond and put option return predictability. We propose an alternative,
two-factor, stochastic volatility, stochastic jump intensity model and show that it matches
these return predictability moments. Our examination of option-implied spreads and return
predictability of both implied bond returns and option returns thus brings forth the necessity
of two factors ­ time-varying volatility and time-varying jump intensity ­ to describe the
elusive nature of option risk premia.

   In this paper, we only focus on S&P 500 options in order to study the time-variation in
option risk premia at the aggregate level, i.e. securities affected by systematic jump risk and
systematic volatility risk. Future research may explore a similar strategy ­ namely, the study
of the joint predictability of implied bond returns and option returns ­ to learn about the
risk premia of options on individual stocks, commodities, or exchange rates. This research
may explore the dynamics of risk premia both in the time-series and in the cross-section.
While additional challenges present themselves in the study of individual stock options and
the definition of implied bonds, we believe such research may yield quite interesting results.

   Future research may also explore what preference-based models are able to replicate the
predictability of implied bonds and lack of predictability of put option returns. Such research
may provide further insights on the type of parameter restrictions on preferences and the
underlying dynamics of fundamentals.




                                              39
                                  REFERENCES

David S. Bates. Post-'87 crash fears in the S&P 500 futures option market. Journal of
  Econometrics, 94(1-2):181­238, 2000.

David S. Bates. Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Latent Affine Processes. Review of
  Financial Studies, 19(3):909­965, 2006.

David S. Bates. U.S. stock market crash risk, 1926­2010. Journal of Financial Economics,
  105(2):229­259, 2012.

Fischer Black and Myron Scholes. The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities. Journal
  of Political Economy, 81(3):637­654, 1973.

Mark Broadie, Mikhail Chernov, and Michael Johannes. Understanding Index Option Re-
 turns. Review of Financial Studies, 22(11):4493­4529, 2009.

John Y. Campbell and Robert J. Shiller. The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
  Future Dividends and Discount Factors. Review of Financial Studies, 1(3):195­228, 1988.

John Y. Campbell and Samuel B. Thompson. Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of
  Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average? Review of Financial Studies, 21(4):
  1509­1531, 2008.

Jie Cao, Amit Goyal, Xiao Xiao, and Xintong Zhan. Implied Volatility Changes and Corpo-
  rate Bond Returns. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 19-75, 2019.

Donald R. Chambers, Matthew Foy, Jeffrey Liebner, and Qin Lu. Index Option Returns:
 Still Puzzling. Review of Financial Studies, 27(6):1915­1928, 2014.

Peter Christoffersen, Kris Jacobs, and Chayawat Ornthanalai. Dynamic jump intensities
  and risk premiums: Evidence from S&P500 returns and options. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 106(3):447­472, 2012.

Peter Christoffersen, Kris Jacobs, and Bo Young Chang. Forecasting with Option-Implied
  Information. Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2:581­656, 2013.

John H. Cochrane. The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability. Review
  of Financial Studies, 21(4):1533­1575, 2008.

John H. Cochrane. Presidential Address: Discount Rates. Journal of Finance, 66(4):1047­
  1108, 2011.

George M. Constantinides, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Alexi Savov. The Puzzle of Index
 Option Returns. Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 3(2):229­257, 2013.

Christopher L. Culp, Yoshio Nozawa, and Pietro Veronesi. Option-Based Credit Spreads.
 American Economic Review, 108(2):454­88, 2018.



                                           40
Alexander David and Pietro Veronesi. Investors' and Central Bank's Uncertainty Embedded
  in Index Options. Review of Financial Studies, 27(6):1661­1716, 2014.

Darrell Duffie and Kenneth Singleton. Simulated Moments Estimation of Markov Models of
 Asset Prices. Econometrica, pages 929­952, 1993.

Darrell Duffie, Jun Pan, and Kenneth Singleton. Transform Analysis and Asset Pricing for
 Affine Jump-Diffusions. Econometrica, 68(6):1343­1376, 2000.

Bjørn Eraker. Do Stock Prices and Volatility Jump? Reconciling Evidence from Spot and
  Option Prices. Journal of Finance, 59(3):1367­1403, 2004.

Christian Gourieroux, Alain Monfort, and Eric Renault. Indirect Inference. Journal of
 Applied Econometrics, 8(S1):S85­S118, 1993.

Lars Peter Hansen and Robert J. Hodrick. Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors
  of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 88(5):
  829­853, 1980.

Steven L. Heston. A Closed-Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility with Ap-
  plications to Bond and Currency Options. Review of Financial Studies, 6(2):327­343,
  1993.

Roni Israelov and Bryan Kelly. Forecasting the Distribution of Option Returns. SSRN
  Working Paper, 2017.

Roni Israelov and Lars N. Nielsen. Covered Calls Uncovered. Financial Analysts Journal,
  71(6):44­57, 2015.

Bryan Kelly, Gerardo Manzo, and Diogo Palhares. Credit-Implied Volatility. SSRN Working
  Paper, 2019.

Robert C. Merton. On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates.
  Journal of Finance, 29(2):449­470, 1974.

Robert C. Merton. Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 3(1-2):125­144, 1976.

Yoshio Nozawa. What Drives the Cross-Section of Credit Spreads?: A Variance Decompo-
  sition Approach. Journal of Finance, 72(5):2045­2072, 2017.

Jun Pan. The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an integrated time-series
  study. Journal of Financial Economics, 63(1):3­50, 2002.

Pedro Santa-Clara and Shu Yan. Crashes, volatility, and the equity premium: Lessons from
  S&P 500 options. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2):435­451, 2010.

Robert F. Stambaugh. Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics, 54(3):375­
  421, 1999.



                                           41
