                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     DEFICIT FOLLIES

                                     Johannes Brumm
                                       Xiangyu Feng
                                    Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                        Felix Kubler

                                     Working Paper 28952
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28952


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We thank Oliver Blanchard and seminar participants at the International Monetary Fund (FAD)
for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Johannes Brumm, Xiangyu Feng, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Felix Kubler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deficit Follies
Johannes Brumm, Xiangyu Feng, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Felix Kubler
NBER Working Paper No. 28952
June 2021
JEL No. E21,E6,H6

                                          ABSTRACT

Deficit finance is free when the growth rate routinely exceeds the government's borrowing rate.
Or so many people say. This note presents three counterexamples. Each features a simple OLG
economy with a zero growth rate and a negative government borrowing rate. None provides a
basis for taking from the young and giving to the old. One example features idiosyncratic risk,
one features policy uncertainty, and one features a safe borrowing rate that exceeds the safe
lending rate. Progressive taxation cures the first problem. Policy resolution cures the second. And
improved intermediation, perhaps organized by the government, cures the third. The three models
are parables. Each conveys an inconvenient truth. Seemingly free deficits may, on careful
inspection, be far more costly than they appear. Indeed, government intergenerational
redistribution can lower the government borrowing rate, encouraging yet more inefficient deficit
finance.

Johannes Brumm                                   Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology                Department of Economics
Waldhornstr. 27                                  Boston University
76131 Karlsruhe                                  270 Bay State Road
Germany                                          Boston, MA 02215
jo.brumm@gmail.com                               and NBER
                                                 kotlikoff@gmail.com
Xiangyu Feng
Boston University                                Felix Kubler
270 Bay State Road                               University of Zurich
Boston, MA 02215                                 Plattenstrasse 32
xyfeng@xmu.edu.cn                                CH-8032 Zurich
                                                 Switzerland
                                                 and Swiss Financial Institute
                                                 fkubler@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Blanchard et al. (2020), Summers and Rachel (2019), Blanchard and Summers (2019), and
Blanchard (2019), among others, suggest fiscal deficits may have no cost when public borrowing
rates average less than economic growth rates. This note demurs. It presents three simple, two-
period, zero-growth, OLG models, each of which features negative safe rates. None provides
support for deficit finance, the essence of which is taking from the young to give to the old,
henceforth, take-go policy. In the first model, the negative safe rate reflects idiosyncratic risk.
In the second, it embeds both TFP risk and policy uncertainty. In the third, TFP risk plus
imperfect intermediation drives the safe lending rate (i.e., the government borrowing rate) below
the growth rate, while leaving the safe private borrowing rate above the growth rate. Model 1's
risk is readily dispelled via progressive taxation. Model 2's risk, which can be extreme, can be
reduced by constitutional or other policy-commitment mechanisms. Model 3's dispersion in safe
rates can be ameliorated via improved intermediation, potentially with the help of government
loan verification, collection, and enforcement.
    The message of our missives is clear. Judging the welfare impact of take-go/deficit finance
when interest rates are low is not as simple as it seems. Such policies may benefit current gener-
ations at the expense of future generations. They may produce policy risk, which, paradoxically,
lowers the government's borrowing rate, encouraging yet more welfare-reducing deficit finance.
And they may redistribute from borrowers to lenders, where the former face safe rates above
and the later safe rates below the growth rate. Our three parables all show that a low gov-
ernment borrowing rate, in and of itself, does not justify deficit finance. Of course, there may
be other reasons for such policies, not considered in our models, that merit consideration. Our
contribution is simply to warn against taking low interest rates as sufficient ground for running
deficits.
    This paper complements Brumm et al. (2021), which traces Blanchard (2019)'s case for
deficit finance not to intergenerational redistribution, but to intergenerational and international
risk sharing as well as implicit beggar-thy-neighbor policy. For brevity, we refer readers to that
paper for a discussion of these points and a review of the literature, particularly the many
recent papers focused on take-go policy in low interest-rate environments.


2     Idiosyncratic Risk
Model 1's economy is deterministic. Production is linear in labor and capital with respective
marginal products of 1 and R. Agents work when young and consume when old. They invest
their wages in safe bonds and risky (to them) capital ­ capital that fully depreciates each period.
Let S denote the safe rate. Agents invest solely in their own firms and have an equal chance of
earning RH and RL, where
                                           H = 1 + ,                                            (1)
and
                                            L = 1 - .                                          (2)
Thus, H + L = 2. Agents comprise a continuum of measure 1 and their returns are independent.
Hence, there is no aggregate risk. Expected utility of those born at t is


                                                2
                                            -            -
                                       .5Ct1+1 ,H   .5Ct1+1 ,L
                                 EUt =            +            ,                             (3)
                                         1-           1-
where,
                                  Ct+1,H = S + (1 - )RH,                                     (4)
                                  Ct+1,L = S + (1 - )RL,                                     (5)
and  is the share of saving invested in the safe bond. The net supply of these bonds is zero.
When S < 1, each unit of output saved and invested safely when young returns less than a unit
when old. In contrast, each unit contributed when young to take-go is reciprocated with a full
unit of consumption when old. The optimal choice of  plus the equilibrium condition,  = 0,
imply
                                            HL + LH 
                                       S=R              .                                 (6)
                                             H  + L
When there is no risk, there is no risk premium, i.e., when H = L = 1, S = R. The same is
true if agents are risk neutral ( = 0). When  = 1, the logarithmic case, S = RHL. If  = 0.5,
HL equals 0.75 and R exceeds S by one third. Thus, a value of R below 1.33 implies S < 1,
which means a higher return to take-go policy than investing safely. As  rises, S converges
to RL and the percentage risk premium converges to (R - RL)/RL, which, in this example,
equals 100 percent.

Progressive Taxation Versus Take-Go Policy
The government can eliminate idiosyncratic-return risk by transferring R from those earning
high returns to those earning low returns. Doing so raises S to R. It also raises the expected
utility of all current and future generations ­ those born at t  -1 from

                                                           R1-
                               EUt = (.5H 1- + .5L1- )         .                             (7)
                                                           1-
to
                                                   R1-
                                         EUt =         .                                     (8)
                                                   1-
But what if such risk-sharing policy isn't undertaken? Instead, suppose that deficit proponents,
observing that S < 1, convince policymakers that deficits are free provided S < 1 and that they
should enact take-go, taking T from the young each period and giving it to the old. Ct+1,H ,
Ct+1,L , and S now satisfy

                        Ct+1,H = (1 - T )S + (1 - )(1 - T )RH + T,                           (9)

                        Ct+1,L = (1 - T )S + (1 - )(1 - T )RL + T,                         (10)
     and

                          RH [(1 - T )RL + T ] + RL[(1 - T )RH + T ]
                     S=                                              ,                     (11)
                            [(1 - T )RH + T ] + [(1 - T )RL + T ]


                                               3
where S increases in T , equalling R when T = 1 and 1 for T = T  < 1. The impact on EUt for
t  0 per unit of expected marginal utility of consumption when old, EUt , of an increase in T
is
                                         EUt
                                             = (1 - S )EUt > 0,                                            (12)
                                         T
where

                                        EUt = .5Ct-         -
                                                  +1,H + .5Ct+1,L ,                                        (13)
which is always positive. For the initial old (born at t - 1), the marginal impact of take-go is

                                             EUt-1
                                                   = EUt-1 .                                               (14)
                                              T
Hence, introducing take-go can raise all generations' utilities relative to the no-policy equi-
librium provided S < 1. This is Blanchard (2019)'s ideal take-go setting. As long as T  1,
the policy is sustainable and, thanks to our assumed linear technology, there are no changes
in factor prices arising from take-go's crowding out of capital. Such changes would otherwise
lower wages of future generations, potentially precluding a Pareto improvement.
    Presumably policymakers would set T at the value T  at which S = 1. When  = 1, R = 1.2,
 = .5, and  = 1, T  = .375. In this case, expected utility of the initial old rises from (7) to
(15). For initial young and future generations, utility rises from (7) to (16).

                                        .5(RH + T  )1- .5(RL + T  )1-
                             EU-1 =                   +               .                                    (15)
                                            1-             1-
                              .5((1 - T  )RH + T  )1- .5((1 - T  )RL + T  )1-
                   EU-1 =                            +                        .                            (16)
                                        1-                      1-
Thus, relative to no-policy, all generations gain from setting T to T  . But take-go is not the
only available Pareto improvement. One indicator of this is that take-go permanently reduces
the economy's output. To see why, note that the no-policy economy's output is 1 + R per
period. Take-go policy with T = T  leaves output unchanged at t = 0. Thereafter, output
falls to 1 + (1 - T  )R since setting T to T  crowds out investment in productive, R > 1,
capital. In contrast, progressive taxation (risk-sharing policy) keeps output at 1 + R forever.
Instead of reducing the economy's productive capacity, it targets the real problem ­ inefficient
risk allocation. Once implemented, everyone, including the initial old, consumes 1 + R for sure
when old. Compared with no policy, this raises all generations expected utility, including that
of the initial old, from (7) to (8).
    Admittedly, risk sharing is not as favorable to the initial old as take-go ­ i.e., (15) will
generally exceed (8). But there is nothing in the problem that justifies singling out the initial
old for special treatment. In short, take-go is a decision to substitute inefficient for efficient
policy, making all current young and future generations worse off in the process.1
   1
    Note, though, that once the T  policy is implemented, it may be possible to gradually move to first-best
policy by substituting take-go policy for progressive tax policy, achieving a Pareto improvement in the process.
We leave this question for future work.


                                                       4
Takeaways
Model 1 has five explicit or implied takeaways. First, in dynamically efficient economies, where
the marginal product of capital exceeds the growth rate, the only reason safe rates lie below
growth rates is risk.2 Second, shocks that drive the safe rate below the growth rate, can arise
due to inefficient risk sharing regardless of the micro or macro nature of the shocks. If that's the
case, improving risk sharing, not running take-go policy, is the economic prescription. And it's
a prescription that needs to be explored before it's too late, i.e., before take-go is implemented
and young and future generations are, as a group, precluded from enjoying the full gains from
immediately adopting first-best, risk-sharing policy. Third, the larger the risk, in this case,
the larger the value of , the lower will be S and the greater will be the temptation to run
deficits (take-go) that disenfranchises some or all young and future generations relative to the
first best. Fourth, adopting and maintaining second-best policy, if not reversed, permanently
lowers the economy's output starting just one period after take-go is initiated. Fifth, relative to
running the risk-sharing policy, either immediately or down the road, engaging in take-go is a
government-organized Ponzi scheme ­ making early participants better off and inducing future
cohorts to participate in what is a hard-to-discern bad deal to recoup their "investment".
     In sum, the carpenter's creed ­ Measure twice and cut once. ­ fully applies. In this case,
it is crucial to first understand why safe rates are low and to consider risk mitigation policies,
instead of simply taking from the young to give to the old.


3       Take-Go Policy Uncertainty
While model 1 assumes only idiosyncratic risk, models 2 and 3 assume only aggregate risk. Now
aggregate capital returns are either RH or RL. In addition, model 2 includes uncertainty over
whether a take-go scheme ­ transferring T from the young to the old ­ will be terminated. In
particular, each period consumption can equal one of the following four equally likely values.

High returns, take-go retained:
                             Ct+1,A = (1 - T )S + (1 - )(1 - T )RH + T,                                       (17)
Low return, take-go retained:
                             Ct+1,A = (1 - T )St + (1 - )(1 - T )RL + T,                                      (18)
High returns, take-go terminated:
                                Ct+1,A = (1 - T )St + (1 - )(1 - T )RH,                                       (19)
Low returns, take-go terminated:
                                Ct+1,A = (1 - T )St + (1 - )(1 - T )RL.                                       (20)
    2
     Idiosyncratic- as well as aggregate-return risk can explain low safe rates. Moreover, uninsured idiosyncratic-
risk, including non-return-related idiosyncratic risk, can exacerbate macro-return risk. For example, idiosyncratic
second-period, labor-income uncertainty, arising from health or other factors, can lower S below 1, when it
would not otherwise fall below 1 due to macro-return risk by itself. In this case, improved intra-generational
risk sharing, via progressive wage taxation, can, potentially, raise S above 1, raising all generations' welfare and
eliminating the argument for deficit finance.

                                                         5
    The solution, given in (21), for S , assuming isoelastic utility, now incorporates states in
which take-go is randomly eliminated to the cost of the contemporaneous elderly. This places
government-generated policy uncertainty in high relief. Other policies, such as a gradual reduc-
tion in the scale of take go starting at an uncertain time, would have different implications for
the path of S .3 As for this setup, we have

                                             S = RH + RL(1 -  ),                               (21)

where
                                                     (A + B )CD
                                        =                                                      (22)
                                              (A + B )CD + (C + D)AB
and
                          A = ((1 - T )(S - RH ) + T ) , B = ((1 - T )(S - RH )) ,
                          C = ((1 - T )(S - RL) + T ) , D = ((1 - T )(S - RL)) .
As T increases from zero, the policy first reduces and then raises risk. Consequently, S rises
and then falls. When utility is logarithmic, S = RHL at the extremes, T = 0 and T = 1.
For our standard parameters, RHL = 0.9. S peaks at 0.943 for T = 0.595. Values of T above
0.595 make take-go look cheaper with S dropping to 0.9. Hence, above 0.595, increasing T ­
expanding take-go ­ makes deficit finance appear cheaper as it becomes economically more
damaging. For higher risk aversion, S is lower, but the pattern with respect to increases in T
is similar. Take  = 2. S = 0.720 at the extremes and peaks at 0.747 for T = 0.408.

Takeaways
Higher T means higher dependency on take go and higher risk associated with its possible
elimination. Hence, unlike model 1, a higher value of T can entail a lower value of S . Thus,
model 2 delivers the alarming possibility that increased deficit finance will lower the safe rate,
"justifying" even greater deficit finance. As T is raised toward 1, expected utility declines. The
broader message here is that policy enacted can be policy reversed. An apt example here is the
Russian hyperinflation of 1998, which greatly reduced the real value of state pensions provided
to a large segment of Russian retirees.


4         When Private Borrowing Rates Exceed Lending Rates
Our third model also assumes macro-return risk with RH or RL equally likely. But now there
is no potential for policy reversal. Instead, this model features two safe rates ­ a low lending
rate and a high borrowing rate, the wedge between the two being driven by transaction costs.
Each generation contains A- and B -type workers in equal proportion. A workers earn 1 when
young and 0 when old. B workers earn 0 when young and 1 when old. A workers consume when
old. B workers consume when young. Let  > 1 denote a transactions cost wedge between the
borrowing rate, S and the lending rate, S . Both types have logarithmic utility. In equilibrium,
the lending of the As, A , equals the borrowing of the B s, 1/(S ), who borrow in full against
their future wages. The As maximize
    3
        Eliminating or dramatically reducing take-go may reflect a decision to raise output.


                                                          6
                EUA,t = .5 log [A S + (1 - A )RH ] + .5 log [A S + (1 - A )RL].                   (23)
Optimal A satisfies

                   A = [RL(RH - S ) + RH (RL - S )]/[2(S - RH )(S - RL)].                         (24)
In equilibrium,

                  [RL(RH - S ) + RH (RL - S )]/[2(S - RH )(S - RL)] = 1/[S ].                     (25)

    Now suppose the government, observing that it can borrow at less than 1, adopts take-go
policy at scale T . Based on (12), this policy raises the expected utility of the As and lowers
that of the B s. Hence, the observation that one group's safe rate is below the growth rate
provides no basis, even with linear technology, for suggesting take-go policy is free, i.e., Pareto
improving. Comparing "the" safe rate with the growth rate is fallacious since there are two safe
rates ­ one above and one below the growth rate. What about running take-go by having the
government take just from and give just to the As by setting T  T  ? This helps current and
future As, but it hurts the B s by reducing the supply of loans from  to (1 - T  ), raising
equilibrium S and, thus, the borrowing rate, S .

Takeaways
In actual economies, safe borrowing rates invariably exceed growth rates by a wide margin. The
borrowing-lending wedge may reflect, as assumed here, transactions costs. Or it could arise from
discrimination, the risk of borrower default, market segmentation, asymmetric information,
etc. Whatever its source, the wedge can't simply be assumed away. Its presence suggests that
improved financial intermediation, potentially assisted via government loan-verification, loan-
collection, loan-enforcement, or idiosyncratic risk-reduction policies, not take-go, is the channel
for Pareto improvement.


5    Conclusion
Safe rates that average less than growth rates make deficit finance alluring. But low safe rates
can reflect incomplete intragenerational risk sharing, government-generated uncertainty, credit
market imperfections, and, as Brumm et al. (2021) show, some combination of incomplete inter-
generational risk sharing, incomplete international risk sharing, and beggar-thy-neighbor policy.
In all such cases, take-go policy, a.k.a, deficit finance, is not free. It redistributes across genera-
tions, across nations, or within generations. And if take-go does Pareto improve, it may reflect
second-best policy that leaves young and future generations worse off relative to enacting first
best policy ­ policy that addresses the root cause of low safe rates. Moreover, uncertainty about
the resolution of government debt policies can, itself, lower the government's borrowing rate,
making deficits look cheaper precisely when they are becoming economically more expensive.




                                                  7
References
Blanchard, O. (2019).    Public debt and low interest rates.     American Economic Review,
  109(4):1197­1229.

Blanchard, O., Leandro, A., and Zettelmeyer, J. (2020). Revisiting the EU fiscal rules in an
  era of low interest rates. In Rethinking the European Fiscal Framework Conference.

Blanchard, O. and Summers, L. H. (2019). Evolution Or Revolution?: Rethinking Macroeco-
  nomic Policy After the Great Recession. MIT Press.

Brumm, J., Feng, X., Kotlikoff, L., and Kubler, F. (2021). When interest rates go low, should
  public debt go high? Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming.

Summers, L. H. and Rachel, L. (2019). On falling neutral real rates, fiscal policy and the risk
  of secular stagnation. In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity BPEA Conference Drafts,
  volume 8.




                                              8
