                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE DEMAND FOR EXECUTIVE SKILLS

                                        Stephen Hansen
                                         Tejas Ramdas
                                        Raffaella Sadun
                                           Joe Fuller

                                      Working Paper 28959
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28959


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021


We thank for their valuable comments Miguel Espinosa, Ulrike Malmendier, Andrea Prat,
Szymon Sacher, Fabiano Schivardi, John Van Reenen, Yanhui Wu and seminar and conference
participants at the Bank of Italy/CEPR/EIEF Conference on Ownership, Governance,
Management & Firm Performance, Brigham Young University Winter Strategy Conference,
Central European University, CEPR VIOE semi- nar, Columbia Business School, Duke
University, HKU Business School, Hoover Institution, Ifo Institute, Imperial College, Jack Welch
College of Business & Technology, MIT IDE seminar, NBER Summer Insti- tute Personnel
workshop, Pompeu Fabra, Stanford Digital Economy Lunch, Utrecht University, Wharton OIDD
Seminar. Zara Elstein, Aleksandra Furmanek, Prashant Garg, Aryan Jain, Darwin Yang, Xinru
Yao, and Miaomiao Zhang provided outstanding research assistance. We thank Bledi Taska for
giving us access to the Burning Glass Technologies data. Hansen gratefully acknowledges
financial support received from ERC Consolidator Grant 864863. Sadun gratefully acknowledges
support from the HBS Division of Research and Faculty Development. Corresponding author:
Raffaella Sadun, rsadun@hbs.edu The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Stephen Hansen, Tejas Ramdas, Raffaella Sadun, and Joe Fuller. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Demand for Executive Skills
Stephen Hansen, Tejas Ramdas, Raffaella Sadun, and Joe Fuller
NBER Working Paper No. 28959
June 2021
JEL No. J23,J24,M12

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a unique corpus of job descriptions for C-suite positions to document skills requirements
in top managerial occupations across a large sample of firms. A novel algorithm maps the text of
each executive search into six separate skill clusters reflecting cognitive, interpersonal, and
operational dimensions. The data show an increasing relevance of social skills in top managerial
occupations, and a greater emphasis on social skills in larger and more information intensive
organizations. The results suggest the need for training, search and governance mechanisms able
to facilitate the match between firms and top executives along multiple and imperfectly
observable skills.

Stephen Hansen                                 Raffaella Sadun
Imperial College Business School               Harvard Business School
South Kensington Campus                        Morgan Hall 233
London SW7 2AZ                                 Soldiers Field
United Kingdom                                 Boston, MA 02163
stephen.hansen@imperial.ac.uk                  and NBER
                                               rsadun@hbs.edu
Tejas Ramdas
Cornell University                             Joe Fuller
tr336@cornell.edu                              Harvard Business School
                                               jfuller@hbs.edu




Managerial word embeddings are available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/yggb210ph7c8fac/embeddings_win5_cbow.txt?dl=0
1       Introduction
The role of top executives in shaping organizational performance has been the subject of
intense scrutiny. Existing studies have linked managerial effectiveness to observable per-
sonal characteristics, career trajectories, psychological traits, and behaviors of individuals
hired in these positions.1 However, much less is understood about the concrete skills re-
quirements needed to succeed in these top managerial positions. Lack of evidence about
the specific skills valued in managerial labor markets is problematic on two levels. First,
it limits the understanding of how top managers actually contribute to firm performance
and, in particular, whether different managerial skills may matter differently across orga-
nizations and over time. Second, it provides little guidance to shape the appropriate skill
formation in potential future candidates for these occupations.
     In this article we use a large corpus of detailed and previously unexplored job descrip-
tions for C-suite positions spanning a time period of 17 years to study which skills are
demanded in managerial labor markets. We classify the information contained in these
documents using methods borrowed from machine learning, which allow us to map un-
structured, free-text data into distinct clusters of skill requirements. We use the data to
examine the variation in the demand for different managerial skills which provides, to the
best of our knowledge, the first direct evidence on C-suite skill requirements.2 Finally,
we provide a stylized model to interpret the variation in the demand for executive Social
skills --a skill cluster that experiences sustained growth over time and is relatively most
likely to be included in CEO job descriptions--across firms and test the implications of
the model by matching the information provided in the job descriptions with firm-level
observable characteristics.3
     Our analysis is based on novel and rich data on thousands of firm-level searches for
executive positions (e.g. CEO, CFO, CIO, etc.) conducted by a large sample of firms around
the globe. These documents, which are private and typically unavailable to researchers,4
    1
      Bertrand and Schoar (2003) document the presence of managerial "fixed effects", i.e. systematic
performance differentials that can be attributed to individual managers. Cust´    odio et al. (2013) discuss the
rising importance of "generalist" CEOs (i.e. executives that gained experience in a variety of industries
prior to appointment vs. specialized managers). Frydman (2019) documents, in addition to the relevance
of generalist experience, the sustained increase in CEOs with business degrees. Cust´         odio and Metzger
(2013) document the importance of CEOs' industry specific knowledge in the context of M&A activities,
while Benmelech and Frydman (2015) focus on CEOs with military experience. Bandiera et al. (2020)
study the behavior of CEOs and its relationship with firm performance. Kaplan et al. (2012) study the
characteristics and psychological traits of candidate and hired executives in the context of a sample of
companies involved in buyout and venture capital transactions. Kaplan and Sorensen (2021) use the same
psychological assessments for a broader sample of CEO candidates.
    2
      In a spirit similar to this paper, Adams et al. (2018) study the skill sets of board members in a large
sample of U.S. firms. Our study differs from this earlier study on multiple dimensions. First, we study the
skill requirements of C-suite executives, rather than board members. Second, we study the skills sought
after by firms, rather than the skills of hired individuals. Third, we use a novel classification approach to
determine the skills requirements, which we describe in more detail below.
    3
      Bandiera et al. (2015) also study the matching between middle managers, firms and incentives in the
context of the Italian labor market, but they do not directly observe the demand for managerial skills.
    4
      The documents are not publicly posted and are only circulated directly to candidates that the head-
hunter identifies as potentially suitable.


                                                       2
were provided to us by one of the world's largest headhunting companies. Headhunters play
an increasingly important role in filling top-level managerial positions and are often engaged
even when a suitable internal candidate already exists. When our headhunter partner begins
a search with a client firm, the first step is the drafting of a job specification that gives
a comprehensive description of the skills and responsibilities sought in an ideal candidate.
The client firm's Board takes the lead in generating the content of the specification, in
collaboration with the headhunter. Its text therefore closely reflects the perceived needs of
the firm at the time of the search. We use the universe of texts that our partner holds to
measure skill demand in a broad sample of firms.
    We propose a novel classification approach to derive economically interpretable measures
from the unstructured text of this corpus. Our approach involves two steps. First, we define
a comprehensive vector of skills requirements that are relevant for Chief Executives. We
obtain this by collecting the numerous textual descriptions of skills from the O*NET entry
for the Chief Executive occupation, and clustering them into six broad categories using a
k-means algorithm. Second, we express each job description in the search corpus in terms
of the relative demand for each skill cluster by comparing the similarity of the language
included in the document with the text associated with each of the O*NET clusters.
    Both the clustering of O*NET skills into groups and the comparison of job texts to
O*NET texts require the quantification of linguistic relatedness. We compute this via a
language embedding model estimated from an auxiliary corpus of all Harvard Business
Review articles from its inception in 1922 to the present day. This large, domain-specific
corpus allows us to obtain semantic relationships between words in the context of business
and management. We then apply the model to measure similarity in the O*NET and job
search corpora, an approach known as transfer learning.
    The clusters that emerge from O*NET capture interpretable structure in skills. Two
categories relate to cognitive skills, Monitoring of Performance and Information Skills ; two
relate to functional and operational skills, Financial and Material Resources and Admin-
istrative Tasks ; and two relate to interpersonal skills, Human Resources and Social Skills.5
These clusters map into well-known aspects of leadership, such as problem solving embod-
ied in the cognitive clusters, or motivation and empathy embodied in the soft skills clusters.
But these categories also contain more subtle distinctions within them. For example, within
soft skills, Human Resources focuses on interpersonal skills relevant for motivating employ-
ees, while Social Skills refer primarily to the ability to establish empathy, persuade and
listen to others.
    To characterize these novel measures of demand for executive skills across firms, we
first examine their variation across different C-suite positions. On average, firms demand
a greater range of skills from the CEO than from other more specialized C-suite positions.
Among these specialized positions, we observe a natural relationship between job title and
skill demand (e.g. Human Resources is the relatively most common skill in CHRO job
  5
      These labels are assigned by us after examining the content of the skill clusters.


                                                       3
texts). This is consistent with Guadalupe et al. (2013) who argue that functional managers
in the C-suite specialize in different tasks according to function-specific characteristics.
Comparing CEOs and CFOs, we find a greater emphasis on interpersonal skills for CEOs
and functional skills for CFOs. In personality assessments there are notable differences be-
tween CEOs and CFOs (Kaplan and Sorensen 2021) which our results show might plausibly
be driven by firms seeking distinct skill sets for the two positions.
    We see less variation in skill demand across countries and industries, although non-
US firms on average demand more Financial and Material Resources. We do see, however,
strikingly different trends over time across different skill clusters. In particular, Social Skills
experienced sustained growth throughout the sample, while the demand for Financial and
Material Resources sharply declined over time.
    The growth of the Social Skills cluster is especially interesting, in our view, in that
its growing relevance mirrors broader trends in the general labor market as documented
in Deming (2017). Additionally, this skill is the most likely to be included in CEO job
descriptions relative to other C-suite positions. We use a stylized model in the spirit of
Garicano (2000) to further study the relationship between the demand for social skills and
firms' characteristics. In this framework, vertical communication between the workforce
and the C-suite raises productivity, but communication is costly. Whereas Garicano (2000)
conceives of this cost as arising due to technological reasons, we view them as also depending
on managerial social skills.6 In the model, greater social skills in the C-suite become more
important when the volume of problems needed to be solved rises, and when the interaction
between workers and C-suite becomes more important for production. These are situations
which increase the demand for and the value of executive time, which is limited, and social
skills allow a relaxation of managerial time constraints.
    Overall, we find supportive evidence for both predictions of the model. Conditional on a
host of firm and search characteristics, the demand for social skills is higher in larger firms
and, using the sub-sample of repeated searches for the same firm, it also varies significantly
within firms according to size. Furthermore, conditional on firm size, the demand for social
skills is also greater in firms that are publicly listed, MNEs, and are involved in M&A
activities, which we use as proxies for the need to deal with a greater scope of problems.
To examine the role of an increase in the value of C-suite communication, we consider the
relationship between the demand for social skills in the C-suite and skills that firms look
for in their workforce. Specifically, we focus on a particular channel that the management
literature has long emphasized increases the value of C-suite communication: the extent to
which workforce skills are specialized in information processing activities. The argument
is that the shift towards information-intensive work requires executives to exert additional
effort in communication in order to coordinate employees and achieve organizational align-
ment (Drucker 2007). To study this prediction, we match firms from the executive search
   6
    The idea that social skills facilitate problem exchange is also present in Deming (2017) who models the
horizontal exchange of problems within a team of workers rather than the vertical exchange of problems
within an organizational hierarchy.


                                                    4
database to their online job postings provided by Burning Glass Technologies. Various in-
dicators of information technology skills in firm-level demand in non-executive occupations
correlate strongly with executive social skills. This provides the first direct evidence (to
our knowledge) supporting the influential ideas of Drucker (2007) about the effective skills
needed to manage knowledge workers. The correlations we observe between social skills
and problem volume and workforce skills, respectively, are nearly all absent for the other
skills in the job descriptions.7
    While the primary contribution of this paper stands in the creation and analysis of
novel measures of skill requirements for top managerial positions for a large sample of
firms and over time, our results also contribute to the broader understanding of managerial
labor markets, and in particular of the process through which firms and managers are
matched. First, the data suggest that firms exert considerable effort in articulating the
managerial skills needed in new hires, and that the skills demanded vary considerably
across organizations. This suggests that managerial effectiveness (especially in cases in
which the assignment process is efficient) may reflect the quality of the match between firms
and managers, rather than solely the characteristics and behaviors of individuals. Second,
whereas the existing theoretical literature on firm-executive matching typically conceives
of top managers as vertically differentiated according to a single "ability" factor (Gabaix
and Landier 2008, Tervio 2008), our results show that assessing match quality requires a
richer skills-based approach. Third, the demand for executive skills is increasingly focused
on "softer" aspects of managerial capabilities such as social skills, which may be harder to
assess in reality relative to cognitive and operational skills. The growth in the importance
of soft skills over time thus calls for investments in screening and high quality governance
approaches to overcome possible matching frictions.8
    Finally, universities and other academic institutions play an important role in the forma-
tion of executive skills via business education. Business education has traditionally focused
on developing cognitive skills, but our work shows that increasing the ability to relate to
others is an important skill to develop for meeting market demand. Recent evidence has
shown that interventions that impart hard skills to managers lead to material gains in per-
formance (Bloom et al. 2013, Custodio et al. 2021) and a natural question that arises from
our work is whether soft skills can also be transferred via training.

Related Literature This paper relates to several literatures. As mentioned above, Dem-
ing (2017) is a seminal contribution that shows a growing importance of social skills in the
labor market. The analysis in Deming (2017) shows that occupations that are more inten-
sive in social skills have a growing share in the overall labor market. We instead show that
   7
     For example, Human Resources, the other soft-skill cluster, is not related to firm size nor positively
related to any of the other firm characteristics, with the exception of a firm being publicly traded. On the
other hand, we do find that managerial cognitive skills are positively related to workers' IT skills.
   8
     Dessein and Prat (2019) model explicitly the interaction between heterogeneous managerial talent,
screening and governance imperfections, and organizational capital.



                                                     5
social skills are growing within the Chief Executive occupation. Moreover, we link cross
sectional variation in social skill demand to firm characteristics, which are not explicitly
considered in Deming (2017).
    Hoffman and Tadelis (2020) draw on personnel data from a large technology firm to
show that non-C-suite managers' interpersonal skills reduce employee turnover. Kaplan
et al. (2012) show that two factors explain variation in personal evaluation surveys of CEO
candidates, one that captures general ability and another that contrasts interpersonal skills
with execution skills. Subsequent firm performance is positively correlated with general
and execution ability. In contrast, Kaplan and Sorensen (2021) further show that Boards
are in fact more likely to appoint C-suite executives with higher interpersonal skills. One
interpretation is that Boards overweight such skills in their appointment decisions. Our
evidence shows that Boards explicitly include social language in job specifications prior to
the screening and interview process, and that this varies systematically with proxies for the
need for internal coordination.
    McCann et al. (2015) present a model in which agents have both communication and
cognitive skills and sort into managerial and worker positions. Individuals with high com-
munication skills become managers in equilibrium, and those with lower communication
skills become workers. Team size increases in managerial communication skill, and there is
positive assortative matching on cognitive skill between workers and managers. Our find-
ings that social skills are more present in larger firms, and that executive and workforce
information skills are positively correlated, support both predictions. More broadly, we are
unaware of any previous empirical work that relates the skills of workers to the skills of top
managers.
    The paper also relates to the literature studying how the shift towards information-
intensive tasks (which we proxy with the demand for IT skills among workers) affects firm
organizations (Bloom et al. (2014), Babina et al. (2020)). Relative to prior contributions,
we are the first to document the relationship between information-intensive skills among
workers and skill requirements at the top of the hierarchy.
    Finally, our paper makes a methodological contribution: the overall measurement strat-
egy is generic and can be applied in other situations in which a researcher wishes to measure
skill content from job descriptions. Dictionary methods in which researchers use keyword
counts to measure content have traditionally dominated the analysis of text in economics
and finance (e.g. Baker et al. 2016) and have also been used to measure the skill content
of job descriptions (e.g. Deming and Kahn 2018). Our method is more automated, retains
interpretability, and draws on semantic relationships derived from the entire HBR vocab-
ulary to measure content rather than a small number of search terms. We make publicly
available our HBR embedding model for researchers who wish to measure skill content in
other settings, or who require language similarity comparisons in business contexts more
generally.9
  9
      It can currently be downloaded at https://bit.ly/3xBiFGN, and we are currently planning a website


                                                   6
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional background
on the headhunting industry and an overview of the main corpus. Section 3 describes how
we map job text to skill vectors. Section 4 documents basic facts about how skills vary
across firms, while section 5 focuses specifically on the role of executive social skills in
facilitating problem exchange. Section 6 concludes.


2     Executive Search Database
The analysis presented in the paper is based on a corpus of documents provided to us by
a global executive search firm. In this section we provide a brief overview of the industry,
as well as of the key steps involved in an executive search, to help contextualize the data
we employ in the analysis. We then describe the firms included in the corpus and the
documents in detail.


2.1     Institutional Background
Executive search firms specialize in filling vacancies for managerial positions, including
those at the very top of firms' hierarchies (what we call C-suite positions in the remainder
of the paper).10 The sector emerged in the post-war boom, and experienced sustained
growth over time, reaching worldwide revenues of more than $15bn in 2018 (from $3bn
in 1991). The industry is currently dominated by five "generalist" firms that account for
about a third of total industry revenues. Our partner is included in this set of top firms.
Generalist firms work with a variety of firms, industries, and countries, as opposed to niche
firms that focus on narrow sectors or C-suite positions (for example, some companies focus
exclusively on technology sectors).
    The use of executive search firms is widespread across large firms, in both developed and
developing economies, even when an internal candidate is under consideration.11 Typically,
when a vacancy opens, a headhunter "pitches" the services offered by his or her company, in
most cases in competition with other search firms. According to our partner, the selection of
a specific company is generally based on the consultant's past record, personal connections
with a large enough pool of suitable candidates, and/or specific industry expertise. If the
contract is won, the search process typically takes three months to a year. The client
forms a Board committee to oversee the search. One of the first tasks assigned to the
committee is the drafting of a document in which the Board makes explicit what they want
the new hire to achieve, and the required competencies. Importantly, while the headhunter
helps shape this document (for example, suggesting a certain structure), the content of
this document primarily reflects the perspectives and beliefs of the Board committee. As
that will allow researchers to interact with the model.
  10
     This section draws extensively from The Economist (2020).
  11
     According to the Economist (2020), 80-90% of Fortune 250 or FTSE 100 companies resort to executive
search firms, while almost half of companies in the next tier also do so.



                                                  7
such, the document provides a unique insight into the firm-specific job skills that the new
appointee is expected to possess, the main activities that the person is expected to engage
in, and the goals that the Board expects the new appointee to pursue.12 The job description
document forms the basis of the executive search campaign, and is the primary source of
data for our analysis (we provide more details on the structure and the content of the
documents in the next subsection).
    When the headhunting begins, recruiters use multiple sources to generate a list of suit-
able candidates for the position, including public and private databases of profiles, or
informal suggestions from the headhunter's network. Potential candidates are vetted ex-
tensively through interviews with former colleagues, clients, ex-bosses or past employees,
or public sources of information on past performance. The headhunters then contact these
potential candidates to further vet the possible match and gauge their interest in the po-
sition. Eventually, a handful of interested candidates are vetted more thoroughly through
a combination of interviews with the Board committee, formal assessments, simulations,
and in-depth background checks performed by specialists. The typical compensation for a
successful search has for a long time been proportional to the first year compensation of the
selected candidate (typically one third of it, including bonuses), but most recently (given
the increase in C-suite pay) it has been capped between $500,000 and $1m.13
    While there is existing empirical evidence on the search and selection process for execu-
tives that focuses on the characteristics of hired candidates (Kaplan et al. 2012, Kaplan and
Sorensen 2021, Cziraki and Jenter 2020), our data allows us to study with unprecedented
detail the demand for executive skills that are made explicit in the job descriptions. This
is important to isolate demand for CEO skills from their supply and any frictions in the
matching process. We describe the sample of firms included in the analysis and the features
of these documents in more detail below.


2.2     Sample
Our sample consists of the universe of executive searches for top managerial positions (C-
suite level) conducted by one of the top-five global headhunters. Besides the job description,
each document also provides additional information: (1) Start and end dates for each
executive search campaign; (2) Location of the branch office of the headhunter the search
contract was awarded to; (3) Title of the executive position to be filled and, lastly, (4)
Name of the client firm and a unique search identifier.
  12
     A possible concern is that the documents may include "boiler-plate" language enforced by the head-
hunter's organization. While some standardization in language is certainly possible, headhunting firms
typically take the form of partnerships, in which individual headhunters work in a regime of substantial
autonomy from the parent organization. The company who gave us access to the data, specifically, re-
assured us that they have not enforced standardized language in the job descriptions. The absence of
standardization is also evident from the variation that we observe across documents, which is described in
more detail below.
  13
     This excludes ancillary revenues that may be generated by other services provided by executive search
companies, i.e. leadership development, Board training etc.


                                                    8
     The sample we analyze has 4,622 searches conducted by 3,794 firms.14 The number
of firms is smaller than the number of documents since some companies perform multiple
searches across different C-suite positions or, in some instances, for the same title but in
different years. We exploit this within-firm variation in some of our analysis later in the
paper.
     Table A.1 shows summary statistics for the documents, including number of job de-
scription documents by position and year of search. The majority of the sample consists of
job descriptions for CEO positions (43%), followed by a sizeable number of CFO searches
(36%), with the remainder being other specialized C-suite positions (Chief Information,
Human Resources and Marketing Officers). The sample contains executive search data
from years 2000-2017. The number of searches ranges from 133 in year 2003 to 375 in year
2015.
     We name-matched the firms included in the sample with external data sources to retrieve
additional information on the firms conducting these searches. Specifically, we matched the
data with CapitalIQ, Orbis, and Dun and Bradstreet for firm size (number of employees),
primary industries of activity (at the 4 digit SIC code level), country of HQ location,
publicly listed status, and involvement in M&A activities, all measured as averages in the
the three years prior to the search). Tables A.1 and A.2 show basic summary statistics
on the sample of firms included in the analysis. 57% of the sample is accounted for by
US firms, 29% are European and UK firms, while the remainder of searches originate from
firms based in Latin America, Asia and Oceania. These frequencies are similar when we
consider the location of the search, though the two differ for 17% of the searches.15 The
firms included in the sample are on average large (1,500 employees at the median, standard
deviation 55,000). 26% are publicly listed, 67% are classified as multinationals, and 52%
are involved in M&A activities. In terms of sectoral composition, the largest industries
represented in the sample are Manufacturing; Finance, Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE);
Business Services (mostly legal); Retail and Wholesale; and infrastructures (transportation,
communication, electric and gas, sanitary).


2.3     Job Descriptions
Each job description document typically contains three sections: a description of the com-
pany (activities, organization chart, history, etc); responsibilities associated with the posi-
tion; and qualifications expected of candidates. For our main analysis, we use text from the
responsibilities and qualifications sections. In the next section we provide some illustrative
examples of the text included in these sections of the documents.
  14
     The total number of searches in which the headhunter participated during the sample period for which
some form of job description exists is 5,168, but 495 of these documents are not in English and 51 of these
do not have a complete document available. We drop both cases.
  15
     In the majority of cases these are Europe-, UK- and US-based companies looking for executives in the
UK, US and Europe, respectively.




                                                    9
   After pre-processing the text for analysis,16 we compute the total number of words in
the "responsibilities" and "qualifications" sections, which we refer to as "document length."
The mean length of pre-processed documents in the sample is 440 words, with a standard
deviation of 218 words. The minimum and maximum lengths are 22 and 1804. The format
and length of job description documents in the sample is relatively stable over time: a
scatter-plot showing the distribution of lengths (in words) of pre-processed documents by
year is shown in figure A.1 in the appendix.


3        From Job Descriptions to Skills Clusters
The job search corpus provides a rich account of the characteristics that firms seek in their
prospective executive hires, but the challenge is to map unstructured textual descriptions
into a set of objective and interpretable job skills demanded by companies. In this section
we describe the classification strategy we designed to map these documents into indices of
job skills demand.


3.1       Classification Strategy
The classification strategy consists of three distinct steps.

       · First, we identify a comprehensive list of skills, tasks and capabilities that are as-
         sociated with Chief Officer occupations from the Occupational Information Network
         (O*NET) maintained by the US Department of Labor (DoL). O*NET contains data
         on almost 1,000 occupations, each one of which is associated with a set of standardized
         and occupation-specific descriptors. The O*NET entry for Chief Executives refers to
         all C-suite positions and includes a rich list of descriptors from which we selected
         those that relate most closely to the content of the job specifications: Skills, Work
         Activities, and Tasks, for a total of 68 descriptors.17 These are represented in tables
         A.3-A.6 in Appendix A. We collectively refer to these occupational characteristics as
         "Executive skills" throughout the analysis below.

       · Second, we group the numerous attributes of Chief Executive occupations included
         in O*NET into a smaller set of clusters of job skills on the basis of the linguistic
         distance between individual descriptors.

       · Third, we detect whether the text included in these clusters is present in the job
         descriptions given to us by the executive search firm. Specifically, we say that a skill
         cluster is present in a job specification if the linguistic distance between the text of
  16
    Appendix B describes in detail the data processing steps we took to prepare the data for analysis.
  17
    O*NET divides Tasks into Core and Supplemental, and we consider all Core Tasks. O*NET also
attaches a numeric value to the descriptors in each set according to its overall importance in the occupation,
and for Skills and Work Activities we retain descriptors of broadest relevance.



                                                     10
        the specification and the text of the skills that form the cluster is sufficiently small
        relative to all other clusters in the document.

    The second and third steps of this classification strategy--the clustering of the O*NET
descriptors and the detection of these clusters in the job descriptions--rely on measures of
linguistic similarity based on word embeddings that we describe in detail below.


3.2       Estimating Managerial Word Embeddings
We use measures of linguistic similarities based on word embeddings, a popular approach in
the natural language processing literature for determining the semantic relatedness among
words. The broad idea is to represent each word as a vector in a low-dimensional vector
space whose coordinates capture aspects of meaning. In our setting, embedding-based
similarity is preferred to simpler approaches (for example, measuring distance based on
shared vocabulary) since it allows us to handle situations in which texts use different words
that share a similar meaning such as `talk' and `communicate', or `bargain' and `negotiate'.
    Constructing word embedding models, however, requires a large amount of textual data,
certainly much more than is available in our job specifications and O*NET skill descrip-
tions. `Off-the-shelf' models--typically estimated on large corpora that are representative
of written language such as Wikipedia and Common Crawl for English--do exist, but se-
mantic relatedness in generic English may not correspond to relatedness in the context of
business and management (we provide specific examples below). For this reason, we con-
structed an embedding model using an auxiliary corpus formed of all articles from Harvard
Business Review (HBR)--a management journal aimed at both academics and professionals
in the business community--whose subject matter and language use make it more appro-
priate for assessing the meaning of language in our setting. HBR covers a variety of topics
related to industry, leadership, work life, and technology, among other areas. We use a
complete digital archive of the HBR that covers every published article since the first issue
in 1922; in total there are 14,235 articles. The HBR has undergone various shifts in edi-
torial policy and focus during its 100-year existence, which makes the content and format
of the articles somewhat varied. For the purposes of the word embedding algorithm, the
salient information is local co-occurrence patterns among words independently of the kind
of article they appear in. An independent contribution of the paper is the publishing of
this estimated embedding model for other researchers to use in their own projects that use
natural language generated in business contexts.
    The specific embedding algorithm we estimate is the continuous bag-of-words (CBOW)
model (Mikolov et al. 2013), a standard and popular model that originated in the natural
language processing literature with existing applications in economics (e.g. Atalay et al.
2020).18
    Word embedding models begin with the idea that words can be represented as vectors
 18
      Ash et al. (2020) also use a closely related algorithm.


                                                       11
in a vector space. To more formally describe them, some notation is useful. Let V be the
number of unique vocabulary words in a corpus, and let v index the unique words. Also, let
wd,n  {1, ..., V } be the nth word in document d. The simplest vector space representation
of a vocabulary has V dimensions and assigns to each unique word v the vector ev  V                     R
where                                       
                                            1 if i = v
                                     ei,v =
                                            0 if i = v.

A major limitation of this representation is that all words are by construction orthogonal to
each other and so the distance between word vectors does not relate to semantic similarity.
Embedding models instead construct a lower-dimensional vector space with K          V dimen-
sions within which to represent words. The motivating idea is that there are K relevant
semantic dimensions for understanding the meaning of a word.
    A key concept in the CBOW model is the context of each word wd,n

                        C(wd,n )  (wd,n-L , . . . , wd,n-1 , wd,n+1 , . . . , wd,n+L )

where the window size L is a model parameter. The context is important under the assump-
tion that a word's meaning can in part be inferred from the words that locally co-occur
with it. Word embeddings can then be used to directly model these co-occurrence patterns.
The CBOW model assigns to each word v an embedding vector v  K and a context                 R
              R
vector v  K that together generate the probability of observing wd,n given its context.
The conditional probability is modeled as

                                                                  1
                                                       exp       2L
                                                                                  T
                                                                                  v w
                                                                      wC(wd,n )
                    Pr [ wd,n = v | C(wd,n ) ] =                                             .
                                                                       1
                                                       v   exp        2L
                                                                                       T
                                                                                       v w
                                                                           wC(wd,n )


The embedding and context vectors are chosen to maximize the probability of the observed
data across all words in all documents.19 We follow common defaults in the machine
learning literature and set L = 5 and K = 200. The quality of an embedding model is
typically evaluated in terms of its performance in downstream language tasks and, as we
show, the embeddings estimated from the HBR corpus indeed appear to produce coherent
and interpretable relationships among words.
    The first test of the quality of the estimated embedding model we perform is to exam-
ine the words most semantically related to important concepts in management. Table A.7
shows the results of this exercise for the four words `vision', `team', `leader', and `coordi-
nation'. We compute the cosine similarity between the word embedding for each concept
  19
     In practice this optimization problem is intractable to solve directly, and Mikolov et al. (2013) intro-
duces several methods for allowing feasible computation. For estimation, we use the gensim implementation
of the CBOW model in Python.


                                                     12
and the embeddings for every other word in the HBR corpus, then rank words accordingly.
For every example, we observe that the most similar words appear naturally related to the
target concept.
   Table A.7 also performs the same exercise with an embedding model estimated on
generic English language captured by Wikipedia articles and newswires.20 Here one observes
that the choice of HBR as a training corpus produces more targeted and specific language
dependencies. While the most similar HBR terms appear to capture broadly plausible
management terms, the most similar generic terms are less specific: for vision, they include
many terms related to the physical process of seeing; for team, they include many sports
words; for leader, the terms relate primarily to politics. This highlights the value of using
a corpus that is appropriate for the context in which one seeks to uncover meaning.
   The primary application of the embeddings in this paper is to compute the similarity
among O*NET descriptions and job specification texts. Exploring the relationship among
management concepts is a question of independent interest beyond the scope of this paper,
and we make available the HBR-based model for interested researchers.


3.3     Transfer Learning
We estimate the model in one corpus (HBR) to measure semantic relatedness in other cor-
pora (O*NET descriptors and job specifications). This is known as transfer learning in the
machine learning literature, and allows one to leverage knowledge gained in one environ-
ment for other related ones. Because our procedure is generic and automated, it can also
be used for determining whether any job-related text (e.g. an online job posting) contains
skills described in external sources (e.g. O*NET skills associated with other occupations).

Clustering of O*NET skills To reduce the number of Chief Executive skills to a more
manageable number, we use a k-means algorithm to group the text descriptions together.
First we preprocess the descriptions in the same way as for HBR (described in appendix B).
We then represent each description as a K -dimensional vector by averaging the individual
                      1
word embeddings as N   d   wwd w where wd is the set of words in description d and Nd is
the number of words in the description. Finally, we normalize the lengths of all vectors to
be 1 so that variation in description length doesn't drive the results of clustering.
   The key modeling choice in k-means is the number of clusters. In this instance, standard
approaches to the problem (such as the elbow method) do not yield definitive results, and
so we adopt a more heuristic approach. We estimate k-means for k = 2, . . . , 1021 and choose
  20
     The generic corpus contains six billion total words and 400,000 unique words. The model is estimated
with an alternative procedure for embedding construction called the GloVe model (Pennington et al. 2014)
which is also very popular in the machine learning literature. We download the estimated model from http:
//nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.6B.zip and use the 200-dimensional vectors in line with the choice of
K in the HBR corpus.
  21
     For each k , we initialize the cluster centroids at 1,000 randomly drawn points, and report as the
clustering the run that results in the lowest value of the objective function at the termination of the
algorithm.


                                                   13
the lowest value of k consistent with finding meaningful separation of clusters according to
our domain expertise. This approach yields k = 6, and tables A.3-A.6 show the resulting
assignment of descriptions into clusters. We assign the following labels to each of the
clusters based on the content of the descriptions that make them up, and provide an
example description for each cluster.

  1. Administrative Tasks : basic tasks involved in running an organization.
     "Preside over or serve on Boards of Directors, management committees, or other
     governing boards."

  2. Financial and Material Resources : managing the organization's physical and financial
     resources, operations, and infrastructure.
     "Monitoring and controlling resources and overseeing the spending of money."

  3. Human Resources : appointing employees and ensuring they remain motivated.
     "Recruiting, interviewing, selecting, hiring, and promoting employees in an organiza-
     tion."

  4. Information Skills : processing information and engaging in analytic reasoning.
     "Identifying the underlying principles, reasons, or facts of information by breaking
     down information or data into separate parts."

  5. Monitoring of Performance : measuring and improving organizational performance.
     "Establishing long-range objectives and specifying the strategies and actions to achieve
     them."

  6. Social Skills : interacting with, listening to, persuading, and empathizing with others.
     "Being aware of others' reactions and understanding why they react as they do."

    The clusters we estimate are related but not identical to the short categories that
O*NET itself provides. For example, the four skills that O*NET explicitly labels as Social
all appear in the Social Skills cluster. At the same time, so does "giving full attention to
what other people are saying, taking time to understand the points being made, asking
questions as appropriate, and not interrupting at inappropriate times," which O*NET
categorizes as a Basic skill. The Administrative Skills cluster is made up solely of 12 Core
Tasks, but other Core Tasks are distributed among various other clusters.
    The different clusters also capture economically relevant distinctions. Information Skills
emphasizes cognitively demanding tasks related to information processing and problem solv-
ing. Monitoring of Performance also has a cognitive focus as the majority of associated
skills involve aspects of firm performance related to measurement and optimization. On
the other hand, Human Resources collects skills related to interpersonal interactions with
employees to increase performance. Social Skills, which we define and study extensively

                                             14
below, also captures interpersonal interactions, but not in the context of employee moti-
vation. Instead, it reflects a more generic ability to interact with others and understand
their perspectives. Finally, Administrative Tasks and Financial and Material Resources are
made up of largely operational abilities related to the day-to-day running of firms.

Mapping job specifications to skills requirements The final step in our construction
is to map each job specification into the O*NET clusters. To establish the reasonableness
of using similarity comparisons between embedded representations of the O*NET skills
descriptions and job specifications, we break the text of the specifications into separate
fragments using the structure of the documents (e.g. sentences, bullet points, paragraphs).
We then pre-process each fragment and form its average embedding vector as described
above for the O*NET text descriptions, and compute the cosine similarity between each
observation and the embedding vector formed by concatenating the text descriptions that
form each cluster. Tables A.8-A.10 display the text in job descriptions that is most similar
to each cluster, and in all cases we observe that they are consistent with the broad theme
represented by the cluster.
    To give a sense of the content that the clusters do not capture, table A.11 shows the
fragments that feature low similarity to all clusters. These generally refer to skills that
do not relate to specific management tasks, e.g. language skills, industry experience, and
educational qualifications. This provides reassurance that our procedure captures content
of interest.
    While working with fragments of job specifications is useful to obtain a sense of the
content that one recovers from similarity comparisons, the structure of documents is some-
what heterogeneous over time. This makes parsing the text into comparable units difficult.22
Therefore, we compute skill demand measures at the document rather than the fragment
level. To do so we express each document as simple average over the individual word
embeddings that make it up.
    Table 1 shows the average similarity across all job specifications in the sample to the
six O*NET skill clusters. Job description language overlaps most closely with Monitoring
of Performance which suggests this is a primary component of executives' desired skill set.
Social Skills has the lowest similarity although, as we show below, the relative importance
of this cluster has been growing over time.

        Table 1: Average Similarity of Job Specifications to O*NET Skill Clusters

                     Fin/Mat     Admin      Monitoring Info       HR Social
                       0.48       0.64        0.77     0.60       0.71 0.46

Note: This table shows the average cosine similarity between C-suite job specifications and O*NET skill
description texts.
  22
   For example, the text from earlier parts of the sample contain more bullet points and less regular
punctuation, which makes forming individual sentences hard.



                                                  15
    A concern with using the raw similarity computed cluster-by-cluster for empirical anal-
ysis is that all similarities positively co-move across documents. The first component of
the principal components decomposition explains 30% of common variation and loads pos-
itively onto all six skill clusters. Our interpretation--borne out by inspecting the texts--is
that documents vary in their level of professionalism and thoroughness and that higher
degrees of both lead to systematically higher similarity scores with all clusters. Since we
wish to interpret the similarity between a job description and an O*NET cluster as cap-
turing relative demand for that skill rather than overall document structure, we adopt the
following approach for classifying a skill cluster as present in a document. First, for each
skill cluster, we demean its similarity across job documents. We then assign a skill cluster
a `1' in a document if the demeaned similarity exceeds the median similarity of the other
skill clusters within the same document, and a `0' otherwise. In this way, we identify in-
stances in which the similarity of a document to a particular skill is higher relative to other
skills within the same document. For the rest of the paper we present analysis using this
constructed variable as our main measure of interest.


4      Skill Clusters
We now turn to describing the variation in the demand for different executive skills emerging
from the job descriptions. We start by examining the correlation across clusters within the
same document. Figure 1 plots pairwise correlations across the six clusters. The largest pos-
itive correlation is between Social and HR, followed by the one between Financial/Material
and Administrative. We also see, more broadly, a pattern of negative correlations between
clusters related to people (Social and HR ) and those related to operations (Financial and
Material Resources and Administrative ). These correlations, however, are far from perfect,
suggesting that there is value in considering the clusters individually, rather than using a
summary index.
    Second, we examine the variation in skill clusters across job titles. Figure 2 tabulates
the frequency of each skill cluster for each job title. The demand for different clusters across
C-suite positions reflects intuitive differences in tasks across the C-suite. Information is the
relatively most common skill in CIO job descriptions, while HR is the most common skill
in CHRO job descriptions.23 These patterns in part validate our measurement algorithm
since we obtain expected differences in skill composition across job titles. They also show
that the content of the job descriptions is not composed of boilerplate language and that
firms indeed adjust the text in line with skill demand.
    CEO job titles show two findings of interest. First, CEO job titles are on average less
specialized than others. The distance between the most and least common skills across
non-CEO job titles is notably higher than in CEO job titles, which suggests that the CEO
  23
    Note that our skill measure is a relative one. In absolute terms, the raw similarity of CIO job descrip-
tions is not highest with respect to the Information cluster--both Monitoring and HR are higher. What
figure 2 shows is that Information is present in CIO job texts relatively more than in other job titles.

                                                    16
           Figure 1: Pairwise Correlations of Skill Clusters within Documents

        Note: The heatmap reports polychoric correlation coefficients among the skill clusters.


is expected to possess a greater variety of skills than other executives. Second, among all
skills, the Social cluster shows the highest intensity. We will analyze the demand for social
skills in more detail in the next section.
    Third, we analyze variation in skills across industries and the countries in which search-
ing firms have their corporate headquarters. To do so, we regress (using an OLS model)
each skill measure on job title fixed effects, industry fixed effects (at the SIC 1 level), and
region fixed effects. Figure 3 reports the point estimates of the industry and region effects
along with standard errors. We do not observe substantial variation in skills across indus-
tries, with the exception of a large over-representation of Administrative Tasks in Health
and Social Services, Membership Organizations, and Public Administration. This may be
driven in part by our sample being composed of larger firms with more uniform needs across
sectors. Across regions, a notable finding is that Financial and Material Resources is rela-
tively more present for firms headquartered outside North America and Australia/NZ. This
suggests that firms in Europe and Asia involve their most senior executives in operational
tasks that are delegated to middle mangers elsewhere.
    Finally, we study the evolution of skills over time by adding year-of-search effects to
the previous controls for job title, country of CHQ location and industry. We report the
estimated regression coefficients on the time dummies in Figure 4. During our sample
period, there is a large increase in the Social cluster (+27% over the 2000-2017 period),
while there is a decreasing trend in Financial/Material (-30% in 2017 relative to 2000).




                                                  17
                              Figure 2: Skills across C-suite Job Titles

Note: The bar heights for each job title show the fraction of documents for which our algorithm identifies
a skill as present.


5        The Demand for Social Skills
One of the novel stylized facts emerging from the classification of the job descriptions is the
importance of Social skills in executive searches, especially in CEO job descriptions, and
its large increase over time relative to all other clusters. In common with Deming (2017),
we interpret the Social cluster as capturing the ability to read and react to others based
on tacit knowledge. Social psychologists have long recognized the importance of such skills
in brain development, beginning with Premack and Woodruff (1978). Korkmaz (2011)
explains that

         Social cognition...embraces all the skills required to manage social communica-
         tion and relationships in humans and nonhumans. It...gives rise to the awareness
         that others have a mind with various mental states including beliefs, intuitions,
         plans, emotions, information, desires, and intentions and that these may differ
         from one's own.

Importantly, this is quite distinct from motivational "soft skills" (which are more appro-
priately captured in the Human Resources cluster), or personal charisma.
    Why do Boards explicitly include social skills in their C-suite job descriptions? A
possible interpretation of the data is that the inclusion of social skills merely represents the
relevance of topics related to "soft" leadership skills in managerial language. In support
of this interpretation, we note that the increasing importance of Social language is also
apparent in the HBR corpus, as we show in Figure 5.24 Between 1980 and 2017, the
  24
       To measure the implied skill content in HBR, we count the fraction of sentences in the HBR per year

                                                     18
                                             (a) Industry Effects




                                              (b) Region Effects

    Figure 3: Executive Skills across Industry and Region of Corporate Headquarters

Note: This figure displays point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of regression coefficients from an
OLS model of individual skills on region, country, and job title fixed effects. The omitted category for
industry is manufacturing and the omitted category for region is USA.




                                                   19
                               Figure 4: Executive Skills over Time

Note: This figure displays point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of regression coefficients from an
OLS model of individual skills on year-of-search effects (in addition to industry, job title, and region fixed
effects). The omitted category is 2000, the first year in our sample.


Social cluster doubles in size, while the operational cluster declines, albeit less intensively
compared to the job descriptions.
    This interpretation, however, fails to capture a salient feature of the data, which is the
wide heterogeneity in the demand for executive skills (including social ones) across firms,
even within countries, narrowly defined industries, and years.25
    In what follows, we thus explore a different angle, i.e. that the demand for social
skills at C-suite levels reflects actual firms' needs, and specifically in the need to reduce
communication frictions in the organization. We discuss the logic of this argument and the
empirical support for it below.


5.1     Modeling the Demand for Social Skills in the C-suite
A seminal paper establishing a connection between social skills and communication frictions
is Deming (2017). The model studies the role of workers' social skills in a team production
setting, where individuals with similar hierarchical status can trade tasks with each other
that contain the words `leader' or `leadership' in addition to a term from the different O*NET skill clusters.
  25
     The adjusted R-squared of a simple OLS regression of each of the clusters on a set of industry, country,
function and year dummies ranges between 0.063 for the cluster Monitoring of Performance and 0.208 for
the cluster Information.



                                                     20
                               Figure 5: Executive Skills over Time

Note: To generate the HBR time series, we use the following procedure. First, we identify every sentence
that contains the word `leader' or `leadership'. We then score these sentences as a 1 in a particular
skill cluster if they contain any of the words from the related O*NET descriptions (stripped of generic
stopwords). Then, for each year we obtain the fraction of flagged sentences as a proportion of all sentences.
The time series plots are the five-year moving averages of these fractions normalized to their 1980 value.




                                                     21
to exploit their comparative advantage. In this context, individuals equipped with better
social skills can perform these trades in a shorter time, and can thus specialize and work
more efficiently with others. This is especially valuable when tasks are more unpredictable,
and/or when there is a greater intensity of tasks whose solution is not readily available
ex-ante (i.e., when there is a greater need for ex-post coordination among workers).
    Our setting differs from Deming (2017) in one important respect, however. While co-
production with other hierarchical peers is surely part of what C-suite managers do, their
job typically consists of other coordination or advisory activities that require interactions
with lower-ranked employees.26 To tailor our analysis to C-suite settings, we thus need
to depart from the Deming (2017) model to allow for team communication flows that are
primarily vertical, i.e. involve individuals with different hierarchical status and specifically
workers and managers. We do so through a model examining the role of social skills within
a simple setup in which, as in Garicano (2000), production hinges on interactions between
workers and a manager to solve problems.

5.1.1    Model setup

A firm is made up of the workforce and the C-suite. It faces a distribution of problems
F () on the unit interval where   [0, 1] is a particular problem and f is the problem
density. Central to the analysis is the idea that production depends in part on vertical
communication. We denote by y () the incremental value of such communication. In
other words, y () captures the additional output that is generated when the C-suite and
the workforce interact in the context of addressing problem . We assume that y (0) = 0
and y () > 0, which captures the idea that problems are ordered according to increasing
difficulty and that the gains from vertical communication are increasing in difficulty.
     Given the setup, output is maximized when the C-suite and workforce interact for every
problem the firm faces.27 The maximum value of communication is therefore
                                                    1
                                         E
                                        y =             y ()f ()d.                                  (1)
                                                0


In practice, communication frictions can limit organizations from achieving this. In Gar-
icano (2000) communication frictions arise due to managerial time constraints combined
with a technological cost of communicating between levels of the organizational hierarchy.
In our setting, we maintain a C-suite time constraint but instead conceive of communica-
tion costs as arising from the (lack of) social skills of managers. The key assumption is that
executives with good social skills are able to spend less time communicating with workers
to understand the problems that must be solved. This idea is explored by Deming (2017)
  26
      Using detailed time diaries on a sample of 1,114 CEOs, Bandiera et al. (2020) show that executives
spend on average 70% of their time in interactive activities such as meetings and calls, of which only a
fraction involves exclusively other C-suite managers.
   27
      One could more realistically add a mass of problems for which there were no gain to communication,
but this would not affect the main conclusions of the analysis.


                                                        22
in the context of collaborative production in the labor force, but rarely in the context of
hierarchical manager-worker interactions.28 The time cost of communicating a unit mass
of problems is c and the total time available for the C-suite to engage in communication
is T . The efficient output level y E is therefore only attainable when 1  T  c
                                                                                , where 1 is the
demand for managerial time (i.e. the unit mass of problems for which communication is
valuable) and T  c
                   is the effective supply of time. For the remainder of the analysis, we focus
on a situation in which this condition fails so that the C-suite lacks the social skills to fully
realize the gains from interaction.
    Maximizing output under a binding managerial time constraint requires the firm to
choose how to allocate managerial time. We model this by introducing a communication
rule C with the interpretation that workers interact with managers whenever   C . In
words, the firm decides which problems benefit from vertical communication and which do
not. The formal problem is

                                                                                T
                       max         y ()f ()d such that              f ()d =       .                    (2)
                        C                                                       c
                            C                                 C


Given that the value of communication is increasing in , the optimal communication rule
allocates problems to the C-suite whenever they surpass a threshold  that is chosen to
satisfy the resource constraint:
                                                   T
                                       1 - F ( ) = .                                    (3)
                                                   c
The choice of  determines the demand for managerial time, and is chosen so that demand
(left-hand side) equals supply (right-hand side). This in turn generates second-best output

                                                  1
                                          
                                         y =          y ()f ()d.                                       (4)
                                                 


Figure 6 presents a graphical representation of the outcome. The left panel presents the
distribution of problems, where  is chosen in line with (3) to satisfy F ( ) = 1 - Tc
                                                                                      . The
right panel presents the resulting loss in output relative to the efficiency benchmark y E .
Because problems in (0,  ) receive no managerial input when such input is valuable, output
falls accordingly.

5.1.2    Social Skills and Firm Characteristics

In the baseline setup, reducing c is valuable because it reduces  and allows the C-suite to
engage with a broader range of problems where its input is valuable. We now study how
the marginal gain of decreasing c depends on firm characteristics to generate predictions
that we can take to the data. We consider two specific situations: how the demand for
  28
    One exception is McCann et al. (2015), in which agents differ in cognitive and communication skills and
endogenously sort into worker and managerial positions. Agents with higher communication skills become
managers because their communication skills allow them to better help workers, although the model does
not feature management by exception.


                                                      23
       F ()
                                                                                           y ()f ()

            T
       1-   c




                                                                   yE - y         y


                                                         0                             1
       (a) Equilibrium Communication Cutoff         (b) Output with Frictions (Dark Shade) and
                                                    Loss Relative to No Frictions (Light Shade)

                Figure 6: Outcome of Model with Communication Frictions


social skills depends on the volume of problems that firms face, and on the value of vertical
communication between managers and workers.

Volume of Problems. We extend the baseline model to incorporate the volume of prob-
lems the C-suite faces by introducing N separate classes of problem, each with the same
distribution F () as above.29 One interpretation of N is that it represents the number of
employees in the firm, where problems arise at the individual level and require bilateral in-
teraction. Another is that N represents different types of problems that arise in the course
of production. For example, a car manufacturer might need to acquire inputs, assemble
them into a car, and then market the cars to buyers. The more distinct tasks that pro-
duction requires, the greater the volume of problems the C-suite faces. Finally, N could
capture the number of divisions in a firm, under the assumption that vertical communica-
tion with the C-suite is intermediated by division managers. We explore different empirical
counterparts for N to account for these distinct possibilities.
    The maximization problem accounting for problem volume is

                                                                                 T
                    max N         y ()f ()d such that N                f ()d =     .                  (5)
                     C                                                           c
                            C                                      C


which produces an optimal communication rule given by

                                                             T
                                        N [1 - F ( )] =        .                                      (6)
                                                             c

As the mass of problems grows, additional demands are placed on the C-suite which reduces
the amount of time available for communication about any one class of problem (see left
panel of figure 7). Moreover, this shifts the marginal problem that the C-suite can solve to
  29
    Problem classes could in principle have different distributions, but this would not affect the main
predictions.



                                                  24
the right (right panel). Importantly, the marginal gain to relaxing time constraints is now
higher because the marginal problem that benefits from vertical communication is more
valuable.
       F ()
                                                                                              y ()f ()
          T
    1-   cN2
          T
    1-   cN1




                                                                                        
                                  1      2                   0                  1       2 1
     (a) Evolution in Communication Cutoff                         (b) Impact on Output

     Figure 7: Effect of Increase in Problem Volume on Communication and Output

Note: This figure shows the impact of increasing the volume of problems from N1 to N2 . To satisfy the
resource constraint on C-suite time, the marginal problem within any class shifts to the right (left panel).
This in turn further reduces total output by an amount equal to the light shaded region (right panel).


    We formalize these observations in the following result.
                  y   2 
Proposition 1 cN     < 0. That is, output falls more quickly when communication costs
rise when problem volume increases.
Proof. By differentiating (6) we obtain:

                               d       T         d       T
                                  =       2
                                             and    =    
                                                                .
                               dc   f ( )c N     dN   f ( )cN 2

Furthermore,
                        1                                          1
               y                                     d                             T y ( )
                  =         y ()f ()d - N y ( )f ( )    =              y ()f ()d -         .
               N                                     dN                              cN

Now observe that

                            2y             d
                                               
                                                   T y ( ) T y ( ) d
                               = -y ( )f ( )    + 2       -
                           N c               dc     cN       cN dc
                                  T y ( ) T y ( ) T y ( ) d
                               =- 2       + 2      -
                                    cN       cN         cN dc
                                  T y ( ) d
                               =-             < 0.
                                     cN dc


    The conclusion is that firms that face a higher volume of problems suffer greater output
losses from poor executive social skills, and also benefit more on the margin from improving
social skills of the C-suite.

                                                      25
Information Intensity of Worker Skills. A straightforward prediction of the model
is that increasing the value of vertical communication increases the value of social skills.
To see this, consider Figure 8, which illustrates a situation where the value of C-suite
communication rises from y1 () to y2 (). The total loss from communication frictions rises
because the problems below the cutoff  would benefit more from vertical communication.
More relevant for social skill demand on the margin is that the loss incurred on the marginal
problem  rises by y2 ( ) - y1 ( ). This in turn raises the value of easing the time constraint
on the margin, which we summarize as:

Proposition 2 Suppose that the value of C-suite communication changes from y1 () to
                                                 
y2 () in such a way that y2 ( ) > y1 ( ). Then y
                                               c
                                                  is larger in absolute value under y2 than
under y1 .
                               d
Proof. From 3 we obtain         dc
                                     =      T
                                         f ( )c2
                                                 .   The equilibrium value of communication is y  =
 1
 
   y ()f ()d so that
                             y                  d      -y ( )T
                                 = -y ( )f ( )      =          .
                             c                   dc       c2
The result follows directly by evaluating this expression under y1 and y2 .

                                                                     y2 ()f ()




                                                                     y1 ()f ()




                                 0                               1

              Figure 8: Effect of Increasing Value of Vertical Communication

Note: This figure shows the impact of increasing the value of vertical communication from y1 () to y2 ().
This increases the loss from communication frictions by an amount equal to the light shaded region.


   To give this result an empirical grounding, we focus on a particular channel that the
management literature has long emphasized increases the value of vertical communication:
the extent to which workforce skills are oriented towards information processing activities.
The argument is that the shift towards information-intensive work requires executives to
exert additional effort in communication in order to coordinate employees and achieve
organizational alignment:

      [With computerization] more effort is needed to establish the necessary min-
      imum of communications so that we understand each other and know each
      other's needs, goals, perceptions and ways of doing things. Information does
      not supply this. Only direct contact, whether by voice or by written word, can

                                                       26
        communicate. . . The more we automate information-handling, the more we will
        have to create opportunities for effective communication (Drucker 2007, The
        Effective Executive, original edition 1967).

To this argument, our model adds the additional insight that firms should seek out execu-
tives who are better communicators when communication needs become more salient. This
channel is quite distinct from work in organizational economics that shows how IT adoption
facilitates the collection, analysis and communication of information that, in turn, comple-
ments executive decision-making (e.g. Garicano 2000, Guadalupe et al. 2013, Bloom et al.
2014). The argument of Drucker (2007) is that the changing nature of worker skills, not
the adoption of new technology in the form of physical capital per se, is key for driving a
change in what constitutes effective management. This motivates us to test the relationship
between executive social skills and direct measures of workforce skills.

Summary The model illustrates a mechanism through which firm characteristics may
affect the demand for social skills in the C-suite. In particular, the value of managerial
social skills is greater when the organization faces a greater volume of problems, or when
vertical communication becomes more valuable. This is because better social skills allow
for more communication per unit of time, and thus relax the managerial time constraint.
These are the main predictions that we take to the data.30


5.2      Empirical results on social skill demand
5.2.1     Empirical model

To explore the empirical support for the predictions of the model, we estimate a regression
model of the form:

                       Socialf t =  + Xf t + o + i + chq + sl + t + jt                                       (7)

Where Socialf t is a dummy to denote the relative importance of the Social cluster in the
job description for firm f at time t, Xf t are firm characteristics that proxy for the volume
of problems in production and the value of C-suite communication (all described below in
more detail), o are C-title fixed effects, i are industry fixed effects (measured at the SIC
2 level), chq are fixed effects for the continent in which the firm originating the search is
located, sl are fixed effects for the continent in which the search is launched from, t are
year of search dummies. We cluster the standard errors by firm. The key prediction is that
the  parameter is positive.
  30
     While the model provides a framework for understanding potential channels for the demand for social
skills, it may indirectly relate to demand for other skills too. For example, if certain skills are complementary
to social skills, one would expect their demand to rise along with social. On the other hand, executives
may be horizontally differentiated, so that emphasizing social skills in a job description may be associated
with a fall in emphasis in other skills.



                                                       27
5.2.2       Social Skills and the Volume and Scope of Problems

Our first proxy for the volume of problems is firm size, expressed in terms of total employee
count.31 In addition, we use measures of firm activities and organizational complexity as
additional proxies of the scope of problems requiring C-suite input: whether the firm is a
multinational and whether it is diversified across industries, to capture problems involving
decisions across countries or sectors; whether the firm was involved in M&A activities
prior to the search, to capture problems related to post-merger integration or divestiture
activities; and whether the firm is publicly listed, to measure the need to solve problems
involving external constituencies, such as investors and regulators.
    Table 2 shows the cross-sectional relationship between social skills and these proxies.
All regressions include controls for industry, continent of CHQ location and continent of
search, job title and year of search fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the firm level across
all regressions.

                       Table 2: Social Cluster and Firm Characteristics


                              (1)                            (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
  Dependent Variable: Social Skill Cluster


  Log(Employment)                    0.014***           0.012***     0.015***     0.012***      0.012***
                                      (0.003)            (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)
  MNE                                                   0.047***
                                                         (0.017)
  Diversified                                                          -0.004
                                                                      (0.017)
  M&A activity                                                                     0.030*
                                                                                   (0.016)
  Public                                                                                         0.030*
                                                                                                 (0.018)
  Observations                         4,618                4,618      4,618        4,618         4,618
  Adjusted R-squared                   0.196                0.198      0.196        0.197         0.197

Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All columns are estimated by OLS. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level, in parentheses under the coefficient. The dependent variable across all columns is a
dummy denoting an above-the-median similarity with the Social O*NET cluster (where the median is
computed using the raw similarity of all clusters in the job description). MNE =1 if the firm has operations
in more than one country; Diversified =1 if the firm has operations in more than one 4 digit SIC sector;
M&A activity=1 if the firm is involved in M&A activity (as a buyer, target or seller); Public =1 if the firm is
publicly listed. All independent variables are measured using data in the three years prior to the executive
search. All columns control for country of CHQ location, country of search, industry (SIC 2 level), year of
search, type of C-suite position advertised.


    We start by looking at the relationship between the Social cluster and firm size in column
(1), and find that larger firms are significantly more likely to include social skills in their job
  31
       All firm variables used in this section are measured in the three years prior to the executive search.


                                                       28
description.32 The magnitude of the coefficient implies that a standard deviation change
in log employment is associated with a 3.5 percentage point increase in the probability
of including the social cluster. In columns (2)-(5) we examine the relationship between
the Social cluster and the other firm characteristics described above, controlling for firm
size. In sum, we find a strong and significant relationship with MNE status, and weaker
or insignificant relationships with the other variables. The magnitude of the coefficients
implies that MNE status is associated with an increase in the probability that the job
description includes references to social skills of 4.7 percentage points, significant at the 1%
level. The coefficient on both the M&A and the Public status dummy imply a 3 percentage
point change, but the coefficient is significant at the 10% level, and the coefficient on the
diversification dummy is close to zero and insignificant (coefficient -0.004. standard error
0.017).

5.2.3    Executive Social Skills and Worker Information Technology Skills

As explained above, an important potential factor in raising the need for effective execu-
tive communication is the information intensity of skills in the workforce. Our measure of
this relies on detailed information on the type of skills demanded by firms, which we infer
from the vacancies posted by the firm in the years adjacent to the search.33 We draw this
information from Burning Glass Technologies data, which collects detailed vacancies for
millions of organizations in the U.S. starting from 2007.34 We are able to match Burning
Glass data only for a subset of organizations in our sample (703 U.S.-based searches, and
within this sample 8 are repeated searches by the same firm), though this small matched
sample includes a large number of job postings (over 5,000,000). We exploit information
on the detailed skills associated with each vacancy using the 27 skill clusters generated by
Burning Glass,35 shown in Table B.13. We start by using the share of postings requiring
skills that are classified in the "Information Technology" and "Analysis" skill categories,
which groups a variety of basic IT skills ranging from "Microsoft Excel" to advanced soft-
ware skills (e.g. "Natural Language Processing"), as well as other broader cognitive skills
related to information tasks (e.g. "Data Analysis"). The average value of the IT skills vari-
able is 0.12 (standard deviation 0.08). To take into account latent patterns of correlation
with other skills within the constraints of our limited sample, we also use summary factors
emerging from a principal component decomposition. This generates six factors with eigen-
value greater than one, as shown in Table B.14. Among these factors, the most relevant
  32
     We obtain similar results when we use log sales as a proxy for firm size, which is available for a subset
of 1916 observations. The coefficient on log sales is 0.012, standard error 0.005.
  33
     To maximize the number of companies matched with the our sample, we use information on vacancies
posted within both the three years prior and following the executive search year (results are qualitatively
similar but include a much smaller sample using only the three years prior to the search).
  34
     Burning Glass data have been extensively used in prior research to document job market trends and
skill demand across firms and MSAs within the U.S. (Deming and Kahn 2018, Hershbein and Kahn 2018).
To our knowledge, this is the first time that they are combined with data on skill demands at C-suite-level
positions. We thank Bledi Taska for giving us access to the Burning Glass for this project.
  35
     Each vacancy can include reference to multiple skill categories.


                                                     29
for our purposes is Factor 1, which loads positively on the Information Technology and
Analysis skills but also, interestingly, on skills such as "Design", "Marketing", "Media and
Writing" and "Business" capturing managerial, creative and communicative tasks, in line
with the idea that information skills are associated with different bundles of complementary
cognitive tasks. To make sure that the skills measures are not sensitive to the Burning Glass
classification, we also use as an alternative classification the skill taxonomy developed by
Deming and Kahn (2018), focusing specifically on software skills (See Table B.15).36 Using
this approach, the IT Skill variable is higher on average, and still heterogeneous across
firms (mean 0.26, standard deviation 0.23). Also in this case, the demand for technological
skills covaries with other skills related to communication ("Writing") and interactive tasks
("Social") (see B.17 for details). In the analysis, we examine the relationship between the
basic technology variables, as well as the factors, using both classification schemes.
    Table 3 presents the results. In column (1), we examine the relationship between social
skills and the technology adoption variable derived from Burning Glass, in a regression
including controls for the log of total number of job vacancies posted by the firm (which
serves as a proxy for firm size in these regressions, since the variable is highly correlated
with employment), the same set of controls used in the earlier regressions (with the main
difference that industry controls are now at the 1 digit SIC level given the smaller sample)
and additional controls related to the Burning Glass data (specifically, total number of oc-
cupations advertised, the share of job ads with levels of education and years of experience
required). The IT variable is positively and significantly correlated with the Social cluster
(coefficient 0.680, standard error 0.241): a standard deviation change in the share of job
vacancies listing IT skills is associated with a 5.2 percentage points increase in the Social
cluster. In column (2) we show that the two variables continue to be significantly corre-
lated even when we include controls for other characteristics of the posted vacancies (the
average level of education and experience requested, and the total number of occupations
advertised). In column (3) we replace the IT shares variables with the principal component
factors described above, and find that the factor loading on the IT variables continues to be
positively and significantly correlated with the Social skills cluster.37 Columns (4) and (5)
repeat the analysis using the IT variables and factors derived from the Deming and Khan
(2018) classification, showing similar results: a standard deviation change in the software
variable is associated with a 6.3 percentage point increase in the Social cluster, and the
  36
     We extended the classification of Deming and Kahn (2018) to include skills that had not been present
in the original taxonomy, and to make sure that we could capture the heterogeneity present in the IT
skills information. For example, "Cloud storage", appears in our data but was not included in the original
classification, and we classified it into the "Software" category. We also reclassified some of the IT skills that
were originally classified into the "Character" group (e.g. "Basic Computer Knowledge" and "Microsoft
Office") in a dedicated "Basic Software" category, where we include other non-specialist software skills.
We present the details of the data construction in Appendix.
  37
     This column includes as additional controls also all the other five factors with eigenvalues greater
than one. None of the other factors are significantly associated with the Social skills cluster. We find
qualitatively and quantitatively similar results when we control for a full battery of occupation fixed effects,
results available upon request.



                                                       30
              Table 3: Social Cluster, IT Adoption and Cognitive Skills


                                    (1)                     (2)        (3)           (5)          (6)
  Dependent Variable: Social Skill Cluster


  Log(Total Vacancies)                  0.042***      0.056***      0.061***     0.053***      0.056***
                                         (0.012)       (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.018)
  IT Skills                             0.680***      0.758***
  (Skill Shares, Burning Glass)          (0.241)       (0.270)
  IT & Cognitive Skills                                             0.093***
  (Factor, Burning Glass)                                            (0.023)
  IT Skills                                                                      0.285***
  (Skill Shares, Deming and Khan)                                                 (0.098)
  IT & Cognitive Skills                                                                        0.061***
  (Factor, Deming and Khan)                                                                     (0.018)
  Observations                             703              703        703           703          703
  Adjusted R-squared                      0.222            0.227      0.239         0.228        0.230

Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All columns are estimated by OLS. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level, in parentheses under the coefficient. The dependent variable across all columns is a
dummy denoting an above-the-median similarity with the Social O*NET cluster (where the median is
computed using the raw similarity of all clusters in the job description). IT Skills measures the average
share of job vacancies including reference to the Burning Glass skill categories Information Technology or
Analysis. IT & Cognitive Skills is the first principal factor derived from the set of 27 skills categories
(factor loadings are presented in Table B.14). The last two rows refer to skill shares and factor built using
the alternative Deming and Kahn (2018) classification. All independent variables are measured using data
in the three years prior to and following the executive search. All columns control for country of CHQ
location, country of search, industry (SIC 1 level), year of search, type of C-suite position advertised, total
number of occupations advertised, the share of job ads with levels of education and years of experience
required.




                                                      31
summary IT factor continues to be positively and significantly correlated with it.

5.2.4    Other clusters

We next examine whether the patterns observed in the data are present for other clusters
beyond Social. This analysis is shown in Table 4 (in this table each coefficient corresponds
to a different regression). In summary, the positive correlation with firm size, MNE status
and M&A activity is specific to the Social cluster. In fact, if anything, the MNE and M&A
dummies are negatively correlated with some of the other clusters. For example, employ-
ment is negatively and significantly correlated with the Material and Financial Resources
cluster, and the MNE and the M&A dummies with HR and Administrative clusters. This
suggests that the increase in social language is capturing a broader patter of substitution in
the job description of C-suite managers, and specifically a shift away from the mentioning
of more operational and easier-to-delegate tasks, and toward more coordination activities.
The other interesting aspect of this analysis is the absence of correlation (or negative cor-
relation) of the proxies with the HR cluster,38 which is primarily focused on the ability
to improve individuals' motivation, in contrast with the Social cluster, which is primarily
focused the ability to interact with other through listening, persuasion and empathy. This
suggests that it is important to distinguish between different types of capabilities that are
typically lumped into a unique "soft skills" category.
    We also observe that our measures of worker information technology skills positively
correlate with the executive Information skill cluster, consistent with the notion that these
skills complement cognitively intensive activities at the C-suite level. This finding--as well
as the negative and significant correlation between the workers' information skills variables
and the demand for operational and administrative skills in C-suite job descriptions--is in
line with the patterns of task complementarity and substitution examined in the earlier
literature (Autor and Dorn 2013, Deming and Kahn 2018). Differently from the earlier
literature, however, these patterns occur across, rather than within, occupations and hier-
archical levels.




  38
    The only variable for which we find a positive correlation between the HR cluster if whether the firm
is publicly listed


                                                   32
                                                         Table 4: Skill Clusters and Firm Characteristics


                                                            (1)               (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
                          Dependent Variable:              Social        Management              Monitoring Information Personnel
                                                         (Baseline)            of   Administrative
                                                                                                 of Perfor-              Manage-
                                                                                                               Skills
                                                                         Financial     Tasks       mance                    ment
                                                                             and
                                                                          Material
                                                                         Resources
                          Log(Employment)                 0.014***        -0.008**     -0.005        0.006     -0.002      -0.005
                                                           (0.003)         (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
                          MNE                             0.047***          0.003   -0.054***       0.023      0.021     -0.040**
                                                           (0.017)         (0.017)    (0.015)      (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.017)
                          Diversified                       -0.004          0.009      -0.011        0.016     0.005       -0.015
                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                           (0.017)         (0.018)    (0.015)      (0.018)    (0.017)     (0.018)




33
                          M&A Activity                     0.030*           -0.003  -0.060***      0.030*       0.009   -0.062***
                                                           (0.016)         (0.016)    (0.013)      (0.016)    (0.014)     (0.013)
                          Public                           0.030*         -0.038**     0.007     -0.062***     0.022     0.040**
                                                           (0.018)         (0.018)    (0.016)      (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.019)
                          IT Skills                       0.758***          0.177   -0.669***    -0.894***    0.663**      -0.036
                          (Shares, Burning Glass)          (0.270)         (0.262)    (0.247)      (0.279)    (0.260)     (0.278)
                          IT & Cognitive Skills           0.093***        -0.043**   -0.050**    -0.075***   0.060***       0.014
                          (Factor, Burning Glass)          (0.023)         (0.022)    (0.021)      (0.024)    (0.021)     (0.023)
                          IT Skills                       0.285***          0.074   -0.259***       -0.163     0.168*      -0.105
                          (Shares, Deming & Khan)          (0.098)         (0.096)    (0.086)      (0.103)    (0.099)     (0.100)
                          IT & Cognitive Skills           0.061***         -0.035*   -0.035**       -0.027     0.026        0.011
                          (Factor, Deming & Khan           (0.018)         (0.018)    (0.016)      (0.020)    (0.019)     (0.020)

     Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Each coefficient in this table corresponds to a different regression. All columns except are estimated by OLS. Standard
     errors are clustered at the firm level, in parentheses under the coefficient. MNE =1 if the firm has operations in more than one country; Diversified =1 if the firm
     has operations in more than one 4 digit SIC sector; M&A activity=1 if the firm is involved in M&A activity (as a buyer, target or seller); Public =1 if the firm is
     publicly listed. IT Skills measures the average share of job vacancies including reference to the Burning Glass skill categories Information Technology or Analysis. IT
     & Cognitive Skills is the first principal factor derived from the set of 27 skills categories (factor loadings are presented in Table B.14). The last two rows refer to skill
     shares and factor built using the alternative Deming and Kahn (2018) classification. MNE, Diversified, M&A and Public are measured using data in the three years
     prior to the executive search. All the IT skills variables are measured using data in the three years prior to and following the executive search. All columns control for
     country of CHQ location, country of search, industry (SIC 2 level), year of search, type of C-suite position advertised.
5.2.5    Robustness

Finally, we explore the robustness of the baseline empirical results above. These are con-
tained in Table 5, with column (1) reporting the baseline results of Tables 2 and 3 (in this
table each coefficient corresponds to a different regression). To begin, column (2) uses a
probit rather than linear probability model and the results are nearly identical.
     One concern is that the inclusion of references to social skills may simply reflect dif-
ferences in the effort that Boards put in drafting job descriptions, rather than actual firm
needs. For example, Boards of larger and more complex firms may simply spend more time
writing the job descriptions, and hence refer to more skills in the documents. While the
data construction controls for these basic differences in document structure--recall that
the dependent variable in our analysis takes value one if the similarity of the social cluster
is higher relative to other clusters in the same document--we also examine whether our
main results hold after including a variable for document length in column (3). We find
little difference with the baseline.
     Another concern is that search consultants may influence Boards to include language
that may help them cross-sell additional consulting services, regardless of specific firm
needs. For example, consultants may suggest including references to specific skills for
which they are able to provide additional screening or development services. To the extent
that this incentive varies across organizations--for example, if cross-selling incentives are
higher in larger firms--and that they focus specifically on social skills, this would bias
our estimates. To address this issue, we exploit the subsample of firms for which we have
multiple searches over time. We use this sample to examine whether references to social
skills are always added--which would be consistent with job descriptions merely reflecting
additions to the "menu" of services offered by search consultants--or also removed--which
would be more in line with the notion that language is instead tailored to firms' specific
needs. More importantly, this sample allows us to study the relationship between changes
in coordination needs and in the language used in the executive search documents, thus
controlling for time invariant firm characteristics that may be salient to search consultants
(e.g. differences in firm size in levels).39
     The within-firm analysis is based on 530 unique firms and 1,273 searches.40 Changes
in job descriptions include both the addition of references to the Social cluster (in 26%
of the cases) and deletion (18% of cases). This is important, as it shows that firms both
add and remove references to Social skills. We also see heterogeneity in the employment
changes: 19% of the sample records a decline in employment over time (average change of
-14%), and 23% an increase (average change of 17%). Column (4) of Table 5 shows the
  39
     Clearly, if the omitted variable is time varying--for example, if cross-selling incentives focused specifi-
cally on social skills are higher in growing firms--this would still bias our estimates.
  40
     We consider only multiple searches that are conducted in different years. Since some firms appear in
the sample in more than two years of data, we include only the first and last job description included in
the corpus. If a company runs multiple searches within a single year (which happens for 165 searches), we
build an average of the cluster measures across all searches within a given year.



                                                      34
within-firm correlation between the Social cluster and log firm employment, the only firm
level proxy where we observe meaningful variation over time.41 This shows that the Social
cluster and firm size are strongly correlated even in this demanding specification. In fact,
the coefficient on employment is even larger than in the cross sectional results: a standard
deviation change in employment is associated with an increase in the Social cluster by 20
percentage points.42
    Finally, Boards may draft job descriptions with a specific candidate in mind, rather than
trying to find the best available match for the job. A specific concern is that referencing
social skills in the job descriptions may help tilt the selection process towards internal
candidates, as it refers to skills (e.g. persuasion, motivation, listening, etc.) that are easier
to assess "on the job." If Boards of firms characterized by more complex production needs
are more likely to prefer internal candidates,43 this would generate a spurious association
with the Social cluster. To allay this concern, we measure whether the search led to the
hire of an internal candidate (that is, a person that was formally employed by the firm
prior to the search). We were able to retrieve information on hiring outcomes for 1,093 US-
and UK-based searches (out of a total of 3,305 in the sample), using both external public
sources and manual searches conducted by a team of Research Assistants.44 We use this
information to examine whether there is a systematic relationship between social skills and
internal hires, and whether the relationship between social skills and firm characteristics is
sensitive to controlling for internal hiring outcomes. The results are as follows. First, the
hiring of an internal candidate is not associated with the probability that the job description
included a reference to social skills. Second, as shown in columns (5) and (6), controlling
for internal hires does not alter the magnitude and significance of the results.45




  41
     Firms may advertise for different C-suite positions within and across different years. To account for
these differences, the fixed effects specification also includes a dummy to denote which C-suite positions
were used to build the averages. These variables are built exactly as in earlier tables, using information on
the three years preceding the search.
  42
     We find no evidence of a correlation with employment in the within-firm regressions for the other
clusters, results available upon request.
  43
     Cziraki and Jenter (2020) show that the share of internal CEO hires has been steadily increasing over
the past two decades.
  44
     We started this exercise drawing information on executive appointments from Boardex data. After
noticing some inconsistencies, especially for private firms, we decided to rely more intensively on manual
searches. Eventually, we decided to focus on US and UK searches since these were the countries more
compatible with the language skills of our RAs, and more likely to include hiring announcements in the
news. Our ability to retrieve data on hires varies dramatically over time. We were able to find data on
hires for only 22% of the sample of searches taking place between 2000 and 2009, and 43% of the sample
for searches between 2010 and 2017. See Appendix B for details on the data construction.
  45
     In these columns We use a coarser set of industry (SIC 1) and time (4 year intervals) controls given
the smaller sample size.


                                                     35
                                           Table 5: Robustness Checks


                                   (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
     Dependent Variable: Social Cluster
                                Baseline    Probit    Control for   Within firm    Internal sample   Internal
                                                      document                                       sample,
                                                      length                                         control for
                                                                                                     internal
     Log(Employment)         0.014***       0.001**    0.014***         0.080***      0.014**          0.016**
                              (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.003)          (0.029)      (0.006)          (0.006)
     MNE                     0.047***      0.147***    0.048***                       0.058*            0.061*
                              (0.017)       (0.050)     (0.017)                       (0.033)          (0.033)
     Diversified              0.030*        0.091*      0.031*                          0.008            0.009
                              (0.016)       (0.054)     (0.018)                       (0.034)          (0.034)
     MA Activity               -0.004        -0.011      -0.004                         0.007            0.011




36
                              (0.017)       (0.051)     (0.017)                       (0.036)          (0.036)
     Public                   0.030*        0.088*      0.030*                         -0.012           -0.010
                              (0.018)       (0.047)     (0.016)                       (0.031)          (0.031)
     IT Skills               0.680***      2.550***    0.763***
     (Shares, Burning Glass)  (0.241)       (0.875)     (0.271)
     IT & Cognitive Skills   0.093***      0.310***    0.094***
     (Factor, Burning Glass)  (0.023)       (0.074)     (0.023)
     IT Skills               0.285***      0.949***    0.288***
     (Shares, Deming & Khan) (0.098)        (0.320)     (0.098)
     IT & Cognitive Skills   0.061***      0.210***    0.061***
     (Factor, Deming & Khan   (0.018)       (0.060)     (0.018)

                                                Notes: See next page.
          * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All columns except column (2) are estimated by OLS. Column (2) is estimated by Probit. Standard errors are clustered at the
     firm level, in parentheses under the coefficient. The dependent variable across all columns is a dummy denoting an above-the-median similarity with the Social O*NET
     cluster (where the median is computed using the raw similarity of all clusters in the job description). MNE =1 if the firm has operations in more than one country;
     Diversified =1 if the firm has operations in more than one 4 digit SIC sector; M&A activity=1 if the firm is involved in M&A activity (as a buyer, target or seller);
     Public =1 if the firm is publicly listed. IT Skills measures the average share of job vacancies including reference to the Burning Glass skill categories Information
     Technology or Analysis. IT & Cognitive Skills is the first principal factor derived from the set of 27 skills categories (factor loadings are presented in Table B.14). The
     last two rows refer to skill shares and factor built using the alternative Deming and Kahn (2018) classification. MNE, Diversified, M&A and Public are measured using
     data in the three years prior to the executive search. All the IT skills variables are measured using data in the three years prior to and following the executive search.
     All columns control for country of CHQ location, country of search, industry (SIC 2 level), year of search, type of C-suite position advertised. Column (3) includes a
     control for log document length. Column (4) includes firm fixed effects on the sample of 1,006 searches and 503 firms with repeated searches. Column (5) presents the
     estimation of the model presented in Table 2 for the sample of searches where we could verify the provenance of the incoming CEO. Column (6) presents the results
     of the regression including a dummy for the appointment of an internal CEO (i.e., a CEO that was previously employed in the firm)




37
5.2.6    Summary of empirical results

In summary, the demand for social skills in executive positions is systematically associated
with specific firm characteristics, namely firm size, geographic diversification, and involve-
ment in M&A activities. The results related to firm size are significant in cross sectional
and longitudinal regressions. We also find that the demand for social skills is greater in
firms with greater demand for workers' information skills. These results by and large hold
only for the Social cluster, except for the fact that a greater demand for workers' informa-
tion skills is positively correlated also with the Information cluster. Overall, these results
are consistent with the notion that the demand for social skills in executive searches re-
flects specific firm needs, and in particular the need to coordinate more, and more complex,
activities within firms.


6       Conclusion
We draw on a rich dataset of job specifications for executive searches across thousands of
firms, and document substantial variation in language that describes the skill content of
top managerial positions. This provides the first measurement of demand for executive
skills in the literature.
    The data show that the demand for executive skills comprises a range of operational,
cognitive, and interpersonal skills. The demand for specific skills, however, is highly het-
erogeneous across firms: far from adhering to similar boilerplate language, firms instead
spend considerable effort in specifying the skills and capabilities they look for in potential
candidates, even within the same country, industry, and year of search. The data also
show that the demand for executive skills has evolved over time. In particular, firms have
become increasingly more likely to demand Social skills--i.e. the capability to interact,
persuade and more generally relate to others--relative to more traditional operational and
administrative capabilities (e.g., monitoring the allocation of financial resources).
    Guided by a simple model of management by exception in the spirit of Garicano (2000),
we show that social skills vary with proxies for the importance of C-suite communication
within firms and that such skills are becoming more important over time, in line with
broader trends in the labor market.
    More generally, our results show that the managerial labor market is similar to generic
labor markets insofar as different firms heterogeneously value different skills, although this
perspective is typically not emphasized in discussion of top-level executives. An important
feature of the executive labor market, however, is its thinness, as relatively few participants
exist on both sides of the market. This makes satisfying skill demand arguably harder than
in typical labor markets, and brings to the forefront important issues surrounding the
matching process of firms and managers. Open questions include whether the supply of
executive skills meets demand; whether firms can adequately screen potential candidates,
especially as non-verifiable soft skills become more important; how quickly firms can iden-

                                              38
tify and remove executives whose skill set is not appropriate; and whether training can
adequately equip managers with "soft" skills deemed important by organizations. We be-
lieve that this paper provides an important step in providing an evidence base to begin
exploring these crucial issues.




                                          39
References
Adams, R. B., Akyol, A. C., and Verwijmeren, P. (2018). Director skill sets. Journal of
 Financial Economics, 130(3):641­662.

Ash, E., Chen, D. L., and Ornaghi, A. (2020). Gender Attitudes in the Judiciary: Evidence
  from U.S. Circuit Courts. Warwick Economics Research Paper Series 1256.

Atalay, E., Phongthiengtham, P., Sotelo, S., and Tannenbaum, D. (2020). The Evolution of
  Work in the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12(2):1­34.

Autor, D. H. and Dorn, D. (2013). The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polar-
 ization of the US Labor Market. American Economic Review, 103(5):1553­1597.

Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A. X., and Hodson, J. (2020). Artificial Intelligence, Firm
  Growth, and Industry Concentration. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3651052, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4):1593­1636.

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2015). Matching Firms, Managers, and
  Incentives. Journal of Labor Economics, 33(3):623­681.

Bandiera, O., Prat, A., Hansen, S., and Sadun, R. (2020). CEO Behavior and Firm Per-
  formance. Journal of Political Economy, 128(4):1325­1369.

Benmelech, E. and Frydman, C. (2015). Military CEOs. Journal of Financial Economics,
  117(1):43­59.

Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A. (2003). Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
  Firm Policies. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1169­1208.

Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., and Roberts, J. (2013). Does Manage-
  ment Matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):1­51.

Bloom, N., Garicano, L., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2014). The Distinct Effects of
  Information Technology and Communication Technology on Firm Organization. Man-
  agement Science, 60(12):2859­2885.

Cust´
    odio, C., Ferreira, M. A., and Matos, P. (2013). Generalists versus specialists: Life-
 time work experience and chief executive officer pay. Journal of Financial Economics,
 108(2):471­492.

Custodio, C., Mendes, D., and Metzger, D. (2021). The impact of financial education
 of executives on financial practices of medium and large enterprises. Technical Report
 wp2105, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Faculdade de Economia, NOVAFRICA.

                                           40
Cust´
    odio, C. and Metzger, D. (2013). How Do CEOs Matter? The Effect of Industry
 Expertise on Acquisition Returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 26(8):2008­2047.

Cziraki, P. and Jenter, D. (2020). The Market for CEOs. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3644496,
  Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Deming, D. and Kahn, L. B. (2018). Skill Requirements across Firms and Labor Markets:
  Evidence from Job Postings for Professionals. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1):S337­
  S369.

Deming, D. J. (2017). The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4):1593­1640.

Dessein, W. and Prat, A. (2019). Organizational Capital, Corporate Leadership, and Firm
  Dynamics. Technical Report 13513, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Drucker, P. F. (2007). The Effective Executive. Routledge, London, 1st edition edition.

Economist (2020). Corporate headhunters are more powerful than ever. 6 February 2020.

Frydman, C. (2019). Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate
  Executives, 1936­2003. Management Science, 65(11):4951­4979.

Gabaix, X. and Landier, A. (2008). Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much? The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 123(1):49­100.

Garicano, L. (2000). Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production. Journal
 of Political Economy, 108(5):874­904.

Guadalupe, M., Li, H., and Wulf, J. (2013). Who Lives in the C-Suite? Organiza-
 tional Structure and the Division of Labor in Top Management. Management Science,
 60(4):824­844.

Hershbein, B. and Kahn, L. B. (2018). Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Tech-
  nological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings. American Economic Review,
  108(7):1737­1772.

Hoffman, M. and Tadelis, S. (2020). People Management Skills, Employee Attrition, and
  Manager Rewards: An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 129(1):243­
  285.

Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M., and Sorensen, M. (2012). Which CEO Characteristics
 and Abilities Matter? The Journal of Finance, 67(3):973­1007.

Kaplan, S. N. and Sorensen, M. (2021). Are CEOs Different? The Journal of Finance,
 forthcoming.


                                           41
Korkmaz, B. (2011). Theory of Mind and Neurodevelopmental Disorders of Childhood.
 Pediatric Research, 69(8):101­108.

McCann, R. J., Shi, X., Siow, A., and Wolthoff, R. (2015). Becker Meets Ricardo: Multi-
 sector Matching with Communication and Cognitive Skills. Journal of Law, Economics,
 & Organization, 31(4):690­720.

Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013). Efficient Estimation of Word
 Representations in Vector Space. arXiv:1301.3781 [cs].

Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. (2014). GloVe: Global Vectors for Word
  Representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532­1543, Doha, Qatar. Association for Compu-
  tational Linguistics.

Premack, D. and Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?
  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1(4):515­526.

Tervio, M. (2008). The Difference That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach.
  American Economic Review, 98(3):642­668.




                                          42
A     Appendix Tables and Figures For Online Publica-
      tion
A.1     Sample Description (Section 2)

                                Table A.1: Sample Descriptives
                 (a) Job titles                           (b) CHQ continent of search
       Job Title    Frequency      Percent          CHQ location Frequency             Percent
         CEO          1,977         42.77                Asia        245                 5.3
         CFO          1,678          36.3              Oceania       199                4.31
        CHRO           677          14.65              Canada        115                2.47
         CIO            87           1.88                USA        2,642               57.17
         CMO           203           4.39              Europe        805                17.42
         Total        4,622          100                 UK          526                11.38
                                                    Other countries  246                1.95
                                                        Total       4,622                100

                                           (c) Year of search
                                   Year      Frequency    Percent
                                   2000         210        4.54
                                   2001         156        3.38
                                   2002         169        3.66
                                   2003         133        2.88
                                   2004         185          4
                                   2005         219        4.74
                                   2006         246        5.32
                                   2007         255        5.52
                                   2008         269        5.82
                                   2009         229        4.95
                                   2010         258        5.58
                                   2011         278        6.01
                                   2012         283        6.12
                                   2013         339        7.33
                                   2014         364        7.88
                                   2015         375        8.11
                                   2016         335        7.25
                                   2017         319         6.9
                                   Total       4,622        100

 This table documents the composition of the corpus of job description texts by job title, location of
 the firm initiating the search, and the year the position is advertised.




                                                  43
                               Table A.2: Firm characteristics
                                           (a) Job titles
          Variable   Mean                Median Standard Deviation              Observations
        Employment 15205.75             1483.125     55009.66                      3786
           MNE       0.67                  1                                       4515
        M&A activity 0.52                  1                                       4622
         Diversified 0.26                  0                                       4515
           Public    0.26                  0                                       4622
This table documents the characteristics of the firms included in the sample, measured in the the three
years prior to the search.




This figures shows scatter plots of job search document lengths (in words) by year.

                 Figure A.1: Distribution of Document Lengths by Year




                                                  44
                                                                        Description                                    Short Description          Category      Subcategory
                                      Talking to others to convey information effectively.                           Speaking                       Skill          Basic
                                      Using logic and reasoning to identify the strengths and weaknesses of
                                                                                                                     Critical reasoning             Skill            Basic
                                                                                                                                                                                   A.2

                                     alternative solutions, conclusions or approaches to problems.
                                      Identifying complex problems and reviewing related information to develop                                                Complex Problem
                                                                                                                     Complex problem solving        Skill
                                     and evaluate options and implement solutions.                                                                                 Solving
                                      Understanding written sentences and paragraphs in work-related documents.      Reading comprehension          Skill           Basic
                                      Understanding the implications of new information for both current and
                                                                                                                     Active learning                Skill            Basic
                                     future problem-solving and decision-making.
                                      Deliver speeches, write articles, or present information at meetings or
                                                                                                                                                    Task             Core
                                     conventions to promote services, exchange ideas, or accomplish objectives.
                                      Analyzing information and evaluating results to choose the best solution and   Making decisions and          Work
                                                                                                                                                               Mental Processes
                                     solve problems.                                                                 solving problems             Activities
                                      Observing, receiving, and otherwise obtaining information from all                                           Work
                                                                                                                     Getting information                       Information Input
                                     relevant sources.                                                                                            Activities
                                      Identifying the underlying principles, reasons, or facts of information by      Analyzing data               Work
                                                                                                                                                               Mental Processes
                                     breaking down information or data into separate parts.                           or information              Activities
                                                                                                                      Evaluating information to
                                      Using relevant information and individual judgment to determine whether                                      Work
                                                                                                                      determine compliance                     Mental Processes
                                     events or processes comply with laws, regulations, or standards.                                             Activities
                                                                                                                      with standards




                Information Skills
                                      Identifying information by categorizing, estimating, recognizing differences or Identifying objects,         Work




45
                                                                                                                                                               Information Input
                                     similarities, and detecting changes in circumstances or events.                  actions and events          Activities
                                      Using computers and computer systems (including hardware and software) to Interacting with                   Work
                                                                                                                                                                 Work Output
                                     program, write software, set up functions, enter data, or process information. computer systems              Activities
                                                                                                                      Interpreting the meaning     Work        Interacting With
                                      Translating or explaining what information means and how it can be used.
                                                                                                                                                                                   Classification Approach (Section 3)




                                                                                                                      of information for others   Activities        Others
                                      Compiling, coding, categorizing, calculating, tabulating, auditing, or                                       Work
                                                                                                                      Processing information                   Mental Processes
                                     verifying information or data.                                                                               Activities
                                      Monitoring and reviewing information from materials, events, or the             Monitor, processes,          Work
                                                                                                                                                               Information Input
                                     environment, to detect or assess problems.                                       materials or surroundings   Activities
                                      Determining how money will be spent to get the work done, and accounting Management of                                      Resource
                                                                                                                                                    Skill
                                     for these expenditures.                                                          financial resources                        Management
                                      Obtaining and seeing to the appropriate use of equipment, facilities, and       Management of                               Resource
                                                                                                                                                    Skill
                                     materials needed to do certain work.                                             material resources                         Management
                                      Administer programs for selection of sites, construction of buildings, or
                                                                                                                                                    Task             Core
                                     provision of equipment or supplies.
                                                                                                                      Monitoring and               Work        Interacting With
                                      Monitoring and controlling resources and overseeing the spending of money.
                                                                                                                      controlling resources       Activities        Others

                                                                             Table A.3: "Information Skills" Cluster for O*NET Executive Skills
     O*NET Executive Skills that are grouped together using a k-means algorithm with six clusters applied to the texts in the Description field. We
     choose the label "Information Skills" to describe this cluster. The Short Description, Category, and Subcategory fields are also provided by O*NET
     to further classify the individual descriptions. Short Description is not available for the O*NET Task Category.
                                                          Table A.4: "Human Resources" Cluster for O*NET Executive Skills
                                                                    Description                                         Short Description        Category      Subcategory
                                     Motivating, developing, and directing people as they work, identifying the      Management of personnel                     Resource
                                                                                                                                                   Skill
                                    best people for the job.                                                         resources                                Management Skills
                                     Communicating effectively in writing as appropriate for the needs
                                                                                                                     Writing                       Skill            Basic
                                    of the audience.
                                                                                                                                                                 Resource
                                    Managing one's own time and the time of others.                                  Time management               Skill
                                                                                                                                                              Management Skills
                                                                                                                     Communicating with
                                     Providing information to supervisors, co-workers, and subordinates by                                        Work        Interacting With
                                                                                                                     supervisors, peers or
                                    telephone, in written form, e-mail, or in person.                                                            Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     subordinates
                                     Communicating with people outside the organization, representing the
                                                                                                                     Communicating woth
                                    organization to customers, the public, government, and other external                                         Work        Interacting With
                                                                                                                     people outisde the
                                    sources. This information can be exchanged in person, in writing, or by                                      Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     organization
                                    telephone or e-mail.
                                     Encouraging and building mutual trust, respect, and cooperation among           Developing anf building      Work        Interacting With
                                    team members.                                                                    teams                       Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     Establishing and
                                     Developing constructive and cooperative working relationships with others,                                   Work        Interacting With
                                                                                                                     maintaining interpersonal
                                    and maintaining them over time.                                                                              Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     relationships




46
                                                                                                                     Updating and using           Work
                                    Keeping up-to-date technically and applying new knowledge to your job.                                                    Mental Processes
                                                                                                                     relevant knowledge          Activities
                                                                                                                     Co-ordinating the work       Work        Interacting With
                                    Getting members of a group to work together to accomplish tasks.
                                                                                                                     and activties of others     Activities        Others




                  Human Resources
                                     Identifying the developmental needs of others and coaching, mentoring, or       Coaching and developing      Work        Interacting With
                                    otherwise helping others to improve their knowledge or skills.                   others                      Activities        Others
                                     Developing, designing, or creating new applications, ideas, relationships,                                   Work
                                                                                                                     Thinking creatively                      Mental Processes
                                    systems, or products, including artistic contributions.                                                      Activities
                                     Recruiting, interviewing, selecting, hiring, and promoting employees            Staffing organizational      Work        Interacting With
                                    in an organization.                                                              units                       Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     Communicationg with
                                     Providing guidance and expert advice to management or other groups on                                        Work        Interacting With
                                                                                                                     supervisors, peers, or
                                    technical, systems-, or process-related topics.                                                              Activities        Others
                                                                                                                     subordinates
                                                                                                                     Scheduling work and          Work
                                    Scheduling events, programs, and activities, as well as the work of others.                                               Mental Processes
                                                                                                                     activities                  Activities
                                     Identifying the educational needs of others, developing formal educational or   Training and teaching        Work        Interacting With
                                    training programs or classes, and teaching or instructing others.                others                      Activities        Others
     O*NET Executive Skills that are grouped together using a k-means algorithm with six clusters applied to the texts in the Description field. We choose the
     label "Human Resources" to describe this cluster. The Short Description, Category, and Subcategory fields are also provided by O*NET to further classify
     the individual descriptions. Short Description is not available for the O*NET Task Category.
            Table A.5: "Monitoring of Performance" and "Financial and Material Resources" Clusters for O*NET Executive Skills
                                                                                  Description                                         Short Description         Category       Subcategory
                                                  Considering the relative costs and benefits of potential actions to choose the    Judgment and decision
                                                                                                                                                                  Skill        Systems Skills
                                                 most appropriate one.                                                              making
                                                  Monitoring/Assessing performance of yourself, other individuals, or
                                                                                                                                    Monitoring                    Skill            Basic
                                                 organizations to make improvements or take corrective action.
                                                  Determining how a system should work and how changes in conditions,
                                                                                                                                    Systems analysis              Skill        Systems Skills
                                                 operations, and the environment will affect outcomes.
                                                  Identifying measures or indicators of system performance and the actions
                                                                                                                                    Systems evaluation            Skill        Systems Skills
                                                 needed to improve or correct performance, relative to the goals of the system.
                                                  Direct or coordinate an organization's financial or budget activities to fund
                                                                                                                                                                  Task             Core
                                                 operations, maximize investments, or increase efficiency.
                                                  Analyze operations to evaluate performance of a company or its staff in
                                                 meeting objectives or to determine areas of potential cost reduction, program                                    Task             Core
                                                 improvement, or policy change.
                                                  Direct, plan, or implement policies, objectives, or activities of organizations
                                                 or businesses to ensure continuing operations, to maximize returns on                                            Task             Core
                                                 investments, or to increase productivity.
                                                  Implement corrective action plans to solve organizational or
                                                                                                                                                                  Task             Core
                                                 departmental problems.
                                                  Coordinate the development or implementation of budgetary control
                                                                                                                                                                  Task             Core
                                                 systems, recordkeeping systems, or other administrative control processes.




                     Monitoring of Performance
                                                  Providing guidance and direction to subordinates, including setting               Guiding, directing, and      Work        Interacting With




47
                                                 performance standards and monitoring performance.                                  motivating subordinates     Activities        Others
                                                  Establishing long-range objectives and specifying the strategies and actions      Developing objectives and    Work
                                                                                                                                                                             Mental Processes
                                                 to achieve them.                                                                   strategies                  Activities
                                                  Developing specific goals and plans to prioritize, organize, and accomplish       Organizing, planning and     Work
                                                                                                                                                                             Mental Processes
                                                 your work.                                                                         prioritizing work           Activities
                                                  Determining how money will be spent to get the work done, and accounting          Management of financial                     Resource
                                                                                                                                                                  Skill
                                                 for these expenditures.                                                            resources                                Management Skills
                                                  Obtaining and seeing to the appropriate use of equipment, facilities, and         Management of material                      Resource
                                                                                                                                                                  Skill
                                                 materials needed to do certain work.                                               resources                                Management Skills
                                                  Administer programs for selection of sites, construction of buildings, or
                                                                                                                                                                  Task             Core
                                                 provision of equipment or supplies.
                                                                                                                                    Monitoring and               Work        Interacting With
                                                 Monitoring and controlling resources and overseeing the spending of money.
                                                                                                                                    controlling resources       Activities        Others
                                                                                                                                    Estimating the
                                                                                                                                    quantifiable
                                                  Estimating sizes, distances, and quantities; or determining time, costs,                                       Work
                                                                                                                                    charactersitics of                       Information Input
                                                 resources, or materials needed to perform a work activity.                                                     Activities




                   Financial and
                                                                                                                                    products, events or
                                                                                                                                    information




                 Material Resources
                                                   Performing day-to-day administrative tasks such as maintaining information       Performing                   Work        Interacting With
                                                 files and processing paperwork.                                                    administrative activities   Activities        Others
     O*NET Executive Skills that are grouped together using a k-means algorithm with six clusters applied to the texts in the Description field. We choose the
     labels "Monitoring of Performance" and "Financial and Material Resources" to describe these clusters. The Short Description, Category, and Subcategory
     fields are also provided by O*NET to further classify the individual descriptions. Short Description is not available for the O*NET Task Category.
                                                Table A.6: "Administrative Tasks" and "Social Skills" Clusters for O*NET Executive Skills
                                                                            Description                                     Short Description           Category      Subcategory
                                          Appoint department heads or managers and assign or delegate
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         responsibilities to them.
                                          Prepare budgets for approval, including those for funding or implementation
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         of programs.
                                          Confer with board members, organization officials, or staff members to
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         discuss issues, coordinate activities, or resolve problems.
                                          Direct human resources activities, including the approval of human resource
                                         plans or activities, the selection of directors or other high-level staff, or                                    Task            Core
                                         establishment or organization of major departments.
                                          Establish departmental responsibilities and coordinate functions among
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         departments and sites.
                                          Preside over or serve on boards of directors, management committees, or
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         other governing boards.
                                          Negotiate or approve contracts or agreements with suppliers, distributors,
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         federal or state agencies, or other organizational entities.
                                          Review reports submitted by staff members to recommend approval or to
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         suggest changes.
                                          Interpret and explain policies, rules, regulations, or laws to organizations,
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core




                  Administrative Tasks
                                         government or corporate officials, or individuals.
                                          Prepare or present reports concerning activities, expenses, budgets,
                                         government statutes or rulings, or other items affecting businesses or                                           Task            Core




48
                                         program services.
                                          Review and analyze legislation, laws, or public policy and recommend
                                         changes to promote or support interests of the general population or                                             Task            Core
                                         special groups.
                                          Direct or conduct studies or research on issues affecting areas of
                                                                                                                                                          Task            Core
                                         responsibility.
                                          Being aware of others' reactions and understanding why they react
                                                                                                                          Social perceptiveness           Skill           Social
                                         as they do.
                                          Adjusting actions in relation to others' actions.                               Coordination                    Skill           Social
                                          Giving full attention to what other people are saying, taking time to
                                         understand the points being made, asking questions as appropriate, and not       Active listening                Skill           Basic
                                         interrupting at inappropriate times.
                                          Persuading others to change their minds or behavior.                            Persuasion                      Skill           Social
                                          Bringing others together and trying to reconcile differences.                   Negotiation                     Skill           Social
                                                                                                                          Judging the qualities of       Work
                                         Assessing the value, importance, or quality of things or people.                                                            Mental Processes
                                                                                                                          things, services, or people   Activities
                                          Handling complaints, settling disputes, and resolving grievances and            Resolving conflicts and        Work        Interacting With




                  Social Skills
                                         conflicts, or otherwise negotiating with others.                                 negotiating with others       Activities        Others
                                          Convincing others to buy merchandise/goods or to otherwise change their         Selling or influencing         Work        Interacting With
                                         minds or actions.                                                                others                        Activities        Others
     O*NET Executive Skills that are grouped together using a k-means algorithm with six clusters applied to the texts in the Description field. We choose the
     labels "Administrative Tasks" and "Social Skills" to describe these clusters. The Short Description, Category, and Subcategory fields are also provided by
     O*NET to further classify the individual descriptions. Short Description is not available for the O*NET Task Category.
                              Table A.7: Most Similar Terms in Harvard Business Review and Generic English Text.

                    vision                                team                               leader                          coordination
               HBR                Generic              HBR             Generic              HBR           Generic              HBR            Generic
              visions             visions              teams             teams          leadership         leaders         integration     cooperation
              mission               mind          project team           squad             leaders      leadership       collaboration     coordinating
         strategic vision           view       management team          players          manager            party         cooperation       coordinate
               goals            perspective      executive team        football            person       opposition        coordinating    co-ordination
             strategy            objective             group              coach       strong leader          led        standardization     strengthen
           core values              sense               staff            league      chief executive        rebel       communication        facilitate
       strategic direction      experience        organization      championship             boss         leading         coordinated         enhance
           aspirations               eyes            top team            player       line manager      movement           coordinate        hand-eye
            aspiration             image           team leader       teammates         team player     communist       information flow   strengthening




49
            objectives            dream           team leaders        basketball    leadership style      socialist      specialization   governmental
                goal                 eye              project          coached       senior manager        faction   information sharing   coordinated
              passion               focus           committee            season          assertive     democratic          supervision     consultation
              culture                our      executive committee       coaches         negotiator       politician      centralization     mechanism
            leadership            clarity       project manager          played           achiever         former           execution      mechanisms
           philosophy         understanding      working group           soccer           follower          cleric        procurement         improve
               ideals             achieve       top management             club          politician    government          centralized     co-operation
          commitment               visual            manager           coaching           outsider          prime            control     communication
             ambition             dreams                crew            hockey        administrator    meanwhile            alignment       supervision
         understanding           visionary   personnel department        games           executive           who    information exchange    monitoring
          value system              truly            subteams             game      middle manager         behind      interdependence      assistance
     For each term in bold, we report the twenty most similar terms in embedding spaces estimated with the Harvard Business Review and generic English text
     (Wikipedia and Gigaword), respectively. Similarity is computed using the cosine similarity between word embeddings. The estimated embedding model for
     generic text is available from http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.6B.zip.
                               Table A.8: Text Segments from CEO Job Specifications Most Similar to O*NET Clusters
                                Information Skills                                                                 Human Resources
                                      Text                                     Sim                                        Text                                    Sim
                                                                                       The successful candidate should have the ability to interact and work
     Understands the complexities of running a successful software and                 effectively with personnel at all levels of the organization as well as
     services business including the management and application of data     0.819      with members of management in client companies and should bring a          0.858
     and data flows and subsequent productization of data into information.            practical approach to management both in obtaining information from
                                                                                       company personnel and making presentations to a board of directors.
                                                                                       The person stepping into this role will have demonstrated their ability
                                                                                       to manage people effectively including assessing the skills and
     S/he is analytical and objective in evaluating information and solving
                                                                               0.818   developmental needs of subordinates and providing appropriate              0.841
     business problems.
                                                                                       coaching and guidance to maximize these peoples efforts and
                                                                                       contribution to the company.
                                                                                       Demonstrates a track record of hiring, retaining, and nurturing a high
     Uses data analysis and judgment to solve problems.                        0.817   quality staff team and of motivating diverse groups of people to work      0.839
                                                                                       together to achieve a common mission or goal.
     Strong analytical and process mindset able to manage the application              Proven people management skills with the ability to focus and guide
     of data and data flows and subsequent productization of data into         0.814   others in accomplishing work objectives using methods and a flexible       0.831
     information.                                                                      interpersonal style to help build a cohesive team.
     As [COMPANY NAME] is a highly information data driven enterprise,
                                                                                       Because of the breadth of this individual's activities, we seek a person




50
     the president will investigate and align the application of new
                                                                               0.808   who has outstanding communication skills and can develop ideas that        0.828
     technologies with the business in order to streamline and improve
                                                                                       are translatable throughout the enterprise.
     information gathering and storage techniques.
     S/he can gather, organize, and systematically analyze complex                 Staff and Culture Development: hire and develop people who possess
     operational information metrics and analysis in order to gauge progress       the technical skills and interpersonal skills to be constructive and
                                                                               0.804                                                                          0.827
     and refine the plan and the strategy.                                         cooperative members of a management team.
     It will be the CEO's responsibility to develop systems, reports, and          The person stepping into this role must have demonstrated the ability
     procedures that ensure timely access to accurate relevant and          0.797 to assess the skills and developmental needs of subordinates and            0.826
     actionable information on key financial performance indicators.               provide appropriate coaching and guidance.
                                                                                   In addition to the needed general management and leadership skills,
     You will need to demonstrate that you organize and integrate data,            candidates must have the self confidence, business maturity, and
     ideas, and/or concepts into a usable system that can be applied to     0.791 communication skills to work effectively with the chairman, board of        0.817
     solving problems.                                                             directors, support functions at [COMPANY NAME], and a variety of
                                                                                   external constituents.
                                                                                   Good team player able to integrate support from [COMPANY NAME]
     He or she will have background in using data and insight to inform the
                                                                            0.790 to optimize results; ability to attract, motivate, and retain highly        0.815
     business, optimize operational decisions, and guide strategy.
                                                                                   talented team of [SECTOR] experts.
     Makes sound, timely decisions based on analysis of available                  The job requires extraordinary people skills enabling one to work with
                                                                            0.786                                                                             0.812
     information, intuition, customer feedback, and supporting data.               government officials, ceos, staff, board members and others at all levels.
       We rank text segments from CEO job specifications according to their cosine similarity with the concatenated text of executive skill descriptions from the
       Information Skills and Human Resources clusters. The table represents the most similar text segments along with their cosine similarity.
                               Table A.9: Text Segments from CEO Job Specifications Most Similar to O*NET Clusters
                                Monitoring of Performance                                                      Financial and Material Resources
                                             Text                                     Sim                                        Text                                      Sim
           Analyzes operations to evaluate performance of divisions and staff for             In addition the CEO will oversee company operations to insure
           meeting objectives and to determine areas of potential cost reduction      0.899   production efficiency, quality service, and cost effective management of    0.755
           process improvement, program improvement, and policy change                        resources
           Establish, lead, and decide objectives, strategies, plans, policies, and
           programs as they affect [COMPANY NAME] in the areas of human
                                                                                              Oversee company operations to ensure production efficiency, quality
           capital management, enhancing organization capabilities and                0.898                                                                               0.744
                                                                                              service, and cost effective management of resources
           performance, and leading transformation and post-merger project
           executions.
           The CEO will monitor and manage the operational results of the                     Manage the day-to-day operations on the sites and deliver the major
           company's businesses, functions, and respective organization units to              facility investment programme to ensure the required operational
                                                                                      0.893                                                                               0.732
           assure results against plans and take appropriate remedial actions as              capability and manufacturing output is achieved and that value for
           and when necessary.                                                                money is secured for the customer
                                                                                              The CEO will both individually and through their direct reports
           Participate in global game-planning sessions to match high potential               provide strategic and/or administrative direction and management in
           talent with global opportunities; perform annual operational people                all functions including finance, accounting, business development,
                                                                                      0.893                                                                               0.732
           planning review; and lead resulting action plan to ensure continuous               information technology, compliance, facility management, human
           improvement of leadership.                                                         resources, investments, lending, marketing operations, retail services,
                                                                                              risk management, security, and data.
           Ensure that all staff activities, internal structure, and policies are             The successful delivery of material growth capital expenditure projects
           aligned with strategic plan and that performance outcomes are              0.878   and efficiently operating capital intensive assets; the setting and          0.73
           evaluated in terms of objectives set forth in the plan.                            delivering of budgets and business plans.




51
           Work closely with the board to meet, set strategic financial and growth
           targets, lead a culture that drives continuous business improvement in             The CEO oversees company operations, credit, legal, human resources,
           all measures of company performance with particular emphasis on            0.875   and risk functions to ensure efficiency, quality service, and cost effective 0.729
           process capability, operational performance, new product development,              management of resources
           and high customer satisfaction.
           Setting and achieving revenue and profit growth targets; monitoring
           financial performance through appropriate attention to critical
           performance metrics; creation of a high performance work environment;              Facilities evaluation: the CEO must evaluate the facilities and
                                                                                      0.867                                                                               0.729
           development and maintenance of a high-performing senior leadership                 equipment
           team; building a high-performance executive team while meeting the
           needs of the organization and the demands of the marketplace.
           Finalization and timely submission of the annual business plan to the
           board for approval, which includes PVNBP, ROCE, NBC, EEV,
                                                                                              Oversee company operations to ensure production efficiency, quality
           operating profit, and embedded value objectives; evaluate, develop, and    0.867                                                                               0.728
                                                                                              service, and cost effective management of resources
           implement business, product, and distribution strategies that aim at
           meeting these plans.
           In collaboration with the Board of Trustees, run the strategy process
           on the active ownership role to ensure [COMPANY NAME] performs
                                                                                              In addition, the company will continue to work with strategic sourcing
           in accordance with agreed long-term targets including growth,
                                                                                      0.866   and procurement, and there will be further improvements in the supply 0.726
           profitability, value creation, and project portfolio; monitor the
                                                                                              chain, i.e. reducing stock and production facilities.
           development of [COMPANY NAME] and report to Board of Trustees
           on any deviations and suggested corrective actions.
     We rank text segments from CEO job specifications according to their cosine similarity with the concatenated text of executive skill descriptions from the
     Monitoring of Performance and Financial and Material Resources clusters. The table represents the most similar text segments along with their cosine
     similarity.
                              Table A.10: Text Segments from CEO Job Specifications Most Similar to O*NET Clusters
                                    Administrative Tasks                                                                   Social Skills
                                           Text                                     Sim                                        Text                                     Sim
                                                                                            You have effectively influenced the thoughts and actions of others,
           Efficiently administer [COMPANY NAME] in accordance with the                     winning them over to a particular position, viewpoint, or course of
           approved budget, available personnel and other resources determined      0.838   action and negotiating skillfully in tough situations; settling differences 0.798
           by the Board.                                                                    with minimum noise; and winning concessions without damaging
                                                                                            relationships
           Coordinate the activities of the numerous departments and committees             This person has to be sincerely interested in people, respect and value
           of the corporation including budgets, spending, and respective goals      0.83   the opinions of others, communicate well, and interact effectively with      0.76
           and objectives.                                                                  all stakeholders at all levels
           S/he will plan, direct, and control all [COMPANY NAME] activities in
                                                                                            This individual will need to express views candidly, while making the
           accordance with [COMPANY NAME]'s plans, policies, directives, and 0.826                                                                                     0.754
                                                                                            effort to understand the views of others.
           activities as established by the Board of Directors.
           Working with the Board of Directors and Board Executive Committee,
                                                                                            This person has to be sincerely interested in people, respect and value
           develop policy positions on legislation proposed, regulations and other
                                                                                    0.817   the opinions of others, communicate well, and interact effectively with    0.753
           governmental and public policy activities that affect reliability in the
                                                                                            all stakeholders.
           [REGION].
                                                                                            [COMPANY NAME] values: communicating openly, honestly, and
           S/he will work closely with the Board and officers on the development            transparently; welcoming challenge; learning from mistakes; listening;
           and implementation of the [COMPANY]'s strategic vision, as well as               treating people fairly; being inclusive; building connections;
                                                                                    0.815                                                                           0.75
           have oversight for the development of policies and programs to                   collaborating across boundaries; caring about individuals and their
           advocate on behalf of the membership in a variety of settings.                   progress; showing respect; being supportive and responsive to ensure




52
                                                                                            that everyone who works for [COMPANY NAME] lives by these values.
           Upon approval by the Board of Directors, ensure staff has the                    In terms of personality the ideal candidate has an attitude of making
           necessary information, resources, working procedures, and guidelines to 0.815    things happen, is proactive and hands on and can make decisions        0.741
           implement policies and plans.                                                    quickly
           Confers with Chief Officers to deliberate business objectives; develop
                                                                                            Straightforward and accustomed to negotiating with an ability to
           organizational policies; coordinate functions and operations between
                                                                                   0.815    create win-win situations by listening and understanding others'           0.736
           offices departments units; and to establish responsibilities and
                                                                                            motives and views.
           procedures for achieving objectives.
                                                                                            Inspires others and understands what motivates different people;
           Implement and develop policy-related activities in line with the Board
                                                                                            understands what motivates others and relates to them on that basis;
           of Directors' priorities; maximise [COMPANY NAME]'s influence in
                                                                                    0.814   helps people feel they are a part of something significant; empowers       0.735
           European affairs. Ensure that the policies and procedures laid down in
                                                                                            and delegates so that all can contribute to the cause; can convey
           the statutes and internal rules are respected.
                                                                                            enthusiasm that rallies the troops and ignites a spark in others.
           S/he will represent [INDUSTRY] regulation at the most senior level,
           forming effective relationships with [INDUSTRY] firms, [INDUSTRY]
                                                                                            Communicating reasons for change and ensuring that others
           executives and Board members, other regulatory bodies, provincial and 0.811                                                                                 0.731
                                                                                            understand them.
           Federal departments, and elected officials and relevant international
           bodies.
           S/he will work closely with the Board of Directors and the various
                                                                                            The individual should be a decisive leader who is willing to listen to
           committees on the development and implementation of [COMPANY
                                                                                 0.809      various opinions on issues, but in the end is capable of making quick       0.73
           NAMES]'s strategic vision and the policies and programs to advance
                                                                                            and clear decisions
           the interests of the industry.
     We rank text segments from CEO job specifications according to their cosine similarity with the concatenated text of executive skill descriptions from the
     Administrative Tasks and Social Skills clusters. The table represents the most similar text segments along with their cosine similarity.
      Table A.11: Selection of Sentences with Low Similarity to all Clusters

Certifications and/or a graduate degree, e.g. CPA, MBA, CFA, are preferred
Fluency in a language other than English is considered a plus
He or she will also represent the company in the equity and bond investor markets and
the restaurant industry
First-class academic background
Experience leading a successful IPO is desired
The ideal candidate has preferably gained experience in a blue chip company acting
globally
He or she will likely be a sitting CFO of a public life sciences, biotechnology, or specialty
pharmaceutical company
Has taken something that began with an idea and moved it to a thriving enterprise
Postgraduate financial study (MBA, CPA, or equivalent), fluency in English, and
familiarity with western business culture
He should have had experience in leading big multifunctional teams
Experience and credibility with Wall Street is a plus, as is international experience
Fluent English and one or more continental European languages could be an advantage,
particularly Southern European languages such as Italian, Spanish, French, or
Portuguese
Experience in multimedia and internet business
The ideal candidate will be a strong CFO with pan-European experience in a background
of ideally telecommunications or hi-tech business which has undergone rapid growth
An entrepreneurial and civic-minded leader, the CEO will exude a sincere passion for
STEM education
The successful candidate will be an accomplished financial executive with unquestionable
integrity, a positive reputation, and demonstrated success serving as a CFO of a
private-equity-backed or publicly-listed company
 The table displays a selection of sentences all of which are in the bottom quintile of the
 similarity distribution for all six O*NET clusters.




                                             53
B      Data Construction
B.1      Text preprocessing
All text data in the paper (Harvard Business Review; O*NET descriptions; executive job
search specification) is preprocessed following the same steps.
    The first step is to find and replace multi-word expressions with a single token. We con-
struct one set of expressions by tabulating all bigrams, trigrams, and 4-grams in the HBR;
retaining those with a Wikipedia entry; and manually pruning the resulting list to remove
generic expressions. This procedure generates 2,148 expressions. We construct another set
by first searching the corpus for named entities using the named entity recognizer provided
in the StanfordNLP package, and then retaining named entity phrases that occur more
than ten times overall in the HBR corpus. This generates an additional 4,653 expressions.
    After replacing multi-word expressions, we lowercase all text; tokenize;46 remove tokens
not comprised entirely of alphabetic characters; remove stopwords;47 and words that appear
fewer than three times in the HBR corpus.48
    For the estimation of the embeddings model, we treat individual HBR sentences as the
unit of analysis. In the HBR, we have 1,835,972 sentences that together form 19,649,620
word tokens. Overall there are 70,760 unique tokens in the HBR corpus.
    Our corpus of job descriptions after pre-processing contains 22,59,887 total words and
18,792 unique words.


B.2      Burning Glass data
After implementing a fuzzy match procedure to pair company names from our job search
corpus to company names in Burning Glass, we obtain 1,463 matches in total, which rep-
resents nearly half of the firms in our executive search dataset. We then apply two filters.
First, we only keep job posts which are within the seven-year window of the CEO search
year (three years before and after). Second, we further restricted our sample to ensure a
minimum number of 11 job posts in each year of the window around the search. In this
way, we obtain 695 firms in the final sample. We summarize the number of firms and job
postings over years of executive search (2004 - 2017) in Table B.12.
    Our first IT skills measure comes directly from Burning Glass. Table B.13 shows the
groupings of raw skills from the job ads that Burning Glass uses for classification. For each
firm, we thereby obtain 27 firm-level variables that measure the share of total postings in
  46
     Tokenization is the process whereby a character string is broken into individual units of meaning. In
most cases these units are synonomous with English words, but also include the multi-word expressions
identified above. We will simply refer to tokens more generically as `words' for simplicity.
  47
     Stopwords are frequently occurring words like `a', `the', `for', etc., that do not contribute to the
understanding of a text's relevant content. We take our stopword list from http://snowball.tartarus.
org/algorithms/english/stop.txt.
  48
     Since we estimate an embeddings model on the HBR to represent all of our text data, we need to
ensure we only retain words that appear a sufficient number of times to have meaningful semantics.



                                                   54
the window around the search that contain a skill from any of these groupings. Table B.14
presents the factors from a principal components decomposition of these skill categories
across firms. We use the projection of job ads onto the first factor as a measure of IT-
intensive skills.
    Our second IT skills measure extends the skill categories of Deming and Kahn (2018) to
account for the appearance of new skills in the Burning Glass data in the last several years.
We additionally include categories for "energy", "industry-specific", "basic software" and
"manufacturing" not present in the original Deming and Kahn (2018) classification. Table
B.17 presents the factors from a principal components decomposition of these alternative
skill categories across firms. We use the projection of job ads onto the third factor as a
measure of IT-intensive skills.
    Finally, we control for the share of job ads with levels of education and years of expe-
rience required in some specifications. For education controls, we calculated the share of
job ads that do not specify a degree requirement, require a high school degree, and those
that require a degree above high school; for experience controls, we have the share of job
ads that do not specify any experience requirement, require zero year of experience, less
than one year of experience, one to six years of experience, and more than six years of
experience. We also constructed average years of experience required using the Minimum
Experience column defined in Burning Glass open text fields (we did not include job ads
with missing minimum years of requirement when calculating the average). All measures
are defined at the firm-year level.




                                             55
Table B.12: Summary Statistics of Vacancies by Year of Executive Searches

     Year of Search   Number of Firms   Mean      SD   Min   q10    q90   Max        Total
          2004             21            708    1,124  11    33    2,016 4,382       14,859
          2005             29           1,610    3,689 20     34   4,853 18,100      46,696
          2006             18            653    1,018  15    24    1,693 3,487       11,752
          2007             35            998    1,736  11    44    2,338 7,432       59,881
          2008             48            682    1,964  12    27    1,365 12,599      75,001
          2009             42           1,556    3,738 11     20   6,483 24,411     182,015
          2010             45            498      979  11     20   1,102 6,462       78,218
          2011             59           3,295   13,419 11    22    5,319 13,7089    70,1897
          2012             72            460      764  11     17   1,515 5,913      135,247
          2013             68           1,010    2,177 11     18   2,816 16,832     313,004
          2014             62           2,095    6,082 11     20   3,222 49,496     659,950
          2015             76           1,460    6,440 11     22   2,482 99,351     588,318
          2016             63           4,154   15,901 11    20    5,981 149,287   1,341,869
          2017             65           2,454    8,361 11     22   5,249 87,856     792,595




                                                56
       Table B.13: Description of Burning Glass Skill Clusters and Skills
                                                         t
Skill Clusters                                                     Skills
Administration      Telephone Skills, Dictation, Memoranda Preparation, Office Machines, Office Management, Adminis-
                    trative Support, General Administrative and Clerical Tasks, Scheduling
Agriculture,        Agricultural Research, Landscaping and Yard Care, Agronomy and Farming
Horticulture, and
the Outdoors
Analysis            Natural Language Processing (NLP), Mathematics, Mathematical Software, Ad Hoc Analysis and Re-
                    porting, Mathematical Modeling, Validation, Machine Learning, Data Mining, Data Science, Business
                    Intelligence Software, Statistics, Data Visualization, Statistical Software, Data Techniques, Business
                    Intelligence, Data Analysis
Architecture and    Road and Bridge Construction, Construction Labor, Green Architecture, Conduits, Architectural De-
Construction        sign, Masonry, Insulation, Construction Painting, Roofing, Construction Inspection, Drywall, Electrical
                    Construction, General Architecture, Carpentry, Construction Management, Estimating
Administration      Telephone Skills, Dictation, Memoranda Preparation, Office Machines, Office Management, Adminis-
                    trative Support, General Administrative and Clerical Tasks, Scheduling
Business            risk management, Internal Controls, Benefits Analysis, Knowledge Management, Category Management,
                    Optimization, Property Management, Technical Assistance, Real Estate and Rental, Event Planning and
                    Management, Due Diligence, Pricing Analysis, Business Consulting, Business Communications, Order
                    Management, Operations Management, Key Performance Indicators, Contract Management, Business
                    Solutions, Product Management, Performance Management, Process Improvement, Quality Assurance
                    and Control, Risk Management, Business Management, People Management, Business Strategy, Busi-
                    ness Process and Analysis, Project Management
Customer      and   Payment Processing and Collection, Claims Processing, Cash Register Operation, Advanced Customer
Client Support      Service, Basic Customer Service
Design              Digital Design, Art and Illustration, Creative Design, Animation and Game Design, Industrial Design,
                    Graphic and Visual Design, Presentation Design, User Interface and User Experience (UI/UX) Design,
                    Graphic and Visual Design Software
Economics, Pol-     Social Studies, Urban Planning, Economic Development, Policy Analysis, Economics
icy, and Social
Studies
Education  and      Test Administration, Interpretations and Translations, Coaching and Athletic Training, Instruction,
Training            Archiving, Childhood Education and Development, Higher Education, Library and Cataloging, Child
                    Development, Education Administration, Learning Management Systems, Exercise Training, Peer Re-
                    view, Instructional and Curriculum Design, Program Management, Teaching, Training Programs
Energy and Utili-   Water Energy, Gas Drilling, Power Plant, Hydraulic Fracturing, Oil Refining, Oil Wells, Petroleum
ties                Science, Wind Energy, Oil Drilling, Oil Reservoirs, Water Supply, Nuclear Energy, Oil Well Intervention,
                    Natural Gas, Clean Energy, Power Generation, Solar Energy, Energy Solutions, Electrical Power, Energy
                    Management, Energy Efficiency
Engineering         Engineering Activities, Aerospace Engineering, Roads and Drainage, Optical Engineering, Geotechni-
                    cal Engineering, Surveying, Radio Frequency Equipment, Automotive Technologies, Imaging, Chemi-
                    cal Engineering, Hardware Description Languages (HDL), Civil and Architectural Engineering, Radio
                    Frequency (RF), Signal Processing, Electronic Hardware, Circuitry, Robotics, Engineering Software,
                    Automation Engineering, Industrial Engineering, Engineering Management, Simulation, Process Engi-
                    neering, Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Practices, Drafting and Engineering Design, Electrical
                    and Computer Engineering
Environment         Forestry, Ecology, Ethanol, Emissions Management, Environmental Geology, Air Quality, Resource
                    Management and Restoration, Conservation, Waste Management, Environmental Work, Environmental
                    Regulations, Water Testing and Treatment, Hazardous Waste Management
Finance             Financial Aid Counseling, Commodities, Specialized Accounting, Lending Assessment, Banking Ser-
                    vices, Costing, Accounts Payable and Receivable, Financial Accounting, Cost Accounting, Financial
                    Regulations, Commercial Lending, Accounting and Finance Software, Mergers and Acquisitions, Corpo-
                    rate Accounting, Tax, General Lending, Financial Trading, Underwriting, Cash Management, Mortgage
                    Lending, Financial Advisement, Financial Management, Investment Management, Financial Reporting,
                    Auditing, Financial Analysis, Billing and Invoicing, General Accounting, Budget Management
Health Care         Injury Treatment, Nuclear Medicine, Orthopedics, Geriatrics, Mental Health Diseases and Disorders,
                    Gastroenterology, Ear, Nose, and Throat, Dermatology, Speech Language Pathology, Medical Doc-
                    umentation and Abstraction, Pulmonology, Obstetrics and Gynecology (OBGYN), Neurology, Alter-
                    native Therapy, Clinical Data Management, Anesthesiology, Endocrinology, Eye Care, Mental Health
                    Therapies, Nutrition and Diet, First Aid, Pediatrics, Social Work, Physical Therapy, Animal Health
                    and Veterinary Medicine, Health Information Management and Security, Rehab Therapy, Rehabilita-
                    tion, Clinical Informatics, Medical Research, Allergies, Hematology, Cardiology, Medical Procedure and
                    Regulation, Patient Reception, Dental Care, Pathology, Clinical Research, Blood Collection, Routine
                    Examination Tests and Procedures, Pharmacy, Mental and Behavioral Health Specialties, Surgery, In-
                    fectious Diseases, Radiology, Urology, Oncology, Mobility Assistance, Patient Physical Measurements,
                    Public Health and Disease Prevention, General Medical Tests and Procedures, Medical Records, Patient
                    Education and Support, Health Care Procedure and Regulation, Nephrology, Basic Living Activities
                    Support, Medical Billing and Coding, General Medicine, Emergency and Intensive Care, Medical Sup-
                    port, Advanced Patient Care, Physical Abilities, Basic Patient Care




                                                        57
 Skill Clusters                                                           Skills
 Human Resources        Deductions, Human Resource Management Systems, Payroll, Compensation and Benefits, Recruitment,
                        Employee Relations, Human Resource Management and Planning, Talent Management, Employee Train-
                        ing, Occupational Health and Safety
 Industry Knowledge     Electrical Engineering Industry Knowledge, Supply Chain and Logistics Industry Knowledge, Insurance
                        Industry Knowledge, Apparel Industry Knowledge, Telecommunications Industry Knowledge, Allied
                        Health Care Industry Knowledge, Civil Engineering Industry Knowledge, Automotive Industry Knowl-
                        edge, Employment Services Industry Knowledge, Local Government Industry Knowledge, Industrial
                        Engineering Industry Knowledge, Biologics Industry Knowledge, Financial Services Industry Knowl-
                        edge
 Information Technol-   JavaScript and Jquery, IT Hardware, Augumented Reality / Virtual Reality (AR / VR), cybersecurity,
 ogy                    Mobile development, Enterprise Messaging, Wiki, Application Development, cloud solutions, Docu-
                        ment Management Systems, Internet Security, database administration, Enterprise Content Manage-
                        ment (ECM), Health Checks, Geographic Information System (GIS) Software, Android Development,
                        Web Content, Anti-Malware Software, Cloud Storage, Network Security, Application Programming In-
                        terface (API), iOS Stack, Application Security, Artificial Intelligence, Mobile Development, SAP, Help
                        Desk Support, Microsoft SQL Extensions, Other Programming Languages, Computer Hardware, PHP
                        Web, Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), Internet of Things (IoT), Data Storage, Distributed
                        Computing, Cloud Computing, IT Automation, Web Design, Productivity Software, Network File Sys-
                        tem (NFS), Advanced Microsoft Excel, NoSQL Databases, Networking Hardware, Mainframe Tech-
                        nologies, Software Development Tools, Version Control, Middleware, Software Development Method-
                        ologies, Extensible Languages, Basic Computer Knowledge, Web Servers, Information Security, Project
                        Management Software, Extraction, Transformation, and Loading (ETL), Microsoft Windows, Script-
                        ing, Data Warehousing, Big Data, Network Protocols, C and C++, Test Automation, Virtual Machines
                        (VM), Microsoft Development Tools, Software Quality Assurance, IT Management, Systems Administra-
                        tion, JavaScript and jQuery, Network Configuration, Cloud Solutions, Programming Principles, General
                        Networking, Scripting Languages, Web Development, Cybersecurity, Telecommunications, Data Man-
                        agement, Management Information System (MIS), Oracle, Java, Database Administration, Operating
                        Systems, SQL Databases and Programming, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Technical Support,
                        Software Development Principles, System Design and Implementation, Microsoft Office and Productivity
                        Tools
 Legal                  Forensics, Labor Compliance, Federal Acquisition, Legal Research, Law Enforcement and Criminal
                        Justice, Intellectual Property, Litigation, Regulation and Law Compliance
 Maintenance, Repair,   electrical and mechanical labor, Hazard Identification, Tailoring and Sewing, Bike Repair, Heavy Equip-
 and Installation       ment, Appliance Repair and Maintenance, Equipment Operation, Painting, Power Tools, Schematic
                        Diagrams, Electrical and Mechanical Labor, Basic Electrical Systems, Hand Tools, HVAC, Vehicle Re-
                        pair and Maintenance, Plumbing, Equipment Repair and Maintenance
 Manufacturing   and    Micro Manufacturing, Metal Fabrication, Materials Process, Manufacturing Design, Brazing and Sol-
 Production             dering, Computer-Aided Manufacturing, Materials Science, Computer-aided manufacturing, Welding,
                        Machine Tools, Manufacturing Standards, Product Inspection, Manufacturing Processes, Machinery,
                        Lean Manufacturing, Product Development
 Marketing and Public   Grant Applications, Concept Development, Fundraising, Investor Relations, Promotional Materials,
 Relations              Corporate Communications, Media Strategy and Planning, Online Advertising, Promotions and Cam-
                        paigns, Web Analytics, Advertising, Marketing Software, Public Relations, Brand Management, Online
                        Marketing, Marketing Strategy, Packaging and Labeling, Social Media, General Marketing, Marketing
                        Management, Market Analysis, Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
 Media and Writing      Audio Production, Music, Multimedia, Media Production, Journalism, Visual Design Production, Con-
                        tent Development and Management, Writing
 Personal Care and      Animal Care, Child Care, Personal Care, Housekeeping, Food and Beverage Service
 Services
 Public Safety and      Transportation Security, Physical Security, Emergency Services, Intelligence Collection and Analysis,
 National Security      Fire Inspection, Government Clearance and Security Standards, Surveillance, Loss Prevention
 Religion               Ministry
 Sales                  Trade Shows, Online Sales, Technical Demonstrations, Business-to-Business (B2B) Sales, Telemarketing,
                        Sales Analysis, Technical Sales, Insurance Sales, Salesmanship, E-Commerce, Outside Sales, Solution
                        Sales Engineering, Account Management, Specialized Sales, Inside Sales, Prospecting and Qualification,
                        Sales Management, Business Development, Company Product and Service Knowledge, Merchandising,
                        Retail Sales, General Sales Practices, General Sales
 Science and Research   Earth and Space Science, Neuroscience, Molecular Biology, Biopharmaceutical Manufacturing, Surveys,
                        Cellular Biology, Chemical Analysis, Drug Development, Biology, Genetics, Physics, Chemistry, Labo-
                        ratory Research, Research Methodology
 Supply Chain and Lo-   Transportation Operation and Management, TSA Regulation, Air Transport, Transportation Operations
 gistics                Management, Operations Analysis, Supply Chain Planning, Warehouse Management, Facility Manage-
                        ment and Maintenance, Logistics, General Shipping and Receiving, Inventory Maintenance, Supplier
                        Relationship Management, Transportation Operations, Supply Chain Management, Retail Store Oper-
                        ations, Store Management, Inventory Management, Procurement, Material Handling


Note: The Burning Glass data associates each online posting with (potentially multiple) skills based on
the free text of the job ad. This table shows the categorization that Burning Glass uses to organize the
skills into broader groups. We use the share of online posts in a seven-year window around a search
that contains any of the skills in the "Analysis" and "Information Technology" categories as a measure of
information-intensive skills in the workforce.



                                                        58
                          Table B.14: Burning Glass Skills­Factors
   Skill                            Factor1   Factor2    Factor3     Factor4   Factor5   Factor6   Uniqueness
   Administration                    -0.46     -0.09         -0.17     0.32      0.47     -0.11       0.42
   Customer Service                  -0.44     -0.48          0.24     0.03     -0.21     -0.19       0.44
   Supply Chain                      -0.43     -0.01          0.41    -0.20     -0.14      0.16       0.56
   Maintenance                       -0.39      0.42          0.37    -0.05      0.26     -0.16       0.44
   Human Resources                   -0.38      0.18          0.24     0.24      0.22      0.20       0.62
   Health Care                       -0.30      0.00         -0.76    -0.13      0.11     -0.06       0.30
   Sales                             -0.20     -0.65          0.36    -0.27     -0.17      0.14       0.29
   Education                         -0.12     -0.09         -0.37     0.03      0.39     -0.21       0.64
   Manufacturing                     -0.11      0.62          0.29    -0.18      0.16      0.29       0.38
   Science and Research              -0.01      0.31         -0.44    -0.25     -0.25      0.53       0.31
   Finance                           -0.01      0.05          0.06     0.80     -0.15      0.07       0.32
   Engineering                        0.06      0.63          0.30    -0.24      0.13     -0.23       0.39
   Business                           0.25     0.22           0.12     0.72     -0.23      0.08       0.29
   Media and Writing                  0.41     -0.21          0.02     0.07      0.56      0.22       0.42
   Marketing and Public Relations     0.45     -0.44          0.23     0.01      0.31      0.37       0.31
   Analysis                           0.54      0.20         -0.20    -0.02     -0.18      0.14       0.58
   Design                             0.67     -0.11          0.20    -0.12      0.30     -0.03       0.39
   Information Technology             0.72     0.08           0.11    -0.10     -0.16     -0.50       0.19

Note: The table shows the factor loadings on the first six principal component factors derived from the
matched Burning Glass Data using the BG skill classification (only factors with eigenvalue greater than
one are shown). We use Factor 1 as a proxy for information-intensive skills in the firm.




                                                        59
                                Table B.15: Description of Job Skills
Job Skills                                                            Skills
Cognitive          Agricultural Research, Ad Hoc Analysis and Reporting, Business Intelligence, Data Analysis, Mathe-
                   matics, Statistics, Validation, Architectural Design, General Architecture, Green Architecture, Benefits
                   Analysis, Business Process and Analysis, Business Solutions, Business Strategy, Key Performance Indi-
                   cators, Operations Management, Pricing Analysis, risk management, Risk Management, Animation and
                   Game Design, Art and Illustration, Creative Design, Digital Design, Graphic and Visual Design, Graphic
                   and Visual Design Software, Industrial Design, Presentation Design, Economic Development, Economics,
                   Policy Analysis, Social Studies, Urban Planning, Aerospace Engineering, Automation Engineering, Auto-
                   motive Technologies, Chemical Engineering, Circuitry, Civil and Architectural Engineering, Drafting and
                   Engineering Design, Electronic Hardware, Engineering Activities, Engineering Management, Engineering
                   Practices, Geotechnical Engineering, Hardware Description Languages (HDL), Imaging, Industrial En-
                   gineering, Mechanical Engineering, Optical Engineering, Process Engineering, Radio Frequency (RF),
                   Radio Frequency Equipment, Roads and Drainage, Robotics, Signal Processing, Simulation, Survey-
                   ing, Cardiology, Clinical Informatics, Clinical Research, Dermatology, Endocrinology, Gastroenterology,
                   Hematology, Infectious Diseases, Medical Research, Nephrology, Neurology, Nuclear Medicine, Nutri-
                   tion and Diet, Obstetrics and Gynecology (OBGYN), Oncology, Pathology, Public Health and Disease
                   Prevention, Pulmonology, Radiology, Urology, cloud solutions, Cloud Solutions, Federal Acquisition,
                   Forensics, Intellectual Property, Labor Compliance, Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, Legal Re-
                   search, Litigation, Regulation and Law Compliance, General Marketing, Market Analysis, Marketing
                   Strategy, Media Strategy and Planning, Intelligence Collection and Analysis, Biology, Biopharmaceutical
                   Manufacturing, Cellular Biology, Chemical Analysis, Chemistry, Drug Development, Earth and Space
                   Science, Genetics, Laboratory Research, Molecular Biology, Neuroscience, Physics, Research Method-
                   ology, Surveys, Air Transport, Facility Management and Maintenance, Logistics, Operations Analysis,
                   Procurement, Retail Store Operations, Store Management, Supplier Relationship Management, Supply
                   Chain Management, Supply Chain Planning, Transportation Operation and Management, Transporta-
                   tion Operations, Transportation Operations Management
Social             Business Communications, Business Consulting, Social Work, Advertising, Concept Development, Cor-
                   porate Communications, Grant Applications, Investor Relations, Online Advertising, Online Marketing,
                   Packaging and Labeling, Public Relations, Social Media, Ministry
Character          Administrative Support, Dictation, General Administrative and Clerical Tasks, Memoranda Prepara-
                   tion, Office Machines, Scheduling, Telephone Skills, Agronomy and Farming, Landscaping and Yard
                   Care, Carpentry, Conduits, Construction Inspection, Construction Labor, Construction Painting, Dry-
                   wall, Electrical Construction, Estimating, Insulation, Masonry, Road and Bridge Construction, Roofing,
                   Due Diligence, Optimization, Order Management, Quality Assurance and Control, Real Estate and
                   Rental, Technical Assistance, Archiving, Child Development, Childhood Education and Development,
                   Coaching and Athletic Training, Education Administration, Exercise Training, Higher Education, In-
                   struction, Instructional and Curriculum Design, Interpretations and Translations, Learning Management
                   Systems, Library and Cataloging, Peer Review, Program Management, Teaching, Test Administration,
                   Training Programs, Air Quality, Conservation, Ecology, Environmental Geology, Environmental Reg-
                   ulations, Environmental Work, Ethanol, Forestry, Water Testing and Treatment, Health Information
                   Management and Security, Medical Billing and Coding, Medical Documentation and Abstraction, Med-
                   ical Procedure and Regulation, Medical Records, Appliance Repair and Maintenance, Basic Electrical
                   Systems, Bike Repair, electrical and mechanical labor, Electrical and Mechanical Labor, Equipment
                   Operation, Equipment Repair and Maintenance, Hand Tools, Hazard Identification, Heavy Equipment,
                   HVAC, Painting, Plumbing, Power Tools, Schematic Diagrams, Tailoring and Sewing, Vehicle Repair and
                   Maintenance, Emergency Services, Fire Inspection, Government Clearance and Security Standards, Loss
                   Prevention, Physical Security, Surveillance, Transportation Security, General Shipping and Receiving,
                   Inventory Maintenance, Material Handling, TSA Regulation
Writing            Underwriting, Web Content, Promotional Materials, Promotions and Campaigns, Audio Production,
                   Content Development and Management, Journalism, Media Production, Multimedia, Music, Visual
                   Design Production, Writing
Customer Service   Advanced Customer Service, Basic Customer Service, Cash Register Operation, Claims Processing, Pay-
                   ment Processing and Collection, Advanced Patient Care, Allergies, Alternative Therapy, Anesthesiology,
                   Animal Health and Veterinary Medicine, Basic Living Activities Support, Basic Patient Care, Blood Col-
                   lection, Clinical Data Management, Dental Care, Ear, Nose, and Throat, Emergency and Intensive Care,
                   Eye Care, First Aid, General Medical Tests and Procedures, General Medicine, Geriatrics, Health Care
                   Procedure and Regulation, Injury Treatment, Medical Support, Mental and Behavioral Health Special-
                   ties, Mental Health Diseases and Disorders, Mental Health Therapies, Mobility Assistance, Orthopedics,
                   Patient Education and Support, Patient Physical Measurements, Patient Reception, Pediatrics, Phar-
                   macy, Physical Abilities, Physical Therapy, Rehab Therapy, Rehabilitation, Routine Examination Tests
                   and Procedures, Speech Language Pathology, Surgery, Animal Care, Child Care, Food and Beverage Ser-
                   vice, Housekeeping, Personal Care, Account Management, Business Development, Business-to-Business
                   (B2B) Sales, Company Product and Service Knowledge, E-Commerce, General Sales, General Sales
                   Practices, Inside Sales, Insurance Sales, Merchandising, Online Sales, Outside Sales, Prospecting and
                   Qualification, Retail Sales, Sales Analysis, Sales Management, Salesmanship, Solution Sales Engineering,
                   Specialized Sales, Technical Demonstrations, Technical Sales, Telemarketing, Trade Shows
          NOTE. ­ Shown in the authors categorization of open text fields in Burning Glass Technologies data.




                                                            60
                       Table B.16: Description of Job Skills (Continued)
 Job Skills                                                             Skills
 Project   manage-     Construction Management, Category Management, Contract Management, Event Planning and Manage-
 ment                  ment, Internal Controls, Knowledge Management, Process Improvement, Product Management, Project
                       Management, Property Management, Energy Management, Emissions Management, Hazardous Waste
                       Management, Resource Management and Restoration, Waste Management, Data Management, Docu-
                       ment Management Systems, Enterprise Content Management (ECM), Enterprise Messaging, Enterprise
                       Resource Planning (ERP), IT Management, Brand Management, Marketing Management, Inventory
                       Management, Warehouse Management
 People      manage-   Office Management, Business Management, People Management, Performance Management, Compensa-
 ment                  tion and Benefits, Deductions, Employee Relations, Employee Training, Human Resource Management
                       and Planning, Human Resource Management Systems, Occupational Health and Safety, Payroll, Re-
                       cruitment, Talent Management, Management Information System (MIS), Customer Relationship Man-
                       agement (CRM)
 Financial             Accounting and Finance Software, Accounts Payable and Receivable, Auditing, Banking Services, Billing
                       and Invoicing, Budget Management, Cash Management, Commercial Lending, Commodities, Corporate
                       Accounting, Cost Accounting, Costing, Financial Accounting, Financial Advisement, Financial Aid
                       Counseling, Financial Analysis, Financial Management, Financial Regulations, Financial Reporting, Fi-
                       nancial Trading, General Accounting, General Lending, Investment Management, Lending Assessment,
                       Mergers and Acquisitions, Mortgage Lending, Specialized Accounting, Tax, Fundraising
 Computer (general)    Electrical and Computer Engineering
 Software (specific)   Business Intelligence Software, Data Mining, Data Science, Data Techniques, Data Visualization, Ma-
                       chine Learning, Mathematical Modeling, Mathematical Software, Natural Language Processing (NLP),
                       Statistical Software, User Interface and User Experience (UI/UX) Design, Engineering Software, Android
                       Development, Anti-Malware Software, Application Development, Application Programming Interface
                       (API), Artificial Intelligence, Augumented Reality / Virtual Reality (AR / VR), Big Data, C and C++,
                       Cloud Computing, Cloud Storage, Data Storage, Data Warehousing, Distributed Computing, Extensible
                       Languages, Extraction, Transformation, and Loading (ETL), General Networking, Geographic Informa-
                       tion System (GIS) Software, Health Checks, Integrated Development Environments (IDEs), Internet
                       of Things (IoT), iOS Stack, IT Automation, Middleware, Mobile development, Mobile Development,
                       Network Configuration, Network File System (NFS), Network Protocols, Networking Hardware, NoSQL
                       Databases, Operating Systems, Oracle, Other Programming Languages, PHP Web, Productivity Soft-
                       ware, Programming Principles, Project Management Software, SAP, Scripting, Scripting Languages,
                       Software Development Methodologies, Software Development Principles, Software Development Tools,
                       Software Quality Assurance, SQL Databases and Programming, System Design and Implementation,
                       Test Automation, Virtual Machines (VM), Web Design, Web Development, Web Servers, Wiki, Mar-
                       keting Software, Web Analytics

      -----------------------------Additional Categories Created by Authors-----------------------------

 Energy              Clean Energy, Electrical Power, Energy Efficiency, Energy Solutions, Gas Drilling, Hydraulic Fracturing,
                     Natural Gas, Nuclear Energy, Oil Drilling, Oil Refining, Oil Reservoirs, Oil Well Intervention, Oil Wells,
                     Petroleum Science, Power Generation, Power Plant, Solar Energy, Water Energy, Water Supply, Wind
                     Energy
 Industry-specific   Allied Health Care Industry Knowledge, Apparel Industry Knowledge, Automotive Industry Knowl-
                     edge, Biologics Industry Knowledge, Civil Engineering Industry Knowledge, Electrical Engineering In-
                     dustry Knowledge, Employment Services Industry Knowledge, Financial Services Industry Knowledge,
                     Industrial Engineering Industry Knowledge, Insurance Industry Knowledge, Local Government Industry
                     Knowledge, Supply Chain and Logistics Industry Knowledge, Telecommunications Industry Knowledge
 Basic Software      Advanced Microsoft Excel, Application Security, Basic Computer Knowledge, Computer Hardware,
                     cybersecurity, Cybersecurity, database administration, Database Administration, Help Desk Support,
                     Information Security, Internet Security, IT Hardware, Java, JavaScript and jQuery, JavaScript and
                     Jquery, Mainframe Technologies, Microsoft Development Tools, Microsoft Office and Productivity Tools,
                     Microsoft SQL Extensions, Microsoft Windows, Network Security, Systems Administration, Technical
                     Support, Telecommunications, Version Control
 Manufacturing       Brazing and Soldering, Computer-aided manufacturing, Computer-Aided Manufacturing, Lean Manu-
                     facturing, Machine Tools, Machinery, Manufacturing Design, Manufacturing Processes, Manufacturing
                     Standards, Materials Process, Materials Science, Metal Fabrication, Micro Manufacturing, Product De-
                     velopment, Product Inspection, Welding
            NOTE. ­ Shown in the authors categorization of open text fields in Burning Glass Technologies data.


Note: The Burning Glass data associates each online posting with (potentially multiple) skills based on
the free text of the job ad. This table shows a categorization of these skills based on Deming and Kahn
(2018), extended to include four additional categories. We use the share of online posts in a seven-year
window around a search that contains any of the skills in the "Computer (general)", "Software (specific)",
and "Basic Software" categories as a measure of information-intensive skills.




                                                               61
                          Table B.17: Deming and Khan Skills­Factors
                  Skill                Factor1   Factor2   Factor3   Factor4   Uniqueness
                  Software              0.54      -0.33     -0.55      0.16       0.26
                  Writing               0.42      0.18      -0.45     -0.29       0.51
                  Social                0.45       0.16     -0.36     -0.31       0.54
                  Computer              0.13      -0.57     -0.24      0.25       0.53
                  Basic Software        0.78       0.05     -0.24      0.16       0.31
                  Project Management    0.84      -0.02      0.01      0.01       0.29
                  Customer              -0.11      0.67      0.03     -0.05       0.54
                  People Management     0.57      0.48      0.10       0.20       0.40
                  Financial             0.57       0.35      0.21     -0.07       0.50
                  Cognitive             0.73      -0.23      0.21     -0.25       0.31
                  Energy                0.16      -0.11      0.28     0.64        0.47
                  Manufacturing         0.40      -0.47      0.40     -0.02       0.45
                  Character             0.46      0.25      0.47       0.28       0.42
                  Industry Knowledge    0.20      -0.31      0.52     -0.60       0.24

Note: The table shows the factor loadings on the first four principal component factors derived the matched
Burning Glass Data using the Deming and Khan skill classification (only factors with eigenvalue greater
than one are shown). We interpret the inverse of Factor 3 as the proxy for information-intensive skills in
the firm.




                                                     62
