                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INTEREST RATE SKEWNESS AND BIASED BELIEFS

                                       Michael D. Bauer
                                       Mikhail Chernov

                                      Working Paper 28954
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28954


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We are grateful to Michael Gallmeyer, Marco Giacoletti, Mathieu Gomez, Valentin Haddad,
Christian Heyerdahl-Larsen, Lars Lochstoer, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and seminar participants
at UCLA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michael D. Bauer and Mikhail Chernov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Interest Rate Skewness and Biased Beliefs
Michael D. Bauer and Mikhail Chernov
NBER Working Paper No. 28954
June 2021
JEL No. E43,E44,E52,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

Conditional yield skewness is an important summary statistic of the state of the economy. It
exhibits pronounced variation over the business cycle and with the stance of monetary policy, and
a tight relationship with the slope of the yield curve. Most importantly, variation in yield
skewness has substantial forecasting power for future bond excess returns, high-frequency
interest rate changes around FOMC announcements, and consensus survey forecast errors for the
ten-year Treasury yield. The COVID pandemic did not disrupt these relations: historically high
skewness correctly anticipated the run-up in long-term Treasury yields starting in late 2020. The
connection between skewness, survey forecast errors, excess returns, and departures of yields
from normality is consistent with a theoretical framework where one of the agents has biased
beliefs.


Michael D. Bauer
Universität Hamburg
Department of Economics
Von-Melle-Park 5
20146 Hamburg
Germany
michael.d.bauer@gmail.com

Mikhail Chernov
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

What predicts changes in interest rates? The literature has come a long way from the
expectations hypothesis distinguishing between statistical, risk-adjusted, and subjec-
tive expectations. Regardless of the channel, the shape of the yield curve has emerged
as a key source of information (e.g., Campbell and Shiller, 1991; Cochrane and Pi-
azzesi, 2005; Piazzesi, Salomao, and Schneider, 2015). The Global Financial Crisis
of 2008/2009 led to unchartered territory for the yield curve, with short-term rates
constrained by the zero lower bound (ZLB) and long-term rates affected by uncon-
ventional monetary policies. In such an environment, interest rate risk was generally
perceived to be tilted to the upside, but the slope of the yield curve did not cap-
ture this. By contrast, interest rate skewness implied by Treasury options signaled
substantial upside risk to yields, suggesting that implied skewness might be a useful
forward looking measure to assess interest rate risk.

In this paper we argue that skewness is important for understanding yield dynamics
and forecasting bond returns both during the ZLB period and outside of it, inclusive of
the COVID pandemic. Because skewness measures the asymmetry in the distribution
of future rate changes, it is a natural candidate for capturing changes in the balance of
interest rate risks. That is in contrast to volatility, which captures market uncertainty
about interest rates (e.g., MOVE or TYVIX indices). We study a model-free measure
of the option-implied skewness of Treasury yields during the period from 1990 to 2021.
We show that it indeed contains rich information about the outlook for interest rates
throughout the whole sample.

Skewness exhibits substantial and persistent variation over time, which is related to
the business cycle and the stance of monetary policy. Importantly, implied skewness
contains significant additional predictive information, supporting the view that these
changes in conditional skewness are indeed informative about the balance of inter-
est rate risk. Specifically, implied skewness helps to anticipate bond excess returns,
monetary policy surprises around FOMC announcements, and survey forecast errors
for Treasury yields. We argue that our evidence is consistent with an environment
where some economic agents have biased beliefs, or, equivalently, exhibit systematic
expectational errors.

                                           1
There is a dearth of evidence regarding this aspect of the distribution of interest
rates. Indeed, many influential papers on non-normality of interest rates and its links
to monetary policy implicitly or explicitly assume zero conditional skewness (e.g.,
Das, 2002, Johannes, 2004). Even the path-breaking work of Piazzesi (2001), which
explicitly relates interest-rate jumps to FOMC announcements, treats the effects as
symmetric in empirical work and focuses on the effects of uncertainty surrounding
the announcements. There is a sound empirical reason for the extant perspective:
the sample skewness of Treasury yield changes is close to zero.

Thus, to set the stage for our subsequent analysis, we start by investigating the
time variation of conditional skewness of yields. We use two alternative measures of
conditional skewness: The first is realized yield skewness computed from daily price
data. The second is risk-neutral yield skewness as implied by Treasury option prices.
The two measures are qualitatively similar in our case, their difference reflecting the
skewness risk premium and measurement noise. For most of our empirical analysis, we
focus on option-implied skewness, which has several advantages including its forward-
looking nature, daily availability, and high statistical precision.

We document substantial and economically interesting time variation and persistence
in conditional skewness over the past 30 years. In stark contrast to unconditional
yield skewness, which is statistically indistinguishable from zero over this sample,
conditional skewness indicates prolonged periods of both substantial upward and
downward skew in the balance of interest rate risk. Option-implied skewness predicts
future realized skewness, establishing formal statistical evidence for the time variation
in conditional skewness. Aside from these cyclical fluctuations, yield skewness has
generally drifted down over the course of our sample.

We then ask what the macroeconomic drivers of skewness in yields are. To this end,
we assess the contemporaneous relationship of conditional skewness with financial
and macroeconomic variables, including the shape of the yield curve and the stance
of monetary policy. We find that yield skewness exhibits a close connection with a
number of variables, the most pronounced being its positive correlation with the slope
of the yield curve. Furthermore, skewness tends to be high when the Fed has recently
eased the stance of monetary policy, and low when the Fed has tightened its policy
stance.

                                           2
Our main evidence is on the information content in option-implied skewness for future
interest rates. We investigate whether the component of skewness that is orthogonal
to the aforementioned variables carries useful information. To that end, we test if it
can forecast key variables in bond markets and find that it does. Skewness exhibits
highly significant predictive power for excess bond returns and FOMC surprises, which
is robust to controlling for the shape of the yield curve and a wide range of other
predictors. During the COVID episode skewness has correctly predicted a steep rise
in 10-year yields from 0.5% in early 2020 to 1.5% in May 2021. Thus skewness appears
to contain genuinely new information about the future evolution of interest rates.

Given that the documented predictability may arise from time-varying risk premiums
or persistently biased beliefs, we next study the relation between survey forecasts and
skewness. Using the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (BCFF) and Survey of Profes-
sional Forecasters (SPF), we associate conditional yield skewness at the time of the
surveys with the future consensus forecast error for the 10-year Treasury yield. We
find a strong statistical relationship between skewness and this forecast error for all
forecast horizons, which is robust to controlling for the shape of the yield curve.
This evidence supports the view that time-varying differences between statistical and
subjective expectations, or biased beliefs, play an important role for explaining the
predictive power of skewness for interest rates. Skewness appears to be a proxy for
the bias in beliefs about future interest rates.

That observation offers a clue about a possible economic mechanism behind the ev-
idence. One needs a framework where some agents have biased beliefs. We adopt
the heterogeneous beliefs two-agent framework by assuming that one agent knows
the true distribution of the state, while the other one has erroneous beliefs. As a
result, the usual measure of disagreement in these models becomes a measure of bias
in beliefs.

The heterogeneous beliefs model of Ehling, Gallmeyer, Heyerdahl-Larsen, and Illed-
itsch (2018) (EGHI) is particularly well suited for our purposes as it focuses on Trea-
sury bonds. When investors differ in beliefs about future inflation, they take different
positions in inflation-sensitive securities. In equilibrium, the investor who thinks in-
flation will be high buys inflation-linked and sells short nominal Treasury bonds,


                                           3
and an investor with the opposite view matches both positions on the other side to
clear the markets. Ex ante, each investor expects to capture wealth from the other
investor and, hence, both expect future consumption to be higher than without dis-
agreement about inflation. Thus, the real interest rate depends on the dispersion
in beliefs between the agents. Because of that dependence, the interest rate is non-
normally distributed even if differences in beliefs have a normal distribution. Thus,
time-variation in the dispersion in beliefs generates time-variation in yield skewness.
Time-variation in bond risk premiums is driven by the differences in beliefs as well
thereby linking skewness to expected excess bond returns.

Brooks, Katz, and Lustig (2020) document that FOMC announcement surprises cause
a persistent drift in Treasury yields and provide an explanation based on non-rational
expectations. Schmeling, Schrimpf, and Steffensen (2020) relate excess returns of fi-
nancial instruments connected to short-term interest rates to survey forecast errors
about future monetary policy. Conditional skewness, given its predictive power for
both high-frequency announcement surprises and lower-frequency Treasury bond re-
turns, captures a similar relationship. We find that skewness is directly connected to
the expectation errors, which may be its source.

Giacoletti, Laursen, and Singleton (2021) (GLS) show that disagreement about fu-
ture yields between 90th and 10th percentiles of BCFF predicts bond risk premiums.
Further, the authors argue that their evidence is inconsistent with the heterogeneous
beliefs mechanism. The standard channel affecting asset pricing is based on disagree-
ment about fundamentals, while GLS document no relation between disagreemnts
about inflation and yields. The mechanism that we advocate is distinct from the one
explored in GLS. First, we show that skewness predicts bond excess returns together
with the GLS measure of disagreement. Second, while the mathematics of biased
beliefs and disagreement are very similar in a heterogeneous beliefs model, empiri-
cally they are different. We demonstrate, using consensus forecasts from both BCFF
and SPF, that in contrast to the GLS evidence about disagreement, survey-based
expectation errors about inflation are related to expectation errors about yields.

Broadly, our paper is related to the literature on interaction of monetary policy
and bond markets pioneered by Balduzzi, Bertola, and Foresi (1997), Fleming and
Remolona (2001), Ang and Piazzesi (2003), and Piazzesi (2005).

                                          4
We forecast bond excess returns as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), Ludvigson and
Ng (2009), and Cieslak and Povala (2015). The role of monetary policy surprises
for bond markets goes back to the work of Kuttner (2001) and Balduzzi, Elton, and
Green (2001), and speaks to the recent work of Nakamura and Steinsson (2018).
Errors in surveys about interest rates and the yield curve feature prominently in
Buraschi, Piatti, and Whelan (2019), Cieslak (2018), and Piazzesi, Salomao, and
Schneider (2015). Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020) document the predictive
power of downside risk for Fed easing actions, the "Fed put", which is related to our
finding that asymmetric risks predict Fed policy actions.

In terms of using options to measure skewness, the methodology follows that of Bak-
shi and Madan (2000) and Neuberger (2012). Beber and Brandt (2006) and Trolle
and Schwartz (2014) are primary empirical examples in fixed-income markets. The
last paper is the closest to ours in terms of measurment: they apply the Neuberger
(2012) approach to swaption prices and document time-variation in conditional skew-
ness. The sample period is relatively short, 2002-2009, and the authors do not relate
skewness to bond returns or survey-based forecasts of yields.

Hattori, Schrimpf, and Sushko (2016) demonstrate that unconventional monetary
policy has reduced option-implied tail risks for the stock and bond markets. Mertens
and Williams (2020) use option-implied distributions during the ZLB period to dis-
tinguish between the constrained and unconstrained monetary policy equlibria. Li
(2020) documents the connection between option-implied Treasury skewness and re-
cessions between 2000 and 2018.

The early work on heterogeneous beliefs is Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Detem-
ple and Murthy (1994). Heterogeneous beliefs-based asset pricing applications are
reviewed in Basak (2005). Xiong and Yan (2010) is the first application of heteroge-
neous beliefs to Treasury bonds. Our contribution to this literature is to point out a
link between dispersion in beliefs and non-normality of yields, both in theory and in
the data.




                                          5
2     Time variation in interest rate skewness

Interest rate skewness captures the degree of asymmetry in the probability distribu-
tion of changes in interest rates. Given that average interest rate changes are close to
zero, positive skewness indicates that large rate increases are more likely than large
rate declines, which implies that the balance of risk is tilted to the upside, and vice
versa.

Unconditional interest rate skewness--the sample skewness of Treasury yield changes
over long periods of time--has been essentially zero. In this section we document
that this contrasts with pronounced shifts and large cyclical swings over the last
three decades in conditional skewness, measured either as realized skewness (using
short rolling windows of Treasury yield changes) or option-implied skewness (using
model-free moments implied by Treasury options). The statistical evidence for this
time variation is that option-implied skewness strongly predicts realized skewness.



2.1    Data

The data we use in this analysis are Treasury yields, as well as Treasury futures
and options. Our Treasury yields are the daily smoothed Treasury yield curves from
G¨urkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007). When we need a monthly data frequency we
take monthly averages. Most of our analysis focuses on the 10-year yield.

The Treasury derivative prices are from CME group. In particular, we use end-of-day
prices of the 10-year T-Note futures contract, and options written on this contract.
Both types of contracts are among the most actively traded Treasury derivatives,
with high liquidity (in terms of open interest and volume) and long available price
histories. The deliverable maturities for this futures contract are between 6.5 and 10
years. Changes in futures prices are closely associated with negative yield changes in
the cheapest-to-deliver (CTD) Treasury security. Because skewness is scale invariant,
we can take the negative of the skewness of futures price changes as a measure of
skewness of yield changes for the CTD bond. Details are in Appendix A.1.


                                           6
Our sample period is from the beginning of January 1990 to the end of May 2021. The
starting date is dictated by the availability of options data allowing us to consistently
calculate option-based moments using prices across many contracts/strikes. While
the historical Treasury options data starts in May 1985, there are only few contracts
and prices available during the early years.



2.2    Sample statistics and unconditional skewness

The top panel of Table 1 reports summary statistics for quarterly changes (using the
last month of the quarter) in the 10-year yield, including the mean, median, variance
and third central moment. We report the statistics for the full sample and the first
and second half of the sample. In addition to sample statistics, we also calculate
90%-confidence intervals using a simple bootstrap, since yields are highly persistent
and the serial correlation of their changes is close to zero. The mean and median
are negative and, like the variance, have changed little between the first and second
sub-sample. By contrast, the third sample moment of quarterly yield changes shifted:
over the first half of the sample, the third moments is zero, while over the second half
it has turned negative.

The middle and bottom panels of Table 1 report the sample skewness coefficient
for yield changes and (negative) futures price changes, respectively, and we report
skewness for different frequences, ranging from one-month to twelve-month changes.
The results for bond yields and futures are similar: For the full sample, sample
skewness of interest rate changes is statistically close to zero. Its value in split samples
depends on the frequency, but it is typically higher and positive over the first half of
the sample and negative over the second half of the sample. The magnitude ranges
between -1 and 0.5, depending on the specific sample and frequency, is comparable
to the skewness estimates for foreign currency and equity index returns reported in
the literature (e.g., Chernov, Graveline, and Zviadadze, 2018, Table 1).

Thus, while the mean and variance of yield changes have not changed, the shape of
the asymmetry has shifted noticeably. While the skew of the distribution generally
appears slightly positive from 1990 to 2004, it has shifted significantly negative for

                                             7
the period from 2005 to 2021. This empirical pattern suggests that an unconditional,
full-sample perspective on skewness may miss interesting features of the distribution
of interest rates. Therefore we next turn to conditional yield skewness.



2.3    Realized and implied skewness

In order to measure yield skewness at a more granular level, and to understand
time variation, we follow the literature on skewness in stock returns and calculate
realized and option-implied measures of skewness. We use daily changes in prices
and implied volatility for Treasury futures to compute realized skewness (RSK) at
the monthly frequency (Neuberger, 2012, Equation 5). Again, the negative of futures
price skewness corresponds to yield skewness.

Figure 1A plots this time series of RSK, as well as a 12-month moving average.
Monthly realized yield skewness is volatile and on average close to zero, but exhibits
some persistence and pronounced time variation. During three episodes skewness was
markedly negative: the dot-com bubble 1998-2000, the financial crisis of 2007-2009,
and the period since 2015 when the Fed lifted its policy rate off the ZLB. Skewness
declines sharply in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 but then reaches
historical high level in the wake of global fiscal and monetary stimulus.

Realized skewness allows us to gauge time variation but it is noisy, available only at
lower frequencies, and backward-looking. We now turn to option-implied skewness for
future Treasury yields. This implied skewness (ISK) measures the conditional, risk-
neutral skewness of future yield changes, as reflected in options on Treasury futures.
Details of how we construct ISK are in Appendix A.1. The negative of implied
skewness for Treasury futures price changes corresponds to skewness of Treasury yield
changes. On every trading day we calculate ISK for each futures contract expiration.
For most of our analysis, we then use ISK for the most active option contract, namely
the shortest quarterly contract, which has a maturity between about 1 and 3 months.

Figure 1B shows a time series of implied skewness that is linearly interpolated to a
constant horizon of 2.4 months (the average horizon of all option contracts). This


                                          8
daily series is highly persistent with a first-order autocorrelation of 0.95. Over the
full sample, the average level of ISK is positive, with a mean of 0.10 that is signifi-
cantly different from zero, and a standard deviation of 0.30. But this average level
of skewness masks substantial variation in risk perceptions about for future Treasury
yields. Similar to realized skewness, ISK has exhibited a general downward trend as
well as pronounced cyclical swings over the course of our sample. Particularly strik-
ing is the behavior during the first ZLB episode, when the Fed's policy rate was near
zero. Between 2009 and 2014, ISK averaged 0.35, while outside of this period the
average was only 0.04. Before liftoff from the ZLB in 2015 skewness shifted markedly
negative, and it averaged -0.21 between 2015 and the end of the sample. As is the
case with RSK, the COVID stumulus has changed that trend with ISK reaching levels
of around 1.0 in mid-2020.

More formal statistical analysis is helpful to better understand the time variation
that is visually evident in these figures. Specifically, we want to test whether time
variation in option-implied skewness is statistically and economically significant. One
straightforward way to do so is to assess whether it predicts realized skewness. In
Table 2 we present results for various regression specifications, predicting monthly
realized skewness with its own lag, option-implied skewness or the shape of the yield
curve, all measured at the end of the previous month. To guard against serial cor-
relation due to the persistence of RSK we report Newey-West standard errors (with
automatic bandwidth selection). RSK exhibits significant autocorrelation, but lagged
values of ISK have even stronger predictive power than lagged values of RSK itself.
In a regression that includes both predictors, both are strongly significant (see col-
umn 3). The slope of the yield curve has some explanatory power for future RSK,
but once we include ISK this is driven out and the information in the yield curve
becomes irrelevant. In sum, there is strong evidence for time variation in the con-
ditional expectation of RSK, as captured by ISK. This establishes ISK as a useful
forward-looking measure of conditional yield skewness.




                                          9
3     Macro-finance drivers of yield skewness

The previous section documents time variation in conditional skewness of yields. We
now investigate which financial and macroeconomic drivers can potentially explain
the time variation in conditional yield skewness. This analysis will lead us closer to
the understanding of skewness' informational content.

It turns out that skewness exhibits a statistically and economically significant rela-
tionship with the slope of the yield curve and stance of monetary policy. Periods
when the slope is high (low) or when the Fed has been easing (tightening) the stance
of monetary policy are characterized by high (low) option-implied skewness. The or-
thogonal component of skewness still exhibits interesting cyclical variation, which our
analysis in Section 4 shows to contain substantial additional predictive information.
We find little evidence for a mechanical effect of the ZLB on the level of skewness,
supporting the view that the importance of skewness is not limited to the ZLB period
alone.



3.1    Skewness and the yield curve

To provide a visual impression of the relationship between interest rates and skewness,
Figure 2 plots annual moving averages of implied skewness with the two-year and ten-
year Treasury yields. In addition, the figure also shades monetary policy easing and
tightening cycles, which we identify based on changes in the federal funds rate, since
shifts in monetary policy are a key driver of shifts in the yield curve (Piazzesi, 2005).

Figure 2 reveals several patterns. Skewness tends to increase when the yield curve is
steepening, in particular during the episodes in 2002-2003 and 2008-2013. Thus, the
term spread appears to be related to skewness. In addition, there is also a relationship
between skewness and the level of the yield curve, but it is more complicated and
appears to depend on the frequency. On the one hand, there is a general downward
trend in skewness and yields over the course of the sample. But on the other hand,
the level of yields and conditional skewness seem to move in opposite directions at
business cycle frequency.

                                           10
We formalize the evidence by a series of regressions reported in Table 3. In all
specifications, the dependent variable is conditional implied skewness, ISK. We use
monthly averages of skewness and interest rates. Due to the high persistence of
ISK, robust standard errors are calculated using the Newey-West estimator (with
automatic bandwidth selection), and they are reported in parentheses.

The relationship between RSK and ISK is the natural baseline and starting point for
an analysis of the drivers of implied skewness. Column 1 shows the corresponding
regression, and the estimates indicate a very strong contemporaneous relationship
between the two series. The next column reports estimates for a regression on the level
and slope of the yield curve. These are calculated as the first two principal components
of yields from one to ten years maturity, normalized such that high level/slope are
associated with high yields/an upward sloping yield curve. The numbers confirm that
the slope is important for skewness: an upward-sloping yield curve is associated with
high skewness. Level, by contrast, does not have a statistically significant relationship
with skewness. By including RSK, level and slope together we can account for more
than half of the variation in ISK, with an R2 of 0.50.

The two subsequent columns incorporate the interaction between level and slope,
which adds substantial explanatory power. The slope has a much stronger relationship
with skewness when the level of yields is low than when it is high, a pattern to some
extent driven by the ZLB period when slope and level were both historically low and
skewness skyrocketed. According to the specification in column 5, we can explain
54% of the variation in skewness just based on the yield curve--including the level-
slope interaction--and RSK. Thus, variation in yield skewness is closely related to
variation in yields themselves.

Figure 1C plots the residual from a regression of ISK on level, slope and a level-slope
interaction, that is, from the regression specification in column 4 of Table 3. This
residual exhibits neither the downward trend nor the pronounced negative level shift
after 2014. Accounting for the shifts in the yield curve also dampens the large cyclical
swings, compared to the original series. However, this unexplained portion still has
interesting cyclical variation, which we show below to contain substantial relevant
information about future yields.


                                           11
3.2    Skewness and the ZLB

Section 2 documented that implied skewness was significantly higher during the ZLB
period beginning in 2008. In light of this pattern, one might hypothesize that skew-
ness generally tends to be high when interest rates are low, i.e., close to the ZLB. In
particular, there could be a mechanical reason for positive skewness in the sense that
the ZLB does not allow a long left tail and thus necessarily makes the right tail com-
paratively longer. If this mechanism was a key driver of conditional skewness, then
it would suggest that skewness does not contain much forward-looking information
about the direction of interest rate risk. But our results instead indicate that prox-
imity to the ZLB itself is not an important factor explaining variation in conditional
skewness.

First, if conditional yield skewness depended on the proximity of yields to the ZLB,
then this should imply a negative relationship between skewness and the level of the
yield curve. By contrast, the estimates in Table 3 suggest either a non-existent or
positive relationship, depending on the specification. Furthermore, skewness is time-
varying and sign-switching in our sample prior to 2008, without any apparent time
trend despite the secular downward trend in interest rates (Bauer and Rudebusch,
2020). For example, yields were lower in 2016 than during most of the first ZLB
period, yet skewness was mainly negative in 2016.

Second, skewness behaved very differently during the two ZLB episodes in our sample.
Skewness turned positive when the ZLB was reached in 2008 and remained mainly
positive for several years, but then switched to negative in 2014, more than a year be-
fore the Fed lifted its policy rate off the ZLB. During the most recent period, skewness
remained negative for several months after the ZLB was reached, but then turned pos-
itive in mid-2020 before long-term Treasury yields commenced a pronounced increase,
as discussed in Section 4.4.

Third, a closer investigation of the entire option-implied density of future yields dur-
ing the two ZLB episodes shows no evidence of a mechanical ZLB explanation of
positive skewness. Figure 3 shows, for two different dates, the implied densities for
yields at the option expiration date, obtained from (i) the bond derivative prices,


                                          12
(ii) a normal-inverse-gamma distribution that matches the first four option-implied
moments (Eriksson, Ghysels, and Wang, 2009), (iii) an approximate mapping from
bond price changes to yield changes (see Appendix A.1), and (iv) the current CTD
bond yield.

The first date is December 31, 2012, a day with a particularly low yield level (1.14
percent) and a high level of skewness (0.8). The density pertains to the yield level
on February 22, 2013, the expiration date. Even for this extreme example of low
yields and high skewness during this episode, the 1st percentile of the distribution
is comfortably above the ZLB, at 0.6 percent. This suggests that the left tail is not
thinner because it is cut off by the ZLB, but instead because investors perceived an
upward tilted balance of risk and large right tail.1

The second date is June 16, 2020, a day with extremely low yields and negative skew-
ness, which was not uncommon during this episode. For this distribution, pertaining
to the yield level on August 21, the 1st percentile is deeply negative, at -0.6 percent,
suggesting that the ZLB does not eliminate left tails and mechanically lead to positive
skewness, at least not during this episode.

Overall, this evidence suggests that the high level of skewness during the first ZLB
episode was not mechanically driven by the proximity to the ZLB itself. Instead, other
factors affected risk perceptions during this episode, such as unconventional monetary
policies implemented by the Fed and the investor view that long-term yields might
return to higher levels if the impact of such policies proved transitory. Our results
below on the predictive power of skewness will further support the view that variation
in skewness reflects a changing outlook on interest rate risk and not a mechanical
impact of the ZLB.



3.3     Skewness and the monetary policy cycle

Figure 2 shows that skewness tends to increase during or after monetary easing cycles,
most prominently during the easing after the 2000 dot-com bust and during the
   1
    Even a counterfactual distribution with an equally large negative skewness, at -0.8, still has a
1st percentile quite a bit above the ZLB, at 0.3 percent.


                                                13
Great recession and ZLB period. Vice versa, tightening episodes coincide with or
precede episodes of falling skewness. We now dig deeper into the relationship between
skewness and monetary policy cycles.

To this end, we estimate regressions that include indicator variables for monetary
easing and tightening cycles. Cross-correlations reveal that one-year lags of the in-
dicator variables for easing and tightening episodes have the strongest correlation
with skewness, so we include these lags instead of contemporaneous indicators in our
regressions. Columns 6 and 7 of Table 3 show the results.

Conditional skewness has a statistically strong and economically intuitive relation-
ship with the monetary policy cycle. A regression of ISK on the cyclical indicators,
shown in column 6, demonstrates their substantial explanatory power, with an R2
of 0.31. A third of the variation in conditional yield skewness is explained by the
monetary policy cycle. Skewness is high during and soon after monetary easing cy-
cles. Intuitively, these are episodes of upward-tilted interest risk because the Fed has
been lowering rates and the next monetary tightening cycle is likely to begin soon.
Vice versa, skewness is low during and early after monetary tightening cycles, peri-
ods where investors are turning their attention to downward risk to interest rates.
Thus, skewness appears to capture the changing balance of interest rate risk over the
business cycle.2

The relationship of skewness with the monetary policy cycle is so strong to even
drive out the relationship with the yield curve. When we add these indicators to a
regression with RSK and the yield-curve variables, the slope becomes insignificant,
as shown in column 7 of Table 3. This finding may be understood in light of the
fact that the slope of the yield curve mainly reflects the stance of monetary policy
(Rudebusch and Wu, 2008) and our two cylical indicators apparently provide a more
nuanced measure of the monetary policy cycle.

Overall, we find very strong contemporaneous statistical relationships, so that the
   2
    We have also found evidence for the cyclical behavior of skewness using various business cycle
variables, including NBER recession dummies, industrial production grpwth, the output gap, the
Chicago Fed National Activity Index, among others. The two cyclical indicators in Table 3 are so
closely related to skewness that when we include them, other macroeconomic variables generally
become insignificant. We omit these results for the sake of brevity.


                                               14
shape of the yield curve together with indicators of the state of the monetary policy
cycle (in addition to past realized skewness) can explain a large share of the variation
in conditional yield skewness. When the yield curve is upward-sloping or the Fed
has been easing its policy stance then implied skewness tends to be high, and vice
versa. Given these strong contemporaeous correlations, it is important to control for
this type of information in our predictive analysis, which shows that skewness is more
informative about the future evolution of yields than any of these indicators.



4       The information in conditional skewness

Our evidence so far has established the cyclical variation in skewness and linked it
to economic driving forces and the business cycle. We now turn to the question
whether yield skewness contains useful forward-looking information for interest rates.
Consider the link between expectations about bond returns and risk premiums:

                                                                        s               (n)
                (n)                 (n)                  (n)         Covt (Mt,t+1 , RXt,t+1 )
          Et (RXt,t+1 )   =   Et (RXt,t+1 )   -   Ets (RXt,t+1 )   -                          ,     (1)
                                                                           Ets (Mt,t+1 )

            (n)        (n-1)     (n)          (1)
where RXt,t+1 = Pt+1 /Pt - 1/Pt is the excess gross return on n-period bond
                (n)
with a price Pt , Mt,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor (SDF), and superscript s
refers to subjective probability.3 This representation is helpful because it demon-
strates that predictability of the future (excess) returns could be due either to vari-
ation in risk premiums or a time-varying bias in beliefs, or both. Variation in risk
premiums has traditionally been the common explanation of empirical results docu-
menting predictability of bond returns or interest rate changes. Recent work, how-
ever, has emphasized the possibility that such empirical correlations could be due to
the failure of the often implicit assumption of full information rational expectations
(FIRE), i.e., to changing biases in beliefs captured by the first two terms in equation
(1) (e.g., Bauer and Swanson, 2020, Bacchetta, Mertens, and van Wincoop, 2009,
    3
    Excess gross returns allow for the cleanest decomposition, while our analysis below in Section
4.1 shows empirical results for excess log returns, as is common in this literature. The two are very
similar in the data, and our empirical results are essentially unchanged if we use excess gross returns.



                                                     15
Buraschi, Piatti, and Whelan, 2019, Cieslak, 2018, Piazzesi, Salomao, and Schneider,
2015).

This representation guides our empirical work. We first establish whether skewness
predicts bond returns. We implement that analysis in two different ways: conven-
tional predictive regressions for monthly excess returns on Treasury bonds, similar
to Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) and many others, and an analysis of monetary sur-
prises at daily frequency.4 Next, we disentangle the source of predictability by using
consensus survey forecasts as a proxy for subjective expectations.



4.1     Bond excess returns

We work with monthly data, and follow common practice by using end-of-month
interest rates. We use a one-quarter holding period for bond returns, given that ISK
is based on derivative contracts with expiration of about 1-4 months in the future, and
we calculate excess returns over the three-month T-bill rate as the risk-free short rate.
                                  (n)
We obtain log excess returns, rxt,t,+3 , in the usual way for all bonds with maturities
from one through ten years. As in Cieslak and Povala (2015), we scale them by
maturity so that all excess returns have the same duration.

Our predictive regresisons are of the form

                                      rxt,t+3 =  Xt + t,t+3 ,                                     (2)

                  1   10        (n)
where rxt,t+3 = 10    n=1 rxt,t+3 /n is the weighted average log excess return across all
maturities, Xt is a vector of predictors observable at the end of month t, and t,t+3 is
the serially correlated prediction error. The predictors in Xt always include, besides
a constant, at least the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve, calculated as
the first three principal components of yields, since a natural null hypothesis is that
the current yield curve reflects all the information that is relevant for expectations
of future interest rates (Duffee, 2011). For more reliable statistical inference in this
   4
    Analysis of daily interest changes can be related to excess bond returns because due to their
high frequency (i) the risk-free return is close to zero so that returns are similar to excess returns
and (ii) rate changes are close to negative returns.


                                                 16
setting with multi-period overlapping returns we calculate standard errors using the
reverse regression delta method of Hodrick (1992) and Wei and Wright (2013).

Table 4 reports estimates of Equation (2) for different sets of predictors. The first
column displays results for level, slope, and curvature alone. Level and slope are
significant, and the slope coefficient is positive, in line with previous work that found
a high slope to predict falling long-term yields and high bond returns (Campbell and
Shiller, 1991, Cochrane and Piazzesi, 2005).

Adding ISK roughly doubles the predictive power relative to the yields-only specifica-
tion (measured by R2 ) and the coefficient on ISK is highly significant. The coefficient
on ISK has a negative sign, and the coefficient on the slope becomes more positive
and more strongly significant. The fact that conditional yield skewness has significant
predictive power even controlling for the information yields--i.e., that the predictive
power of ISK is not subsumed by the shape of the yield curve--indicates a violation
of the spanning hypothesis (Duffee, 2011; Bauer and Hamilton, 2018).

Estimates for individual bond returns yield similar conclusions. The predictive power
of ISK for excess returns is stronger for short than for long bond maturities. We omit
the results for the sake of brevity.

As a more reliable method of inference that accounts for potential small-sample prob-
lems, Bauer and Hamilton (2018) propose a bootstrap method to test the spanning
hypothesis in predictive regressions for bond returns. Using their bootstrap procedure
leads to a small-sample p-value on the coefficient of ISK that is below 1%, confirm-
ing the result reported in the Table. ISK exhibits only moderate autocorrelation in
monthly data, with a first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.72, which alleviates
some of the usual concerns about inference with persistent predictors.

Column (3) uses RSK instead of ISK. Realized skewness also has predictive power for
bond returns, but less than implied skewness, as evidenced by the lower R2 in column
(3) than column (2). In column (4) we estimate a regression that includes both ISK
and RSK. In this specification, in addition to the yield curve predictors, it is only
ISK that exhibits significant predictive power, but not RSK.



                                           17
Column (5) adds a different control, namelyan estimate for the trend component
of nominal interest rates, or i , which Bauer and Rudebusch (2020) have found to
be important for predicting Treasury yields and returns. Accounting for the slow-
moving interest rate trend in this way further raises the predictive power for future
bond returns, but ISK remains highly statistically significant.

The last column explores the relation between ISK and the survey disagreement about
the 10-year yield advocated by Giacoletti, Laursen, and Singleton (2021) (GLS). The
sample for this regression is shorter because the GLS variable is currently available
only until November of 2018. The estimates show that ISK continues to be significant
when combined with yield disagreement, and that both variables add forecasting
power for future bond returns.

In additional, unreported analysis we have investigated further predictive models that
control for other variables. Our earlier estimates in Section 3 documented a strong
contemporaneous relationship with implied skewness for a level-slope interaction effect
and for indicator variables capturing the state of the monetary policy cycle. Including
these variables in the excess return regressions has no material effect on the predictive
power of ISK. This supports the view that the variation in implied skewness that is
orthogonal to the yield curve and business cycle indicators, the residual we plotted
in Figure 1C, contains information that is highly relevant for the future evolution
of interest rates. Lastly, the asset pricing literature has focused on the role option-
implied variance (e.g., Choi, Mueller, and Vedolin, 2017). Such a measure captures
the market uncertainty but does not posses directional information. Indeed, our
findings are unchanged when controlling for option-implied variance or volatility using
measures calculated from our Treasury options and using the TYVIX index.

Our interest rate data are the smoothed Treasury yields of G¨   urkaynak, Sack, and
Wright (2007), but we have also run predictive regressions using the popular un-
smoothed Fama-Bliss Treasury yields. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) famously doc-
umented in this dataset that a single linear combination of forward rates captures
essentially all of the predictive power of the yield curve for future excess returns
across bond maturities. Our evidence with the Fama-Bliss data, which we omit for
the sake of brevity, also shows that ISK strongly and robustly predicts future bond


                                           18
returns, for both the averaged bond return as well as for individual returns for 2-5
years bond maturities. Importantly, this finding is robust to controlling for the usual
yield factors, all five annual forward rates, or the powerful Cochrane-Piazzesi factor.

Finally, one might wonder about the role of the ZLB episode for these results. After
all, this is an episode during which yield skewness was substantially elevated, and
Treasury yields generally increased after the Fed lifted the policy rate off the ZLB, at
least for some time. To address this issue, we estimate predictive regressions for the
period before the ZLB, using a sample that ends in November 2008. Appendix A.2
shows the results, which reveal that the predictive power of conditional skewness was
in fact much stronger during this first part of the sample, before the ZLB became
a serious concern. In short, the ZLB episode does not contribute to the predictive
power of yield skewness.



4.2    Monetary policy surprises

We now zoom in on an important source of new information for bond markets: FOMC
announcements. Going back to Kuttner (2001), an extensive literature has studied
the reaction of interest rates to the surprise change in short-term interest rates. Such
monetary policy surprises are typically calculated based on intraday changes in money
market futures rates over a tight window around the FOMC announcements (G¨        urkay-
nak, Sack, and Swanson, 2005). Several recent papers, however, have found that the
high-frequency rate changes are predictable using publicly available macroeconomic
data (Bauer and Swanson, 2020; Cieslak, 2018; Miranda-Agrippino, 2017).

We measure the policy "surprise" as the first principal component of intraday rate
changes around the announcement that are derived from changes in Fed funds and
Eurodollar futures prices, following Nakamura and Steinsson (2018). This surprise,
denoted below by st , is a univariate summary of the shift in short- and medium-
term interst rates--the change in the expected path of future policy rates, up to a
term premium component. Appendix A.3 contains additional results for st measured
as either the target surprise or the path surprise of G¨
                                                       urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson



                                          19
(2005). We report estimates for predictive regressions

                                        st =  Xt-1 + t ,                                        (3)

where t are days with FOMC announcements, Xt-1 are predictors observed on the
day before the announcement and t is a prediction error. For statistical inference, we
report White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, because t is not serially cor-
related between FOMC announcements. Our sample contains 213 FOMC announce-
ments from the beginning of 1994 (when the FOMC first started publicly stating a
target for the policy rate) to June 2019 (where our data for intradaily policy surprises
ends). The sample includes both scheduled and unscheduled FOMC announcements,
but our results are not sensitive to the exclusion of unscheduled announcements.

Table 5 reports results showing the predictive power of skewness for interest rate
changes around FOMC announcements. In most of the specifications, Xt contains
the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve, based on daily Treasury yields with
annual maturities from one to ten years. Subsequent specifications add ISK and RSK,
which are calculated from Treasury derivative prices over the 22 days preceding the
day before the FOMC announcement.5

Column (1) shows that yield factors alone do not have any predictive power. In
Column (2) we instead use ISK in a univariate regression, which shows that by itself
ISK has significant predictive power and explains close to six percent of the variance
in the monetary policy surprise. Column (3) shows that adding both ISK and the
yield curve completely changes the result compared to the yields-only specification in
column (1): Now both the slope and ISK are highly statistically significant, and the
R2 is about 10%. The slope's coefficient is statistically negative, while the coefficient
of ISK is significantly positive, mirroring the findings for the return regressions in
Table 4.

If instead of ISK we include RSK as a predictor, it is also found to exhibit significant
predictive power, as shown in colum (4). But in this case, the R2 is only around
   5
    ISK is taken as the mean of the daily ISK observations over these 22 days, or roughly one month,
before the FOMC meeting. RSK is calculated as in Section 2 but based on sums over the 22 trading
days before the FOMC meeting (instead of a calendar month). Moderate changes to these window
lengths do not materially affect our results.


                                                20
3%. Column (5) includes both ISK and RSK with the yield curve factors. The slope
and ISK are the most significant predictors in this specification, and the predictive
power is similar to the specification without RSK. Similarly to return regressions,
the information in implied skewness appears more relevant for predicting future rate
changes than the information in realized skewness.

Table 6 considers specifications with macroeconomic variables that have been found
to predict FOMC surprises in previous studies. Our goal here is to assess whether ISK
retains its predictive power even if we control for these additional predictors in our
regressions. In column (1) we include the predictors considered by Cieslak (2018):
the average federal funds rate over the month preceding the FOMC meeting, and
annual employment growth, measured as the 12-month log-change in total nonfarm
payroll employment, appropriately lagged so that it is known by the day before the
FOMC announcement. In this specification, employment growth but not the Federal
Funds rate exhibits predictive power. The lack of predictive power of the funds rate is
partly due to our different sample period and partly due to the different policy surprise
measure than in the estimates of Cieslak (2018). Using Cieslak's exact sample and
regression specification we are able to replicate her results, and we still find that when
we add ISK to the regression it significantly raises the predictive power.

Columns (2) to (4) add the macroeconomic variables considered by Bauer and Swan-
son (2020): the Brave-Butters-Kelley business cycle indicator produced by the Chicago
Fed, the change in nonfarm payroll employment in the previous month (again appro-
priately accounting for the publication lag), and the return of the S&P 500 stock
index over the three months preceding the FOMC announcement. In all three cases,
both ISK and the Bauer-Swanson predictor exhibit statistically significant explana-
tory power for the FOMC policy surprise.



4.3    Survey forecast errors

The evidence on interest-rate predictability with skewness in Sections 4.1 and 4.2
speaks to time variation in expected excess bond returns, that is, the left-hand side



                                           21
of equation (1). The right-hand side of the equation tells us that the established pre-
dictability may arise because of systematic forecast errors that are related to skew-
ness. To investigate this possibility, we use survey forecasts as proxies for subjective
expectations.

Specifically, we calculate forecast errors for the 10-year Treasury yield from the Blue
Chip Financial Forecasts (BCFF). This is a monthly survey that contains forecasts for
the current quarter (nowcasts) and each of the next five quarters.6 The forecast target
is the quarterly average for the constant-maturity 10-year yield from the Fed's H.15
statistical release, which we obtain from FRED. We calculate errors as the difference
between the realized value and the consensus forecast, which is the average of the
individual forecasts.

For each forecast horizon from h = 0 to 5 quarters we run monthly predictive re-
gressions of the forecast errors on information available at the time of the survey.
Specificially, we estimate the regression

                                             (h)             (h)
                                  yq(t,h) - yt     =  X t + t ,

where t indexes the month of the survey forecast, yq(t,h) is the average ten-year yield
                                                        (h)
over quarter q (t, h) that contains the month t + 3h, yt is the forecast for the average
yield in quarter q (t, h), Xt are predictors observable at the time the survey forecasts
                 (h)
are made, and t is a forecast error.7 For example, in January, February, and March,
forecasts for h = 1 are for the average over the second quarter (April to June). We
measure the predictors on the day of the BCFF survey deadline to ensure that they
are observable at the time the forecast is made.8 Our predictors Xt include ISK as
well as the level, slope and curvature of the yield curve.

The forecast errors of these regressions are necessarily serially correlated due to both
the monthly frequency and also overlapping observations. Because of the latter,
Hansen-Hodrick standard errors are preferable to Newey-West standard errors, see
   6
     The surveys conducted before 1997 extend out only four quarters.
   7                                                                              s    (n)
     Forecasts about yields can be related to forecasts about excess returns via Et (rxt+1 ) = -(n -
    s   (n - 1)   ( n)    (1)
1)Et  (yt+1 ) + nyt - yt .
   8
     The surveys are conducted between the 23rd and 26th of the preceding month; the January
survey is conducted between the 17th and the 21st of December.


                                                   22
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). We use 3(h + 1) lags to estimate the covariance matrix
of the parameter estimates.

Table 7 shows the results. For all forecast horizons, the coefficient on ISK is positive
and statistically significant at the five-percent level. As before, we find that in predic-
tive regressions with ISK and yield factors, the slope of the yield curve has a negative
coefficient, which is statistically significant for horizons of three quarters and beyond.

Appendix A.4 present results for a similar analysis using the consensus forecasts in
the Survey of Professional Forecasters. There we also find strong predictive power of
conditional skewness for survey forecast errors at all forecast horizons.

Previous work has documented that expectation errors are particularly pronounced for
short-term yields (Cieslak, 2018; Brooks, Katz, and Lustig, 2020). We have therefore
also investigated the predictive power for Blue Chip forecast errors for Treasury yields
of shorter maturities (1y, 2y, 5y). We found that ISK forecasts with higher accuracy
the shorter the yield maturity. We omit these results for the sake of brevity.

Finally, we also investigated the role of survey forecast revisions. Coibion and Gorod-
nichenko (2015) found that forecast revisions are strong predictors of forecast errors
for inflation and other macroeconomic variables, suggesting an important role of in-
formation rigidities for the expectation formation process. However, for long-term
Treasury yields, we have not found ex-ante survey revisions to have any predictive
power for ex-post forecast errors. Including revisions as additional predictors in the
regressions leaves our results essentially unchanged. Notably, Coibion and Gorod-
nichenko (2015) suggested that information rigidities play a larger role for less persis-
tent time series, while the ten-year Treasury yield is highly persistent, which might
explain this empirical finding.

This evidence suggests that the correlation of ISK with future interest rates that we
have documented above in Tables 4­6 is unlikely to be due entirely to its correlation
with risk premiums. Instead, it appears that conditional yield skewness is systemati-
cally related to the difference between subjective and true expectations about future
yields and bond returns, that is, to persistently biased beliefs of investors.



                                            23
4.4    Skewness in the time of COVID

As we noted earlier, skewness has reversed its downward trend and reached all-time
high values in the wake of the COVID pandemic. A natural question is whether the
unusual circumstances have disrupted the properties of skewness established in this
paper. The answer is no. In fact, the period immediately preceding the COVID
lockdown and the COVID period itself serve as a nice showcase of our findings.

Figure 4 displays the main actors in the reported evidence: ISK, the ten-year Treasury
yield and its survey forecasts from BCFF, and the slope of the yield curve, measured
as the difference between the ten-year and three-month Treasury yields. We see that
skewness was negative throughout 2019, and, in fact, sharply dropped to -1.5 in early
2020 as the pandemic was taking hold. After that, coincident with aggressive mone-
tary and fiscal stimulus, it started climbing back and ultimately reached historically
high values around 1.0 in the second half of 2020. Was skewness helpful in predicting
10-year yields during this period? Was it related to expectational errors of forecast
surveys?

Early 2019 and late 2020 are two episodes where the slope was close to zero in both
cases, predicting low bond returns and rising interest rates. But the level of skewness
differed substantially, negative during the first and positive during the second episode.
In 2019 the signal from the slope turned out to be incorrect, as yields dropped pre-
cipitously. This was correctly anticipated by the implied skewness. In 2020, while the
prediction of the flat yield curve for rising long-term rates ultimately turned out to
be correct, the slope was essentially unchanged over most of the year, so that it was
of little use as a timely indicator of interest rate risk. Skewness, by contrast, all of
a sudden rose subtantially in the middle of the year, correctly anticipating the rising
long-term yields. Both of these episodes highlight the extra information in skewness
that is not present in the current yield curve.

Large swings in skewness during this period indicate large expectational errors. Con-
sistent with our regression results in Table 7, forecasters were overshooting yields
in the beginning of the pandemic and then undershooting later in this episode. In
fact, in late 2020 expectational errors were large as Treasury yields began a sustained


                                           24
ascent from historical lows (from 0.5% to 1.5%). At the time market observers were
surprised by the development. Again, this was correctly predicted by skewness, which
started rising in advance of the rise in yields.

Thus, the COVID episode and the sudden rise in yields seem special at a first glance.
After all, yields rarely move by such large magnitudes over such short periods of
time. But it wasn't so different from the vantage point of conditional skewness,
which correctly anticipated both the dramatic decline in long-term Treasury yields
in 2019 and early 2020, as well as their pronounced increase starting in the middle of
the COVID pandemic.



5    A potential explanation of the evidence

To summarize, we have accumulated the following evidence: Treasury yields exhibit
time-varying conditional skewness. A single measure of the skewness, ISK, is related
to the shape of the yield curve, and predicts, after controlling for the yied curve and
other usual suspects, bond excess returns and yield forecasting errors associated with
professional surveys. A natural question is whether this evidence is consistent with
an economic mechanism. That skewness is time-varying and is related to bond excess
returns via expectation errors implies that an explanation should feature non-normal
time-varying distribution and subjective beliefs.

The heterogeneous beliefs framework is an attractive candidate for capturing the
evidence because, as we show below, it does not require hardwiring non-normal dis-
tribution of state variables and differences in beliefs could be interpreted as expecta-
tion errors. Heterogeneous beliefs models are known to imply time variation in risk
premiums and volatility of asset returns. They also impact the spot risk-free rate.
Unfortunately, there is dearth of research on the term structure of interest rates.

In this section we adopt the EGHI model to demonstrate how heterogeneous beliefs
could be consistent with our evidence. We consider a special case of the framework
where one of the agents knows the true distribution of inflation while the other one
has an erroneous conditional expectation. This perspective is consistent with Reis

                                          25
(2020) who posits that bond traders are better informed than the general public,
which is proxied by surveys.

In this case, the usual disagreement between the agents becomes a measure of a
bias in beliefs, computed as the difference between (biased) survey-based and (true)
statistical inflation expectations, standardized by inflation's volatility. As we show
in Appendix A.5, the bias in beliefs becomes a state variable, t , that affects bond
yields, their departures from the normal distribution, and bond risk premiums.

In particular, bond yields are a quadratic function of the bias via the substitution
effect. That makes them non-normally distributed despite the normal state vari-
ables driving the economy. Thus, the presence of the biased beliefs directly affects
the distribution of yields. Finally, bias in beliefs affects time-variation in bond risk
premiums. Taken together, all these features are qualitatively consistent with the
presented evidence.

As a next step, we use an illustrative version of the EGHI model to understand how
skewness is related to the bias. Due to the complicated dependence of yields on states,
we resort to simulations to accomplish the analysis. We conduct a comparative static
exercise as follows.

We simplify the model by focusing on dynamics of inflation alone. Further, we assume
that t is constant. See the special case in Appendix A.5. Lastly, we simulate the
true dynamics of inflation, and then compute nominal short rate and its skewness for
a range of values of . Figure 5 plots of the dispersion in beliefs, 2 , which captures
the substitution effects in the interest rates, vs the corresponding value of skewness.

Yield skewness depends on the dispersion in beliefs about inflation in a non-linear
fashion. For a small 2 , skewness is close to zero precisely because yields become close
to normally distributed. Skewness turns negative for moderate size of 2 , reaching a
minimum of -0.5 before increasing with the size of the bias. In summary, we conclude
that the model is capable of generating quantitatively the skewness' scenarios that
we see in the data.

The EGHI model connects biased beliefs about inflation to the distribution of yields
and bond risk premiums. The presented evidence documents the connection of skew-

                                          26
ness and risk premiums to expectation error about yields. To trace out the explicit
connection to the predictions of the model, we document predictability of consensus
yield forecast errors based on expectation errors about inflation. Table 8 shows that
in the BCFF, inflation forecast errors are significantly positively correlated with yield
forecast errors. Appendix A.4 reports similar results for the SPF forecasts. These
results demonstrate that expectation errors about inflation and yields are related, in
line with the predictions of the model.



6    Conclusion

Our paper makes three contributions to the macro-finance literature. First, we doc-
ument novel empirical patterns for the conditional skewness of Treasury yields, in-
cluding a tight empirical relationship between conditional skewness and the shape of
the yield curve, the business cycle, and the stance of monetary policy. Second, we
show that option-based yield skewness contains useful forward-looking information
for interest rates, including predictive power for survey forecast errors. The evidence
suggests that conditional skewness captures biased beliefs about future interest rates.
Third, we argue that our empirical findings can be rationalized by a simple theoretical
framework with heterogeneous beliefs.




                                           27
References
Ahn, Dong-Hyun, Robert F. Dittmar, and A. Ronald Gallant, 2002, Quadratic Term
 Structure Models: Theory and Evidence, Review of Financial Studies 15, 243­288.

Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A No-Arbitrage Vector Regression of Term
 Structure Dynamics with Macroeconomic and Latent Variables, Journal of Mone-
 tary Economics 50, 745­787.

Bacchetta, Philippe, Elmar Mertens, and Eric van Wincoop, 2009, Predictability in
  financial markets: What do survey expectations tell us?, Journal of International
  Money and Finance 28, 406­426.

Bakshi, Gurdip, and Dilip Madan, 2000, Spanning and derivative-security valuation,
  Journal of Financial Economics 55, 205­238.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, Giuseppe Bertola, and Silverio Foresi, 1997, A model of target
  changes and the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Monetary Economics
  39, 223­249.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, Edwin J. Elton, and T. Clifton Green, 2001, Economic news and
  bond prices: Evidence from the US Treasury market, Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative analysis 36, 523­543.

Basak, Suleyman, 2005, Asset pricing with heterogenous beleifs, Journal of Banking
  and Finance 29, 2849­2881.

Bauer, Michael D., and James D. Hamilton, 2018, Robust Bond Risk Premia, Review
  of Financial Studies 31, 399­448.

Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch, 2020, Interest Rates Under Falling
  Stars, American Economic Review 110, 1316­1354.

Bauer, Michael D., and Eric T. Swanson, 2020, The Fed's Response to Economic News
  Explains the "Fed Information Effect", Working Paper 2020-06 Federal Reserve
  Bank of San Francisco.

Beber, Alessandro, and Michael W. Brandt, 2006, The Effect of Macroeconomic News
  on Beliefs and Preferences: Evidence from the Options Market, Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics 53, 1997­2039.

Bikbov, Ruslan, and Mikhail Chernov, 2009, Unspanned stochastic volatility in affine
  models: evidence from eurodollar futures and options, Management Science 55,
  1292­1305.


                                        28
Brooks, Jordan, Michael Katz, and Hanno Lustig, 2020, Post-FOMC Announcement
  Drift in U.S. Bond Markets, Working Paper.

Buraschi, Andrea, Ilaria Piatti, and Paul Whelan, 2019, Subjective Bond Risk Premia
  and Belief Aggregation, Sa¨ id Business School WP 6, 2016­36.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1991, Yield Spreads and Interest Rate
  Movements: A Bird's Eye View, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495­514.

Chernov, Mikhail, Jeremy Graveline, and Irina Zviadadze, 2018, Crash Risk in Cur-
 rency Returns, Journal of Fnancial and Quantitative Analysis 53, 137­170.

Choi, Hoyong, Philippe Mueller, and Andrea Vedolin, 2017, Bond Variance Risk
 Premiums, Review of Finance 21, 987­1022.

Cieslak, Anna, 2018, Short-Rate Expectations and Unexpected Returns in Treasury
  Bonds, The Review of Financial Studies 31, 3265­3306.

Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala, 2015, Expected Returns in Treasury Bonds, Review
  of Financial Studies 28, 2859­2901.

Cieslak, Anna, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2020, The Economics of the Fed Put,
  The Review of Financial Studies hhaa116.

Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond Risk Premia, American Eco-
  nomic Review 95, 138­160.

Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2015, Information rigidity and the expec-
  tations formation process: A simple framework and new facts, American Economic
  Review 105, 2644­2678.

Das, Sanjiv, 2002, The surprise element: jumps in interest rates, Journal of Econo-
 metrics 106, 27­65.

Detemple, Jerome, and Shashidhar Murthy, 1994, Intertemporal asset pricing with
  heterogenous beleifs, Journal of Economic Theory 62, 294­320.

Duffee, Gregory R., 2011, Information In (and Not In) the Term Structure, Review
 of Financial Studies 24, 2895­2934.

Ehling, Paul, Michael Gallmeyer, Christian Heyerdahl-Larsen, and Philipp Illeditsch,
  2018, Disagreement about inflation and the yield curve, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 127, 459­484.

Eriksson, Anders, Eric Ghysels, and Fangfang Wang, 2009, The normal inverse Gaus-
  sian distribution and the pricing of derivatives, Journal of Derivatives 16, 23­37.

                                         29
Fleming, Michael, and Eli Remolona, 2001, The Term Structure of Announcement
  Effects, BIS Working Paper No. 71.

Giacoletti, Marco, Kristoffer Laursen, and Kenneth Singleton, 2021, Learning From
  Disagreement in the U.S. Treasury Bond Market, Journal of Finance 76, 395­441.

G¨
 urkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury
 Yield Curve: 1961 to the Present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.

G¨
 urkaynak, Refet S., Brian P. Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, 2005, Do Actions Speak
 Louder Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions
 and Statements, International Journal of Central Banking 1, 55­93.

Harrison, J. Michael, and David Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock
  market with heterogenous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323­
  336.

Hattori, Masazumi, Andreas Schrimpf, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2016, The Response
  of Tail Risk Perceptions to Unconventional Monetary Policy, American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 8, 111­136.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative
 Procedures for Inference and Measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357­386.

Jiang, George, and Yisong Tian, 2005, Model-Free Implied Volatility and Its Infor-
  mation Content, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1305­1342.

Johannes, Michael, 2004, The statistical and economic role of jumps in continuous-
  time interest rate models, Journal of Finance 59, 227­260.

Kuttner, Kenneth N., 2001, Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence
 from the Fed Funds Futures Market, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523­544.

Li, Xinyang, 2020, Bond Implied Risks Around Macroeconomic Announcements,
  Working Paper.

Ludvigson, Sydney, and Serena Ng, 2009, Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia, Review
  of Financial Studies 22, 5027­5067.

Mertens, Thomas, and John Williams, 2020, What to Expect from the Lower Bound
 on Interest Rates: Evidence from Derivatives Prices, American Economic Review,
 forthcoming.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, 2017, Unsurprising Shocks: Information, Premia, and the
 Monetary Transmission, Staff Working Paper 626 Bank of England.

                                         30
Nakamura, Emi, and J´  on Steinsson, 2018, High-Frequency Identification of Mon-
  etary Non-Neutrality: The Information Effect, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133, 1283­1330.

Neuberger, Anthony, 2012, Realized Skewness, The Review of Financial Studies 25,
  3423­3455.

Piazzesi, Monika, 2001, An econometric model of the yield curve with macroeconomic
  jump effects, NBER working paper 8246.

Piazzesi, Monika, 2005, Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve, Journal of Political
  Economy 113, 311­344.

Piazzesi, Monika, Juliana Salomao, and Martin Schneider, 2015, Trend and Cycle in
  Bond Premia, unpublished manuscript.

Reis, Ricardo, 2020, The People versus the Markets: A Parsimonious Model of Infla-
  tion Expectations, Working Paper.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Tao Wu, 2008, A Macro-Finance Model of the Term
 Structure, Monetary Policy, and the Economy, Economic Journal 118, 906­926.

Schmeling, Maik, Andreas Schrimpf, and Sigurd Steffensen, 2020, Monetary Policy
  Expectation Errors, Working Paper.

Trolle, Anders B., and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 2014, The Swaption Cube, Review of
  Financial Studies 27, 2307­2353.

Wei, Min, and Jonathan H Wright, 2013, Reverse Regressions And Long-Horizon
 Forecasting, Journal of Applied Econometrics 28, 353­371.

Xiong, Wei, and Hongjun Yan, 2010, Heterogenous expectations and bond markets,
  Review of Financial Studies 23, 1433­1466.




                                       31
A         Appendix

A.1        Calculating option-implied moments of Treasury yields

Our Treasury derivatives data are end-of-day prices of Treasury futures and options from CME.9
We focus on the 10-year T-note futures contract (or "TY"). The deliverable securities for the TY
contract are "U.S. Treasury notes with a remaining term to maturity of at least six and a half
years, but not more than 10 years" (according to the CME contract specifications). The contract
expirations are at the end of each calendar quarter, and at each point in time three consecutive
quarterly contracts are available; the exact delivery date is roughly in the third week of the month.
The first quarterly contract is the most active, until about 2-3 weeks before expiration when trading
in the subsequent quarterly contract becomes more active. Therefore, when working with futures
prices (e.g., for calculating sample moments or realized moments of price changes), we always use the
first quarterly expiration that is not in the current calendar month (e.g., we use the March contract
until the end of February, and the June contract starting in the beginning of March).

The options on the TY contract are available for three quarterly and three serial (monthly) expi-
rations, and they each exercise into the next futures contract. For example, February and March
options exercise into the March futures contract, and April options exercise into June futures con-
tract. The last trading day for each options contract is the "2nd last business day of the month
prior to the contract month" so that trading for the March options ends at the end of February. We
denote by t the current trading day and by T the last trading day (or expiration date) of an options
contract. For most of our analysis we focus on the first quarterly option expiration. In some cases
we linearly interpolate option-implied moments to a constant horizon, and then we use 0.2 years
as the horizon which is about the average maturity of all option contracts (across all expirations,
strikes and put/call prices), and interpolate based on the data for the two expirations surrounding
this horizon.

Based on option prices on day t for the contract expiration T we can calculate conditional market-
based/risk-neutral moments for the price of the underlying futures contract at the time of the option
expiration, FT . The implied risk-neutral variance is
                                                                            Ft
                   V art FT = Et (FT - Ft )2 = 2           C (K )dK +            P (K )dK
                                                     Ft                 0
                                     
                           =2           C (K ) - max(0, FT - K )dK
                                 0

where all moments are under the time-T forward measure, we treat Ft as the forward price for
simplicity, and the forward call and put prices for options with strike K are C (K ) and P (K ).
Because expectations are under the T -forward measure, Et FT = Ft , C (K ) = Et max(0, FT - K ) and
P (K ) = Et max(0, K - FT ). The second line follows from put call parity, C (K ) - P (K ) = FT - K .
   9
       For details see https://www.cmegroup.com/trading/interest-rates/us-treasury.html.




                                                   32
The implied third moment is
                                                                        Ft
                Et (FT - Ft )3 = 6            (K - Ft )C (K )dK -            (Ft - K )P (K )dK
                                         Ft                         0
                                         
                              =6          (K - Ft )(C (K ) - max(0, FT - K ))dK.
                                     0

See also Trolle and Schwartz (2014) who use similar formulas for calculating swaption-implied mo-
ments for future swap yields. The implied skewness coefficient is

                                              F       Et (FT - Ft )3
                                          skewt,T =
                                                      (V art FT )3/2


We now describe how we implement these measures empirically. In what follows  is the normal
implied volatility (IV) for at-the-money options. Normal IV, the most common way to measure IV
in bond markets, is based on the Bachelier model and measures the volatility of future price changes
under the assumption that they are Gaussian. First, we filter our options data to reduce the impact
of measurement error and eliminate data errors, similar to Beber and Brandt (2006). Specifically,
we exclude options that


     have maturity of at most two weeks
     have prices of at most two ticks (2/64)
     have relative moneyness greater than 15, i.e., (Ft - K )/ (T - t) 2 is at most 15 in absolute
     value (options that are further out of the money tend to have unreliable/implausible IVs),
     are too far out of the money, with absolute moneyness of less than -15 (the absolute moneyness
     is F - K for calls and K - F for puts),
     have distinct duplicate prices for the same strike (using the IVs and other prices we can
     eliminate the erroneous price by hand),
     have prices which are not monotone across strikes, or
     violate the no-arbitrage condition that the price is no lower than the intrinsic value.


Then we calculate implied moments for each pair (t, T ) if we observe at least five option prices (puts
and calls across all strikes) in the following way:


   1. We select all option prices that are ATM/OTM
   2. We calculate the normal IVs for these observed prices.
   3. We fit a curve in strike-IV space by linearly interpolating IVs and, outside the range of
      observed prices, using IVs at the endpoints of the range.
   4. We obtain a continuous price function C (X ) by mapping the IVs back to call prices using the
      Bachelier pricing formula.
   5. We approximate the required integrals using trapezoid rule for grid of strike prices from Ft - 10
      to Ft + 10 with 200 grid points (see also Jiang and Tian, 2005).


                                                      33
As a result we have, for each trading day t and option expiration T , conditional model-implied
variances and skewness coefficients for the change in the futures price between t and T .

With the moments for futures prices in hand we can also calculate certain moments for changes in the
yields of the cheapest-to-deliver (CTD) bond. The reason is that for small changes, the relationship
between changes in futures prices and changes in the CTD yield is approximately linear. The "dollar
value of a basis point" (DV01) is the negative sensitivity of the futures price (in points) to a change
in the CTD yield (in basis points). Denoting the change in the futures price as F and the change
in the CTD yield by y , we have
                                                     F
                                          y  -            .
                                                   DV 01
Under the assumption that the change in the CTD yield until expiration, yT - yt , is small, and that
DV 01 remains approximatley unchanged between t and T , we can obtain risk-neutral moments for
future yields as

                        V art FT                         Et (FT - Ft )3         y
           V art yT              ,   Et (yT - yt )3  -                  ,   skewt,T       F
                                                                                     -skewt,T
                       (DV 01)2                            (DV 01)3

The DV 01 data, as well as any information about the CTD bonds, becomes available on Bloomberg
in 2004. But this information is not required for the skewness coefficient, since skewness of yield
changes is approximately equal simply to the negative of the skewness of futures price changes.

Our derivation and implementation abstracts from the fact that Treasury options are American
options on futures contracts, and not, as assumed, European options on forward contracts. Existing
results suggest that accounting for early exercise would lead to only minor adjustments; see Bikbov
and Chernov (2009) and Choi, Mueller, and Vedolin (2017). In addition, since we only use out-of-
the-money options any adjustment for early exercise would be minimal, since there are no dividends
and the early-exercise premium increases with the moneyness of options.



A.2      Additional results for Treasury bond returns

Table A1 shows predictive regressions for excess bond returns similar to those in Table 4, but for a
sample that ends in November 2008, before the Fed lowered the policy rate to the ZLB. Limiting the
sample period in this way substantially increases the coefficient on ISK, and with only the exception
of the univariate regression in column 2 it also raises the statistical significance of this coefficient
and the R2 of the regression. Evidently, conditional yield skewness had even more predictive power
for bond returns before the ZLB period.



A.3      Additional results for FOMC announcement surprises

Since G¨
       urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) the literature on high-frequency event studies of FOMC
announcements has focused on two measures of the policy surprises: a target surprise which, similar
to the original measure proposed by Kuttner (2001), measures the surprise change in the federal
funds rate, and a path surprise which captures the change in the expected policy path that is
orthogonal to the target surprise. The two surprises are the first two principal components of the


                                                   34
high-frequency changes in different money market futures rates, appropriately rotated and scaled
(for details see G¨
                  urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson, 2005).

Table A2 shows estimates of predictive regressions for the target surprise (columns 1-5) and the
path surprise (6-10). Generally, ISK contains predictive power for both components of the policy
surprise. However, in regressions with macro variables, the predictive power tends to be stronger
for the path surprise. In additional, unreported results we have found that excluding the 9 unsched-
uled announcements in our dataset lowers the predictability of the target surprise but raises the
predictability of the path surprise.



A.4      Additional results for SPF forecast errors

Here we present additional evidence using the quarterly Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).
As in the BCFF, the forecast target is the quarterly average for the constant-maturity 10-year yield
from the Fed's H.15 statistical release. Forecasts are reported for the current quarter (nowcasts)
and each of the subsequent four quarters. As the SPF consensus forecast we take the median of the
individual forecasts.

We run predictive regressions of the form
                                              (h)
                                     yt+h - yt      =  Xt + t,t+h ,                                (A.1)
                                                                                                   (h)
where t indexes the quarterly SPF surveys, yt is the average 10-year yield in quarter t, yt is
the survey consensus forecast made in quarter t for the average 10-year yield in quarter t + h, h
ranges from 0 to 4, Xt is a vector with predictors, and t,t+h is a forecast error. To ensure that
the predictors Xt are observable at the time the forecast is made, we take observations on the day
before the response deadline of the survey. Because the forecast errors t,t+h are serially correlated
we use Hansen-Hodrick standard errors with h lags.

Table A3 shows the results. For each forecast horizon, we estimate two specifications, one with ISK
only, and one that also includes yield factors. We find that ISK has statistically significant predictive
power for all forecast horizons. The specifications that also include yield curve factors show that
the slope tends to have additional predictive power for h > 0. As before, we find that the slope has
a negative coefficient while ISK has a positive coefficient.

Paralleling our analysis for the Blue Chip surveys (see Table 8 and the discussion in Section 5, we
also consider the relationship between yield forecast errors and inflation forecast errors in the SPF
surveys. The results in Table A4 show that there is generally a positive correlation, with a rela-
tionship that is strongly statistically significant for the one-quarter-ahead forecast, and marginally
significant for the two- and four-quarter horizons. Overall these results are consistent with our
findings from the Blue Chip surveys.



A.5      A model of biased beliefs

The model is adopted from Ehling, Gallmeyer, Heyerdahl-Larsen, and Illeditsch (2018).


                                                    35
Setup

Consumption growth follows

                                        dCt /Ct = µC dt + C dzC,t .

Inflation follows:

                                 dt /t              =   xt dt +  dz,t ,
                                            dxt     =    x - xt )dt + x dzx,t .
                                                        (¯


Expected inflaton xt is not observable. There are two agents in the economy who disagree about
                                                                                              1
its true dynamics, specifically its volatility x . We assume that agent 1 is correct, that is x = x .
                                                      2    s
Agent 2 represents the consensus survey forecast, x = x .

As a result, the second agent's perceived inflation and its expectation follow:

                              d t / t            = xs         s
                                                    t dt +  dz,t ,
                                 dxst               x - xs
                                                 = (¯            s   s
                                                         t )dt + x dz,t ,
                                  s                       -1
                                dz,t             = dz,t +    ( xt - xs
                                                                     t )dt,

                                        s                        -1 s 2
                                        x        =          2 + (  x ) -  .

The first agent does not observe xt either, thus its filtered dynamics follow:

                                dxt          =     x - xt )dt + x dz,t ,
                                                  (¯
                                                               -1
                                x            =            2 + (   x ) 2 -  .


The expectation error is defined as
                                                      s
                                             dz,t - dz  ,t  t dt.

We can derive dynamics of the bias in beliefs t as
                                                           -1 s               -1 s
              dt = - t dt +  dz,t ,                   =  +   x ,            =   (x - x ).


Let P and P s denote the true and subjective probabilities, respectively. Let t and t s
                                                                                        denote the
state-price density (SPD) under the probability P and P s , respectively. E s is expectation taken
under P s . Agents 1 and 2 solve their consumption-savings problems given by, respectively,
                                    T                                           T
                      max E             e-t u(Ct
                                               1
                                                 /Ht )dt       s.t. E                   1
                                                                                    t C t dt        1
                                                                                                   w0 ,
                                0                                           0
                                        T                                           T
                      max E s               e-t u(Ct
                                                   2
                                                     /Ht )dt    s.t. E s                s 2
                                                                                        t Ct dt      2
                                                                                                    w0 ,
                                    0                                           0




                                                          36
where

                                                u(X )        X 1- /(1 -  ),

and habit Ht is
                                                                          t
                             log Ht            log H0 · e-t +                 e-(t-u) log Cu du.
                                                                      0

Dynamics of Ct and Ht imply that the relative log output t = log(Ct /Ht ) follows
                                                                            2
                                - t )dt + C dzC,t ,
                        dt =  (¯                                  ¯ = (µC - C
                                                                              /2)/.



Results

Consumption allocations and state price densities. Denote the likelihood ratio by t = dP /dP s =
y -1 t /t
        s
          , where y = y 2 /y 1 , and y i is the constant Lagrange multiplier from the respective budget
constraint. Optimal consumption allocations are
                   1
                  Ct = f (t )Ct ,          2
                                          Ct = (1 - f (t ))Ct ,       f (t ) = (1 + (yt )1/ )-1 .

The state price densities are:
                                                             -  -1
                                 t        =    (y 1 )-1 e-t Ct Ht f (t )-
                                                             -  -1
                                          =    (y 1 )-1 e-t Ct Ht (1 + (yt )1/ )
                                                
                                                                      -  -1
                                          =             (y 1 )-1 e-t Ct Ht (yt )k/ ,
                                                      k
                                               k=0
                                                             -  -1
                                 s
                                 t        =    (y 2 )-1 e-t Ct Ht (1 - f (t ))- .

Note that y i and y cancel out in the SDF, T
                                           i  i
                                             /t .

Lastly,

                                                     dt = t t dz,t .


Bond pricing. Set y = 1 w.l.o.g. The real bond price is, for integer  ,
                                                                  -                 -1       k/                      (k)
                                    (k)          -(T -t)   CT                 HT         T                    (k)    C,T
Bt,T      =   Et (T /t ) =         wt Et        e                                                  =         wt Et    (k )
                                                                                                                             ,
                                                           Ct                 Ht         t                           C,t
                             k=0                                                                       k=0

 (k)            k/     1/
wt        =       (1 + t )- ,
               k t
 (k )            -  -1           k/
C,t       = e-t Ct Ht t               .




                                                             37
Then
                      (k)    (k)                (k)
                    dC,t /C,t           =     -rt dt - C · dzC,t -  -1 k t · dz,t ,
                             (k )                            2                             1k          k
                            rt          =      + µC -  ( + 1)C /2 -  ( - 1)t +                   1-        2
                                                                                                           t.
                                                                                           2           

These expressions imply exponentially quadratic form in the states t and t . Thus, bond prices
are weighted averages of exponentially quadratic functions of Gaussian state variables. The weights
  (k)
wt , which add up to 1, are affected by the bias in beliefs via t .

The real short rate is obtained by applying Ito's lemma to t and picking out the drift of the result:

                             2                                                  1
              rt =  +  (µC - C /2) -  2 C
                                        2
                                          /2 -  ( - 1)t +                         (1 - IES ) f (t )(1 - f (t ))2
                                                                                                               t,
                                                                                2
where IES =  -1 stands for intertemporal elasticity of substitution. IES < 1 for a risk averse
agent. The terms in the expression for rt are rate of time preference, consumption smoothing over
time, precautionary savings, habit, and substitution effect.

The nominal bond price is
                                                                                      -           -1           k/
                                                                (k )             CT        HT              T        t
    Pt,T        =     Et (T /t · t /T ) =                      wt Et e-(T -t)
                                                                                 Ct        Ht              t        T
                                                         k=0
                                             (k )
                                 (k )        ,T
                =           wt Et            (k)
                                                     ,
                      k=0                    ,t

         (k)    -  -1                         k/
where ,t = e-t Ct Ht t                              - 1
                                                    t . Then

       (k )     (k)                 (k )
   d,t /,t            = -it                - C · dzC,t - ( +  -1 k t ) · dz,t ,
                (k)                    2      2                                              k     1k               k
               it     =  + µC -  ( + 1)C /2 -   -  ( - 1)t + xt +                              t +             1-       2
                                                                                                                        t.
                                                                                                   2                

These expressions imply exponentially quadratic form in states xt , t , and t . Thus, bond yields,
-(T - t)-1 log Pt,T are non-normal because they are complicated non-linear functions of Gaussian
state variables.

The nominal short rate is
                                                                              2
                                              it = rt +  (1 - f (t ))t + xt -   .


When there is no bias in beliefs, t = 0, nominal bond yields become linear functions of the
Gaussian state variables xt and t . Thus, t controls non-normality of yields, and their skewness,
in particular.

Bond risk premiums. If t = 0, the bond risk premiums are constant as implied by the expression
              (k)
for the SPD ,t . It is also straightforward if cumbersome to show explicit bond risk premium
dependence on t .


                                                                       38
Write the nominal bond price as
                                                                        
                                                                                   (k)     (k )
                                                       Pt,T =                 wt Pt,T ,
                                                                       k=0

          (k)                                                                                                                                    (k)
where Pt,T are the artificial (exponential quadratic) bond prices corresponding to the SPD ,t .

Then,
                                                                       (k )                                               (k)
                                dPt,T                                Pt,T                   (k)               (k)   dPt,T
                       Et                      =                              Et dwt                + wt Et
                                Pt,T                                 Pt,T                                            Pt,T
                                                       k=0
                                                                          (k)                         (k )
                                                                     (k) Pt,T                     dPt,T
                                               =                  wt                 · Et             (k)
                                                                                                                .
                                                                         Pt,T                     Pt,T
                                                       k=0


                                                                                                                                                       (k )
Expected bond return in each artificial economy is going to be the corresponding risk-free rate, it ,
plus a linear function of the prices of risk, one of which is constant, c , and the other one is linear
in disagreement,  +  -1 k t . Continuing the previous expression, one can then write:
                                                     (k)       (k)
           1        dPt,T                       wt Pt,T                    (k )           (k )        (k)           (k)
              Et                 =                                   · it         + t            + t c + t ( +  -1 k t ) ,
           dt        Pt,T                             Pt,T
                                        k=0

where ,  and  reflect sensitivities of a bond price w.r.t. to its factors (see, e.g., Ahn, Dittmar,
and Gallant, 2002 for explicit expressions). Thus, the risk premium is:
                                                 (k)        (k)
     1          dPt,T                         wt Pt,T
        Et            - it dt     =                               ×
     dt          Pt,T                                Pt,T
                                      k=0

        (k )       k                   (k)                                                k               k               1                            2
      t        +     -  (1 - f (t )) + t  -1 k t +                                                1-            - 1-            f (t )(1 - f (t ))      t
                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                       2


Special case: static bias

This model is referred to as GBM in EGHI. In this case xt = x, xs    s
                                                                t = x , and Ct = Ht = 1. Then

                                                        s                     -1
                                                      dz  ,t         = dz,t +    (x - xs )dt,
                                               s                       -1 s
                                      dz,t - dz  ,t                  =   (x - x)dt  dt,
                                                           dt        = t dz,t .


Bond pricing. The real bond price is exactly the same, but t has a different dynamic. That will
                                      (k)
show up in the set of artificial SPDs C,t :

                                              (k )     (k)                        (k )
                                        dC,t /C,t                 = -rt                  -  -1 k  · dz,t ,
                                                       (k)                          1k                k
                                                      rt          = +                            1-           2 .
                                                                                    2                 

                                                                              39
As a result, the real short rate is

                                      1        1
                            rt =  +       1-       2 f (t )(1 - f (t )).
                                      2        

The nominal yields follow by analogy:
                                                             2
                               it = rt +  (1 - f (t )) + x -   .




                                                   40
Figure 1: Yield skewness. Panel (A) displays monthly realized Treasury yield skew-
ness, calculated from changes in daily Treasury futures prices and implied volatilities,
with a 12-month moving average (blue line). Panel (B) plot daily implied Treasury
yield skewness, calculated from options on Treasury futures and interpolated to a
constant horizon of 0.2 years, with a 250-day moving average (blue line). Panel (C)
shows residual skewness from a regression of monthly implied skewness on yield-curve
factors (specification 4 in Table 3), with a 12-month moving average (blue line). Sam-
ple period: January 2, 1990, to May 28, 2021.
                        (A) Realized skewness, RSK                                                  (B) Implied skewness, ISK
             8

                                                                                        1



             4
 Skewness




                                                                            Skewness



                                                                                        0

             0




            -4                                                                         -1




                 1990     2000                           2010   2020                        1990     2000                 2010   2020


                                                                (C) Residual skewness




                                                   0.5
                                       Skewness




                                                   0.0




                                                  -0.5




                                                         1990   2000                         2010     2020
Figure 2: Skewness and interest rates. Option-implied yield skewness (left
axis) with two-year and 10-year Treasury yields (right axis). Annual moving av-
erages of daily values. Turquoise/orange shaded areas indicate monetary policy eas-
ing/tightening cycles (based on changes in the fed funds rate). Sample period: Jan-
uary 1990 to May 2021.


                                  Implied skewness (left axis)
           0.6




                                                                               8
                                  Ten-year yield (right axis)
                                  Two-year yield (right axis)
           0.4




                                                                               6
           0.2
Skewness




                                                                                   Percent
                                                                               4
           0.0
           -0.2




                                                                               2
           -0.4




                                                                               0




                  1995     2000        2005         2010         2015   2020




                                          42
Figure 3: Densities for future yields at ZLB. Option-implied probabilities densi-
ties for future CTD bond yield given market prices on December 31, 2013 (left panel)
and June 16, 2020 (right panel). Red shaded area indicates 1st percentile.

          2012-12-31 (Expiration: 2013-02-22)                 2020-06-16 (Expiration: 2020-08-21)
   1.4




                                                       1.5


                            Current yield: 1.14                                 Current yield: 0.57
   1.0




                             Skewness: 0.8                                       Skewness: -0.78
                            1st percentile: 0.6                                1st percentile: -0.59
                                                       1.0
   0.6




                                                       0.5
   0.2




         0.0   0.5   1.0   1.5   2.0    2.5   3.0            0.0   0.5   1.0      1.5    2.0   2.5     3.0




                                                  43
Figure 4: Skewness and interest rates since 2019. Ten-year Treasury yield, yield
forecasts from Blue Chip Financial Forecasts, option-implied yield skewness, and slope
of the yield curve (measured as difference between ten-year and three-month yield).
Sample period: January 2, 2019, to May 28, 2021.

                                       Implied skewness (left axis)
                                       Slope (left axis)
1.5




                                       Ten-year yield (right axis)




                                                                                         2.5
                                       BCFF yield forecasts (right axis)
1.0




                                                                                         2.0
0.5
0.0




                                                                                         1.5
-0.5




                                                                                         1.0
-1.0
-1.5




       2019                             2020                               2021          0.5




                                          44
Figure 5: Bias in beliefs and skewness. Sample skewness of interest rates sim-
ulated from a simple model with biased beliefs (described in Appendix A.5). For
each value of , 10,000 paths of the real short rate are simulated over a ten-year
horizon, using monthly time increments, and the skewness coefficient is calculated for
the distribution of the final value of the short rate. Parameter settings are x = 0.04,
 = 5,  = 0.02.


             2.0



             1.5
 Skewness




             1.0



             0.5



             0.0



            -0.5

                   0.0         0.5                  1.0                  1.5
                                               2




                                          45
          Table 1: Summary statistics for changes in 10-year Treasury yield

                          Full sample                 1990-2004               2005-2021
  Summary statistics of quarterly yield       changes
  Mean            -0.05 (-0.13, 0.01)          -0.07 (-0.18, 0.03) -0.04         (-0.14, 0.05)
  Median          -0.02 (-0.10, 0.04)          -0.04 (-0.18, 0.13) -0.02         (-0.14, 0.06)
  Variance         0.23 (0.18, 0.28)           0.23 (0.18, 0.29) 0.23            (0.16, 0.31)
  Third moment -0.03 (-0.06, 0.01)             0.00 (-0.04, 0.04) -0.05          (-0.11, 0.01)
  Skewness of m-month yield changes
  m=1            0.03 (-0.41, 0.52)            0.52     (0.12, 0.96) -0.49 (-1.20, 0.16)
  m=2            -0.41 (-1.27, 0.36)           0.46     (0.15, 0.79) -1.05 (-2.52, -0.20)
  m=3            -0.24 (-0.56, 0.05)           0.01     (-0.35, 0.34) -0.46 (-1.05, -0.02)
  m=6            0.03 (-0.30, 0.37)            0.27     (-0.20, 0.77) -0.27 (-0.71, 0.19)
  m = 12          0.36 (-0.10, 0.84)           0.40     (-0.30, 1.10) 0.37 (-0.19, 1.17)
  Skewness of m-month (negative) futures price changes
  m=1            -0.14 (-0.63, 0.41) 0.40 (0.02, 0.81) -0.69 (-1.47, 0.04)
  m=2            -0.20 (-0.66, 0.30) 0.32 (0.05, 0.61) -0.72 (-1.55, -0.01)
  m=3            -0.16 (-0.39, 0.06) 0.15 (-0.07, 0.40) -0.45 (-0.84, -0.14)

Summary statistics for changes in 10-year Treasury yield and futures prices. Sample period: January
1990 to May 2021.




                                                46
                           Table 2: Predicting realized skewness


                          (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)
       RSK              0.43             0.20                 0.40               0.19
                        (0.04)           (0.06)               (0.05)             (0.06)
       ISK                        2.05 1.51                            2.04      1.52
                                  (0.22) (0.27)                        (0.23)    (0.27)
       Level                                  -0.02           -0.02    -0.02     -0.02
                                              (0.06)          (0.04)   (0.04)    (0.03)
       Slope                                  0.27            0.14      0.05      0.04
                                              (0.08)          (0.06)   (0.06)    (0.06)
       Curvature                               0.08            0.15    -0.48     -0.31
                                              (0.55)          (0.33)   (0.34)    (0.31)
       Constant           0.08 -0.09 -0.06 -0.39              -0.18     0.07      0.06
                         (0.07) (0.08) (0.07) (0.47)          (0.32)   (0.29)    (0.26)
       Observations       376      376      376       376      376       376      376
       R2                 0.18     0.23     0.26      0.05     0.19      0.24     0.26

Predictive regressions for one-month realized skewness (RSK). ISK is option-implied yield skewness;
RSK is realized yield skewness based on daily changes in futures prices and implied volatilities,
following Neuberger (2012); Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of
Treasury yields from one to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled). All predictors are measured
at the end of the previous month. Sample: monthly observations from January 1990 to May 2021.
Newey-West standard errors with automatic bandwidth selection are reported in parentheses, and
 
 , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                47
               Table 3: Explaining the level of conditional yield skewness


                      (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                                    
  RSK               0.14                 0.13                   0.13                  0.11
                    (0.02)               (0.02)                  (0.02)               (0.01)
  Level                        0.004      0.004     0.06        0.06                   0.01
                              (0.02)     (0.01)    (0.04)        (0.02)               (0.01)
  Slope                       0.10       0.06      0.20          0.17                 -0.01
                              (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.06)        (0.04)               (0.03)
  Level*Slope                                      -0.03        -0.03
                                                   (0.01)        (0.01)
  Easing                                                                   0.23 0.19
                                                                           (0.08) (0.07)
  Tightening                                                               -0.16 -0.10
                                                                           (0.08) (0.06)
  Constant          0.10       -0.11     -0.05         -0.32    -0.27       0.07   0.03
                    (0.03)     (0.14)    (0.10)        (0.19)   (0.12)     (0.06) (0.11)
  Observations        377       377       377          377       377         377        377
  R2                  0.44      0.15      0.50         0.19      0.54        0.31       0.58

Regressions for the level of option-implied yield skewness of the ten-year Treasury yield, using
monthly data from January 1990 to May 2021. RSK is monthly realized yield skewness based on
daily changes in futures prices and implied volatilities, following Neuberger (2012); Level and Slope
are the first two principal components of Treasury yields from one to ten years maturity, scaled
to correspond to level and slope of the yield curve; Easing and Tightening are dummy variables
indicating whether the Federal Reserve was easing or tightening monetary policy one year ago (based
on observed changes in the policy rate). Newey-West standard errors (with automatic bandwidth
selection) are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  48
                              Table 4: Predicting excess returns


                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
 Level              0.003       0.004          0.004        0.004         0.01         0.01
                    (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.01)       (0.002)
 Slope               0.02        0.03           0.03        0.03          0.05         0.05
                     (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
 Curvature            0.03        0.004          0.04         0.01        -0.05         -0.02
                     (0.06)      (0.06)         (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.07)        (0.06)
 ISK                            -0.34                       -0.28        -0.32         -0.29
                                 (0.12)                      (0.13)       (0.12)        (0.14)
 RSK                                          -0.06          -0.02
                                               (0.02)        (0.02)
 i                                                                       -0.26
                                                                         (0.12)
 GLS                                                                                   -0.39
                                                                                       (0.17)
 Constant            -0.07       -0.15          -0.11        -0.15          0.26       -0.03
                     (0.10)      (0.09)         (0.09)       (0.09)        (0.18)      (0.14)
 Observations         374          374           374          374           374          347
 R2                   0.06         0.11          0.09         0.11          0.13         0.14

Predictive regressions for three-month excess bond returns (average of duration-normalized excess
returns on Treasury bonds with one to ten years maturity) using monthly data from January 1990
to May 2021. Predictors: Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of
end-of-month Treasury yields from one to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled); ISK is option-
implied yield skewness averaged over the last five business days of the month; RSK is monthly
realized yield skewness based on daily changes in futures prices and implied volatilities, following
Neuberger (2012); i* is an estimate of the trend component of nominal interest rates from Bauer
and Rudebusch (2020); GLS is survey disagreement about future ten-year yields from Giacoletti,
Laursen, and Singleton (2021). Standard errors based on the reverse regression delta method of Wei
and Wright (2013) are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                49
                Table 5: Predicting FOMC surprises with ISK and RSK


                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)
     Level              -0.0002                        -0.001       -0.001        -0.001
                        (0.001)                        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
     Slope              -0.001                        -0.007        -0.003       -0.007
                        (0.002)                        (0.003)      (0.002)       (0.003)
     Curvature          -0.016                        -0.025        -0.015       -0.029
                        (0.013)                        (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.014)
     ISK                               0.030          0.043                      0.059
                                       (0.009)         (0.012)                    (0.016)
     RSK                                                            0.004        -0.005
                                                                    (0.002)       (0.003)
     Constant             0.003       -0.010           0.018         0.008        0.017
                         (0.007)       (0.003)         (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.009)
     Observations          213           213             213          213           213
     R2                   0.009         0.056           0.099        0.027         0.112

Predictive regressions for the monetary policy surprise around FOMC announcements from January
1994 to June 2019. The dependent variable is the first principal component of 30-minute futures rate
changes around the announcement for five different contracts with up to about one year maturity.
Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of Treasury yields from one
to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled) measured on the day before the announcement; ISK
is option-implied yield skewness, RSK is realized yield skewness based on daily changes in futures
prices and implied volatilities, following Neuberger (2012), both implied and realized skewness use
data over the month (22 trading days) before the FOMC announcement. White heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 50
          Table 6: Predicting FOMC surprises with ISK and macro variables


                                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
 ISK                                   0.031          0.028          0.032           0.021
                                       (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.008)
 FFR                                   -0.001
                                       (0.001)
 Annual employment growth              0.455
                                       (0.169)
 BBK index                                             0.010
                                                       (0.004)
 Change in employment                                                0.057
                                                                     (0.018)
 S&P 500 return                                                                      0.135
                                                                                     (0.049)
 Constant                             -0.013          -0.008        -0.016          -0.011
                                       (0.004)         (0.003)       (0.004)         (0.003)
 Observations                            213             213            213            213
 R2                                     0.084           0.107          0.130          0.128

Predictive regressions for the monetary policy surprise around FOMC announcements from January
1994 to June 2019. The dependent variable is the first principal component of 30-minute futures rate
changes around the announcement for five different contracts with up to about one year maturity.
ISK is option-implied yield skewness averaged over the month (22 trading days) before the FOMC
announcement; FFR is the average federal funds rate over the calendar month preceding the meeting,
and Annual employment growth is the 12-month log-change in total nonfarm payroll employment
(appropriately lagged), as used by Cieslak (2018); BBK index is the Brave-Butters-Kelley business
cycle indicator form the Chicago Fed, Change in employment is the change in non-farm payrolls
released in the most recent employment report, and S&P 500 return is the stock return over the
three months (65 days) up to the day before the FOMC announcement, as used by Bauer and
Swanson (2020). White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, and
 
 , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 51
                      Table 7: Predicting Blue Chip forecast errors

                  Current 1Q ahead 2Q ahead 3Q ahead 4Q ahead 5Q ahead
                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                            
ISK               0.13         0.33         0.37          0.43         0.58         0.70
                  (0.04)       (0.10)       (0.15)        (0.17)       (0.18)       (0.17)
Level              0.004        0.01         0.01          0.02         0.03        -0.02
                  (0.01)       (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.07)
Slope             -0.005       -0.05        -0.09         -0.15        -0.20        -0.31
                  (0.02)       (0.04)       (0.06)        (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.13)
Curvature         -0.01         0.14         0.32          0.35         0.39         0.29
                  (0.10)       (0.22)       (0.27)        (0.39)       (0.50)       (0.48)
Constant          -0.07        -0.21        -0.35         -0.45        -0.56        -0.40
                  (0.05)       (0.13)       (0.19)        (0.28)       (0.39)       (0.56)
Observations        372          371          368          365           362          276
R2                  0.03         0.05         0.06         0.07          0.10         0.18

Predictive regressions for forecast errors in the h-quarter ahead consensus Blue Chip Financial
Forecasts for the ten-year Treasury yield, using monthly surveys from January 1990 to January 2021.
The forecast horizon h ranges from 0 (current/nowcast) to 5. ISK is option-implied yield skewness;
Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of end-of-month Treasury yields
from one to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled). All predictors are measured on the day of
the survey deadline. Hansen-Hodrick standard errors with 3(h + 1) lags are reported in parentheses,
and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                52
          Table 8: Inflation and yield forecast errors in the Blue Chip survey

                            Dependent variable: Blue Chip inflation forecast error
                         Current 1Q ahead 2Q ahead 3Q ahead 4Q ahead 5Q ahead
                            (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
  Yield forecast error    1.31        1.00        0.56         0.36        0.33        0.67
                          (0.57)      (0.45)      (0.25)       (0.16)      (0.17)      (0.28)
  Constant                 0.09        0.16        0.08        -0.04       -0.07        0.44
                          (0.11)      (0.17)      (0.17)       (0.18)      (0.22)      (0.33)
  Observations             372         371         368          365         362         276
  R2                       0.05        0.07        0.04         0.02        0.02        0.06

Regressions of forecast errors in the h-quarter-ahead consensus Blue Chip Financial Forecasts for CPI
inflation on corresponding forecast errors for the ten-year Treasury yield, using monthly surveys from
January 1990 to May 2021. The forecast horizon h ranges from 0 (current/nowcast) to 5. Hansen-
Hodrick standard errors with 3(h + 1) lags are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 53
                  Table A1: Predicting excess returns: pre-ZLB sample


                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
Level                0.01        0.01          0.01        0.01           0.03          0.01
                    (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.01)       (0.004)
Slope                0.03        0.03          0.03         0.03          0.09          0.05
                     (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.02)
Curvature             0.01        0.09          0.05         0.09         -0.06          0.03
                     (0.12)      (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.11)        (0.18)        (0.11)
ISK                             -0.75                      -0.69         -0.73         -0.64
                                 (0.24)                     (0.26)        (0.23)        (0.23)
RSK                                           -0.09         -0.02
                                              (0.04)        (0.04)
i                                                                         -0.56
                                                                          (0.30)
GLS                                                                                     -0.52
                                                                                        (0.27)
Constant            -0.33         -0.27        -0.36         -0.28          0.34        -0.17
                    (0.25)        (0.26)       (0.24)        (0.26)        (0.34)       (0.24)
Observations         227           227          227           227           227           227
R2                   0.06          0.14         0.10          0.14          0.20          0.17

Predictive regressions for three-month excess bond returns (average of duration-normalized excess
returns on Treasury bonds with one to ten years maturity) using monthly data from January 1990 to
November 2008. Predictors: Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of
end-of-month Treasury yields from one to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled); ISK is option-
implied yield skewness averaged over the last five business days of the month; RSK is monthly
realized yield skewness based on daily changes in futures prices and implied volatilities, following
Neuberger (2012); i* is an estimate of the trend component of nominal interest rates from Bauer
and Rudebusch (2020); GLS is survey disagreement about future ten-year yields from Giacoletti,
Laursen, and Singleton (2021). Reverse regression standard errors, using the reverse regression delta
method of Wei and Wright (2013), are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 54
                 Table A2: Predicting target and path FOMC surprises

                                                   Dependent variable:
                               Target surprise                               Path surprise
                      (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)    (10)
Level           -0.003                                0.002
                (0.002)                              (0.002)
Slope           -0.005                               -0.01
                (0.004)                              (0.005)
Curvature       -0.06                                 -0.01
                 (0.03)                               (0.02)
ISK              0.09 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.02 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.03
                 (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
RSK             -0.01                                 0.003
                 (0.01)                              (0.004)
FFR                     -0.004                                0.002
                        (0.002)                              (0.002)
Empl. growth             0.42                                 0.65
                         (0.24)                               (0.31)
BBK index                        0.01                                0.02
                                (0.01)                               (0.01)
Change in empl.                        0.06                                 0.08
                                       (0.03)                               (0.03)
S&P 500 return                                0.17                                 0.14
                                              (0.08)                               (0.08)
Constant         0.04 0.002 -0.002 -0.01 -0.004 0.02 -0.02 -0.001 -0.01 -0.004
                 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.004) (0.01) (0.004)
Observations         213       213      213    213     213      213       213      213      213     213
R2                   0.09      0.04     0.04   0.05    0.06     0.08      0.08     0.08     0.09    0.07


Predictive regressions for the target and path factor of the monetary policy surprise around FOMC
announcements from January 1994 to June 2019, measured as in G¨         urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson
(2005). For a description of the predictors see the notes to Tables 5 and 6. White heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 55
                         Table A3: Predicting SPF forecast errors

                                       Dependent variable: SPF forecast error
                   Current           1Q ahead           2Q ahead           3Q ahead          4Q ahead
                  (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)       (9)        (10)
ISK            0.16      0.19      0.48     0.56      0.57    0.69      0.57     0.75       0.59   0.83
                (0.04)  (0.04) (0.12) (0.10) (0.18) (0.17) (0.19)                 (0.26)    (0.33) (0.29)
Level                   0.002         -0.003         -0.01                        0.005             0.02
                        (0.01)        (0.03)         (0.03)                       (0.06)           (0.06)
Slope                   -0.01         -0.05         -0.10                         -0.12            -0.16
                        (0.01)        (0.03)         (0.05)                       (0.08)           (0.10)
Curve                  -0.17          -0.13           0.04                        -0.04             0.02
                        (0.09)        (0.17)         (0.26)                       (0.38)           (0.46)
Constant       -0.08 -0.01 -0.25 -0.09 -0.40 -0.20 -0.54                          -0.30    -0.69 -0.45
                (0.02) (0.04) (0.06) (0.10) (0.08) (0.15) (0.07)                  (0.27)    (0.14) (0.38)
Observations     118      118       117      117      116       116       115      115       114        114
R2               0.09     0.14      0.08     0.10     0.07      0.09      0.05     0.08      0.04       0.09


Predictive regressions for forecast errors in the h-quarter ahead median forecast for the ten-year
Treasury yield in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, using quarterly surveys from 1992:Q1 to
2020:Q3. The forecast horizon h ranges from 0 (current/nowcast) to 4. ISK is option-implied yield
skewness, Level, Slope and Curvature are the first three principal components of Treasury yields from
one to ten years maturity (appropriately scaled), measured on the day before the survey deadline.
All predictors are measured on the day before the survey deadline. Hansen-Hodrick standard errors
with h lags are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 56
                 Table A4: Inflation and yield forecast errors in the SPF

                                 Dependent variable: SPF inflation forecast error
                            Current   1Q ahead     2Q ahead     3Q ahead     4Q ahead
                               (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
  Yield forecast error        1.60         1.10            0.52           0.28          0.34
                             (1.21)        (0.40)         (0.29)         (0.19)         (0.20)
  Constant                    0.13          0.17           0.06          -0.05          -0.02
                             (0.11)        (0.15)         (0.18)         (0.18)         (0.22)
  Observations                115           114            113            112            111
  R2                          0.05          0.08           0.03           0.01           0.02

Regressions of forecast errors in the h-quarter-ahead median forecast for CPI inflation in the Survey
of Professional Forecasters on the corresponding forecast errors for the ten-year Treasury yield, using
quarterly surveys from 1992:Q1 to 2020:Q3. The forecast horizon h ranges from 0 (current/nowcast)
to 4. Hansen-Hodrick standard errors with h lags are reported in parentheses, and  ,  , and 
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                   57
