                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                     THE DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF TRADE:
                  THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES

                                         Kirill Borusyak
                                         Xavier Jaravel

                                       Working Paper 28957
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28957


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021


We are particularly indebted to Pol Antràs, Cecilia Fieler, Teresa Fort, Edward Glaeser, Gita
Gopinath, Alonso de Gortari, Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Lawrence Katz, Danial Lashkari,
Marc Melitz, Tom Sampson, Felix Tintelnot, and Oren Ziv for insightful comments. We are also
grateful to numerous seminar and conference participants for thoughtful suggestions. We thank
Jim Davis for his help at the Boston Census Research Data Center, Pablo Fajgelbaum and Amit
Khandelwal for sharing their replication code and data, and James O'Brien for sharing a
concordance between CEX categories and NAICS industries with us. The research in this paper
was conducted while Borusyak was a Special Sworn Status researcher of the U.S. Census Bureau
at the Boston Census Research Data Center. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Researchers
own analyses calculated based in part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and
marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the
Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not
responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results
reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kirill Borusyak and Xavier Jaravel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Distributional Effects of Trade: Theory and Evidence from the United States
Kirill Borusyak and Xavier Jaravel
NBER Working Paper No. 28957
June 2021
JEL No. D63,F14,F16,F60

                                          ABSTRACT

How much do consumption patterns matter for the impact of international trade on inequality? In
neoclassical trade models, the effects of trade shocks on consumers' purchasing power are
governed by the shares of imports in consumer expenditures, under no parametric assumptions on
preferences and technology. This paper provides in-depth measurement of import shares across
the income distribution in the United States, using new datasets linking expenditure and customs
microdata. Contrary to common wisdom, we find that import shares are flat throughout the
income distribution: the purchasing-power gains from lower trade costs are distributionally
neutral. Accounting for changes in wages in addition to prices in a unified nonparametric
framework, we find substantial distributional effects that arise within, but not across, income and
education groups. There is little impact of a fall in trade costs on inequality, even though trade
shocks generate winners and losers at all income levels, via wage changes.


Kirill Borusyak
University College London
Drayton House
30 Gordon Street
London
WC1H 0AX
United Kingdom
k.borusyak@ucl.ac.uk

Xavier Jaravel
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London
WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
x.jaravel@lse.ac.uk




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28957
1       Introduction
How much do consumption patterns matter for the impact of international trade on
inequality? Some households benefit from the global economy by buying products
manufactured abroad or using imported inputs. If the poor buy disproportionately
more imported products, then trade liberalizations may reduce purchasing-power in-
equality. Whether or not this is the case empirically remains debated to this day:
because of data constraints, we still lack direct and comprehensive empirical evidence
on the import shares in the consumption baskets of different income groups, even in
widely-studied countries, such as the United States. Furthermore, it is not clear how
consumption heterogeneity compares and interacts with the labor market effects of
trade in shaping the distributional effects of trade shocks.1
    This paper provides new evidence on the heterogeneous effects of trade shocks
through both consumer prices (expenditure channel) and wages (earnings channel)
across and within income and education groups, and thus on the net distributional
effects. Our analysis is based on linked datasets that cover the consumption and
production sides of the entire U.S. economy and leverage detailed expenditure micro-
data on consumer packaged goods and motor vehicles merged with restricted access
customs data. Contrary to common wisdom, we show that the expenditure channel
of trade is close to distributionally neutral in the United States. Taking into account
the earnings channel and general equilibrium effects, we find distributional effects of
trade shocks that are primarily concentrated within groups of workers with similar
initial earnings, while the effect on overall inequality is small. In this sense, the distri-
butional effects of trade shocks are mostly "horizontal" (within income deciles) rather
than "vertical" (across deciles).
    A key contribution of this paper is the in-depth measurement of import shares
across the income distribution. We motivate this analysis by showing that in neoclas-
sical trade models the welfare effects of small, uniform counterfactual trade shocks are
fully governed by observed import shares.2 While this theoretical result, in the spirit
    1
      Canonical and more recent trade theories predict that trade should negatively impact the earn-
ings of low-skilled and low-paid workers in the U.S. (e.g., Stolper and Samuelson (1941), Burstein
and Vogel (2017), Caron et al. (2020), and Cravino and Sotelo (2019)), but these studies do not
allow for heterogeneity in consumption baskets within countries.
    2
      Our definition of welfare effects is the equivalent variation measured as a fraction of initial
expenditures. In dollar terms, the effects have to be rescaled by total expenditures, which are higher
for richer households.


                                                  1
of Deaton (1989), applies in partial equilibrium and under some conditions which we
specify, it requires no parametric assumptions on preferences and technologies.
    To measure import shares across the income distribution accurately and compre-
hensively, we build three complementary datasets, focusing on the year 2007. First,
we match the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to the U.S. Input-Output ta-
ble to jointly measure income-specific expenditure shares and import shares for 170
industries that cover all goods and services. We then complement it with detailed
microdata for two spending categories which cover around 40% of total expenditures
on tradable goods: consumer packaged goods and motor vehicles. These datasets are
essential to address potential aggregation biases in import shares, e.g. if low-income
consumers buy more imported varieties within categories. For consumer packaged
goods, we build a firm-level link between the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel, as
a source of detailed consumption baskets, and the Economic Census and Customs
microdata, as a source of import shares. For motor vehicles, we similarly match the
CEX with Ward's Automotive Yearbooks and the Census of Manufactures. In each of
the three analyses we account for both imported final goods and imported inputs in
domestic goods. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to document the
expenditure channel of trade with a direct measurement approach covering all indus-
tries of the economy, including the role of imported intermediate inputs, and allowing
for heterogeneity in import shares arising across firms within the same industries.
    Comparing income and education groups, we find that there is no difference in
import shares arising across industries, i.e. from industry-level heterogeneity in con-
sumption baskets; within industries, richer and more educated individuals have a
slightly higher spending share on imports. In the aggregate, imports account for
12.6% of expenditures, and this share varies only slightly across income groups in the
industry-level data, hovering non-monotonically between 11.7% and 12.9% across the
income distribution. Within consumer packaged goods, we find that higher-income
households buy more imports, except from China, but these differences are relatively
small, varying from about 10.3% at the bottom to about 11.6% at the top. Finally,
import shares for vehicles are flat around 44% across most of the income distribution,
except for a marked increase to 50% for those earning above $150,000 a year.
    These results run counter to both the common wisdom and findings from prior
work on the expenditure channel (Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal 2016) which suggest


                                          2
that low-income U.S. households consume more imports and benefit more from trade
through lower prices. To reconcile the findings, we first explain theoretically that
the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) employed by Fajgelbaum and Khandel-
wal (2016) mechanically generates a strong pro-poor expenditure channel. We then
estimate a nested version of the non-homothetic CES demand system (e.g. Comin
et al. 2021), which does not possess the mechanical features of AIDS, and find that
the expenditure channel of trade becomes small, consistent with our direct measure-
ment. This analysis shows that the choice of the demand system can have a large
quantitative impact on the estimated expenditure channel, highlighting the value of
our data-driven approach.
    In the remainder of the paper, we study the distributional effects of trade shocks in
general equilibrium, offering a unified analysis of the expenditure and earnings chan-
nels. This analysis requires additional assumptions on the structure of the economy,
such that the factor market equilibrium response to trade shocks can be character-
ized. Our framework preserves the key advantage of our data-driven approach to
the expenditure channel: the welfare effects of counterfactual trade shocks are repre-
sented in terms of intuitive sufficient statistics that capture heterogeneous exposure
to international trade.
    We provide a novel characterization for the changes in factor demand and factor
prices induced by small shocks to trade costs. This characterization holds in a class
of quantitative trade models with standard assumptions on the labor and product
markets allowing for a broad set of preferences and production functions. We show
that changes in factor demand can be decomposed into several terms corresponding to
different mechanisms: exporting, import competition, imported intermediate inputs,
income and substitution effects. Each of these terms is governed by an intuitive
statistic measuring exposure to international trade -- similar to our analysis of the
expenditure channel, but now arising from the factor market. For instance, a factor
whose employment is concentrated in industries that have high export ratios, directly
or indirectly, will see factor demand grow after a trade liberalization, ceteris paribus.
How factor prices respond to factor demand in turn depends on the elasticities of
aggregate factor demand. Our characterization highlights a new mechanism: given
exposure, the welfare gains through the earnings channel are stronger for the factor
specialized in non-traded industries, as factor demand is less elastic in these industries.


                                            3
    Taking our characterization to the data, we evaluate a counterfactual where trade
costs fall by 10% with all trading partners. We also assess the impacts of other shocks,
including a trade liberalization with China specifically, historical reductions in trade
costs, and the introduction of the "Trump tariffs" in 2018. Our theoretical results
allow for any factor types, but empirically we consider different groups of workers in
the main analysis and study capital in a robustness check. To assess both vertical and
horizontal distributional effects, i.e. the unequal effects of trade shocks both across
and within income groups, we first consider a calibration in which there is no mobility
of workers across industries.3
    The key lesson that emerges from this empirical analysis is that exposure differ-
ences and the corresponding distributional effects are primarily concentrated within
income groups, rather than across. Over 99% of the variance of welfare changes arise
within income deciles. There is little impact of a fall in trade costs on overall in-
equality, despite the substantial distributional effects that generate sizable changes in
relative income as well as winners and losers at all income levels. The spread between
the 10th and 90th percentiles of welfare effects is over 2 percentage points within each
decile, while variation across deciles is much smaller: all groups benefit on average
and the gains are slightly higher for poorer households, ranging from 2.0% in the
bottom decile to 1.8% for the top decile.4
    Higher gains for poor households may look surprising, in particular in light of the
canonical Heckscher-Ohlin model. Consistent with the Stolper-Samuelson theorem,
in our calibration relative labor demand for low-income workers falls after the trade
shock. Yet, an offsetting force dominates: low-income workers are employed relatively
more in service industries, which have lower labor demand elasticities; as a result, a
given labor demand shock induces, on average, a stronger wage response for them.
    To confirm that there are no strong distributional effects across groups of ex-ante
similar workers, we conduct a similar analysis across education groups. In this second
calibration, we consider two groups of workers -- those with and without a college
   3
     In that case, each worker's labor market exposure is simply her industry's exposure. While the
assumption of no mobility may be most appropriate in the short-run, this analysis can be generalized
to the case where labor mobility follows a Roy model with a finite but non-zero elasticity of industry
labor supply, as in Galle et al. (2020). We have no reason to expect that the key lesson presented
below would change in that medium-run model.
   4
     These differences are due to the earnings channel, with the expenditure channel still mostly flat
when accounting for the general equilibrium effects. Thus, the interaction between the expenditure
and earnings channels, allowed for in the model, turns out to be quantitatively small.


                                                  4
degree -- and assume perfect mobility across industries. We again find that the effects
are very similar across groups. The welfare gain from the 10% fall in trade costs is
1.7% for college-educated workers, compared with 1.6% for those without a college
degree. All our findings therefore go against a popular narrative that "trade wars are
class wars" (Klein and Pettis 2020).
    This paper contributes to the growing literature on the distributional effects of
trade through the expenditure channel. Several papers rely on the structure of the
demand system to (implicitly) infer differences in import spending across consumer
groups from aggregate trade flows. Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) and He (2020)
found strong pro-poor effects of the expenditure channel for all countries, while the es-
timates of Nigai (2016) are pro-rich. In contrast, the estimates reported in this paper
are based on direct observation of consumption baskets for both domestic and im-
ported products and therefore require minimal structural assumptions to characterize
the magnitude of the expenditure channel.
    Several papers directly measure spending on imports across consumer groups:
Porto (2006) for Argentina, Faber (2014) for Mexico, Levell et al. (2017) and Brein-
lich et al. (2017) for the U.K., Auer et al. (2021) for Switzerland, and Hottman and
Monarch (2020) for the U.S. Data limitations make these papers focus only on par-
ticular types of differences in expenditure shares.5 In contrast, our paper is the first
to consider the entire economy, taking into account imports of both final and inter-
mediate goods, and at the same time using very detailed data on consumer packaged
goods and motor vehicles to address potential aggregation biases.6
   5
     Porto (2006) captures differences in spending across 7 large categories of final goods and services,
Faber (2014) looks at imported intermediate inputs only, Levell et al. (2017) limit their analysis to
9 categories of food, and Breinlich et al. (2017) consider 12 broad groups of goods and services
consumed by households. In contemporaneous work, Hottman and Monarch (2020) also use CEX to
show that import spending is similar across income groups, but they do not account for intermediate
inputs and only have industry-level expenditure data. In work subsequent to ours, Auer et al. (2021)
analyze import shares in Nielsen scanner data, without accounting for sectors other than fast-moving
consumer goods. In related papers, Furman et al. (2017) and Gailes et al. (2018) merge the CEX
consumption data by group with import shares but, focusing on the incidence of tariffs, do not
report differential import spending.
   6
     While we focus on counterfactual shocks, a related literature evaluates the heterogeneous effects
of historical trade shocks on U.S. prices: Amiti et al. (2020) and Jaravel and Sager (2020) quantify
the reduction of U.S. prices due to trade with China; Bai and Stumpner (2019) further show that
the effects of trade with China on prices and product variety were similar in industries selling to
richer and poorer households; and Hottman and Monarch (2020) show that lower-income households
experienced larger growth of import prices between 1998 and 2014.



                                                   5
    Our paper also contributes to the literature characterizing the effects of trade
on wage inequality using sufficient statistics. The early literature, guided by the
Heckscher-Ohlin model, looked at the net factor content of trade (e.g. Katz and
Murphy (1992), Deardorff and Staiger (1988), Krugman (2000)). More recently,
Burstein and Vogel (2017) and Cravino and Sotelo (2019) show that this statistic
is not appropriate in richer models. Our characterization provides a set of sufficient
statistics in a modern, multi-sector gravity model. It allows us to quantify the role of
multiple mechanisms in a unified way and assess their relative importance: e.g., the
role of skill endowment emphasized by the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, the contri-
butions of non-homothetic preferences (Caron et al. 2020), and the complementarity
between goods and services (Cravino and Sotelo 2019). In independent subsequent
work, Ad~  ao et al. (2020) develop a different decomposition for factor price changes
due to trade, into import and export channels, and apply it to detailed firm-level data
in Ecuador. Our results allow for non-homothetic demand, incorporate and isolate
additional channels, and analyze the United States.7
    On the empirical side, our results are related to Galle et al. (2020) who show,
by using exact hat algebra in a multi-sector gravity model, that the China shock
generates strong distributional effects. Our contribution is to quantify the extent to
which the distributional effects of the shocks we study are "horizontal" rather than
"vertical," which to the best of our knowledge has not been studied in prior work.8
Because of data limitations, we do not consider the regional dimension of the effects
of trade, which has been emphasized by Autor et al. (2013) and could be studied
using our exposure-based approach given appropriate data.9
   7
      While our theoretical results are most suited to study small shocks to trade costs, Ad~        ao et
al. (2020) focus on the autarky counterfactual. Compared with Proposition 3 in Ad~       ao et al. (2020),
we allow for flexible income and substitution effects, modeled with nested non-homothetic CES
preferences across industries. We also capture the effects of import competition in intermediate
demand (rather than in final demand only), making our model consistent with the standard industry-
level gravity equation. We isolate the negative effects of import competition from the positive
productivity effects of imported intermediate inputs. Compared to our paper, Ad~         ao et al. (2020)
leverage rich data on firm-to-firm transactions and on capital ownership.
    8
      This point is distinct from the line of work on the role of trade for "residual" inequality, i.e.
wage dispersion within occupations and sectors (e.g., Helpman et al. 2017). Residual inequality is a
component of the overall wage inequality, whereas horizontal distributional effects generate winners
and losers without affecting inequality.
    9
      This line of work has largely been silent about the effect of trade on wage inequality: Autor
et al. (2013) do not find significantly different cross-sectional effects on skilled and unskilled wages
(see Tables 6 and 7) and do not document the distribution of trade shocks across commuting zones.


                                                    6
    Finally, we contribute to an emerging literature that analyzes the expenditure
and earnings channels jointly, in a unified framework. There are only two papers in
this space: Porto (2006) uses time-series regressions to estimate the impact of trade-
induced price changes on wages and domestic prices, while He (2020) generalizes the
structural model of Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016). We take a different approach
by focusing on a set of exposure statistics measured in detailed data.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows how to connect
import shares to the expenditure channel and presents the data sources. Section 3
estimates import shares across the income distribution and other household groups.
Section 4 reconciles the results of our direct measurement approach with those based
on parametric assumptions. Section 5 presents the theoretical framework and the
estimates of the distributional effects from counterfactual trade shocks in general
equilibrium. Section 6 concludes.


2     Conceptual Framework and Data
In this section, we first characterize the conditions under which the welfare effects
of trade shocks via the expenditure channel are fully governed by import shares
in consumer expenditure. We then describe the data sources we use to measure
heterogeneity in import shares across household groups.


2.1     Import Shares as Sufficient Statistics
We consider a set of infinitesimal price changes due to a decline in iceberg trade costs
in a static setting. We adopt the standard approach defining the change in welfare
for consumer group i as the equivalent variation EVi divided by initial expenditures
Xi (Deaton 1989; Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal 2016), which we denote d log Wi . For
example, d log Wi is equal to 0.01 if the trade liberalization is equivalent, in utility
terms, to increasing total spending by 1% at the original prices. Consumers maximize
utility over a set of differentiated products indexed by  , with expenditure shares
They instead find negative effects of trade with China on manufacturing employment in the U.S. at
the level of commuting zones (and industries in Acemoglu et al. (2016)), which is consistent with
our model.




                                               7
denoted by si  .
                 10

    Trade costs affect prices faced by domestic consumers through three channels:
prices of final goods imported from abroad, costs of production and prices of domestic
goods that use imported intermediate inputs, and general equilibrium adjustments to
domestic production costs, including wage changes for different domestic factors and
terms of trade effects.
    We formalize the conditions under which differences in the import shares of con-
sumption baskets across consumer groups are sufficient statistics for the expendi-
ture channel. Specifically, we consider a reduction in iceberg trade costs between
Home and a foreign country (or a set of countries) c that is uniform across prod-
ucts: d log   d log  < 0 for each  imported from c (  c ), with d log  = 0
otherwise. We aim to show that its welfare effect is given by:
                                       d log Wi
                                                = ImpShi
                                                       c,                                             (1)
                                       -d log 
where the import share in expenditures is defined as
                                                                           Int
                               ImpShi
                                    c =          si
                                                   · 1+           si
                                                                    IP c .
                                             c             H

                                             Direct           Indirect
                                      Int
Here indirect import share IP c for a domestic product   H is the share of
intermediate inputs from c in  's total cost, accounting for all domestic input-output
(IO) linkages.11 This result follows from three assumptions.
Assumption 1 (Neoclassical economy). All product and factor markets are perfectly
competitive, and all production technologies have constant returns to scale and differ-
entiable cost functions.
    Under Assumption 1, prices are continuous in trade costs. Hence, by the envelope
theorem (Roy's identity), consumer price changes d log p affect each consumer group
in proportion to the spending shares si
                                       , and

                               dlog W i = d log Xi -         si
                                                               d log p ,                              (2)
                                                          
  10
    Throughout the paper, we indicate buyers in the superscripts and sellers in the subscripts.
Agents are buyers in the product markets and, in Section 5.1, sellers in the labor market.
 11
    We use tildes to denote objects that account for upstream suppliers. Indirect import shares are
                         Int                                     Int
defined recursively by IP c =      c    · 1 +         H     IP    c ,   where   are the shares of   inputs
in the unit costs of   H .

                                                  8
where d log Xi is the change in total expenditures. This equation holds regardless of
the demand system (see Appendix A for the proof).12

Assumption 2 (Partial equilibrium). Factor prices do not change at Home or abroad.

    Under Assumption 2, the second term in equation (2), corresponding to the change
in the cost of living, is entirely responsible for the welfare gain. We relax this assump-
tion in the general equilibrium version of the model in Section 5.1.

Assumption 3 (No domestic value in imports). Products imported into Home con-
tain no inputs previously exported from Home.

    Assumption 3 does not preclude global value chains (GVCs) involving foreign
countries but allows us to disregard the fact that the domestic economy may be em-
bedded into GVCs. Appendix S.1 relaxes this assumption for our theoretical results,
but data constraints make it challenging to implement the formulas at a granular
level of observation. As a result, we focus on domestic IO linkages abstracting from
GVCs in our empirical analysis.
    Assumptions 1­3 combined allow us to solve for the price changes. By Assumption
1 the incidence of the trade shocks falls entirely on consumers due to complete pass-
through.13 For imported products, price changes are equal to the underlying changes
in iceberg trade costs of importing, i.e. d log p = d log  for   c . By Assumptions
1­2 and the envelope theorem (Shephard's lemma), the unit cost of domestic produc-
tion adjusts in proportion to the use of imported intermediates. By Assumption 3 it
                                                                          Int
is sufficient to consider domestic IO linkages, which yields d log p = IP c d log  for
  H . This leads to our first proposition, which motivates our empirical investiga-
tion of import shares in consumption baskets (see Appendix A for the proof).

Proposition 1. Suppose Assumptions 1­3 are satisfied. Then equation (1) holds.
  12
      In Appendix S.1 we show the conditions under which (2) applies with endogenous product entry
and exit, e.g. as in Eaton and Kortum (2002) or the generalized Melitz-Pareto model of Kucheryavyy
et al. 2020.
   13
      Complete pass-through is consistent with the estimates from Trump tariffs by Fajgelbaum et
al. (2020) and Amiti et al. (2019). Models with complete pass-through and intermediate inputs can
also accommodate the empirical finding that final consumer prices adjust less than border prices in
response to trade or exchange rate shocks (Goldberg and Campa 2010), as well as exchange rate
disconnect (Amiti et al. 2014).




                                                9
    In Appendix S.1, we show how to relax Assumptions 1­3, allowing for global
value chains, markups and incomplete pass-through, expanding product variety, and
returns to scale. In these extensions, import shares continue to play an important
role for the expenditure channel but require model-specific adjustments. In Section 5
we further allow for changing domestic factor prices, quantifying their impact on the
expenditure channel (in addition to the earnings channel), and analyze non-uniform
changes in trade costs.
    Finally, we introduce a decomposition for the heterogeneity in import shares that
will structure our empirical work. Such heterogeneity may arise at different levels
of product aggregation. For example, a group of consumers may purchase relatively
more imports because it spends more on manufactured goods relative to services
(between-industry heterogeneity), or because it buys more imported fruit relative to
domestically-produced fruit (heterogeneity within detailed industries). Classifying
products  into broader categories r, the difference in import shares between some
consumer group i and the representative consumer in the country, denoted by i = 0,
can be decomposed as

   ImpShi        0
        c - ImpShc =               si    0      0
                                    r - sr ImpShrc +             si      i         0
                                                                  r ImpShrc - ImpShrc ,            (3)
                               r                             r

                                       Between                                Within
                                                                 Int
where ImpShi   rc =
                                 i
                          rc s · 1 +
                                                   i         i
                                            rH s IP c /sr is the average import
share of products in group i's expenditures in r, and si  r =
                                                                      i
                                                                   r s is the spend-
ing share of group i on all products in r. Similar decompositions hold when there are
additional aggregation levels.
    Armed with this decomposition, we will measure the "between" and "within"
terms separately using complementary datasets. With industry-level data on the
entire U.S. economy and tracing input-output linkages, we will measure the between
term. We will then collect data disaggregated by the producing firm or brand and
measure the within terms for consumer packaged goods and motor vehicles.14
  14
    Besides guiding our empirical analysis, another use of the within-between decomposition is to
shed light on whether trade policy can be targeted to reduce cost-of-living inequality. Since tariffs
are typically imposed at the level of product categories, rather than individual firms and products,
such targeting will not be effective if heterogeneity in import shares mostly arises within categories.




                                                  10
2.2    Data Construction
We now describe three linked datasets we develop to measure import shares across
the income distribution as accurately and comprehensively as possible. The details of
data construction are reported in Appendices S.2.1­S.2.3, while Supplementary Table
S1 presents the summary statistics.

The entire economy at the industry level: CEX-IO data. We first measure
import shares by consumer group at the industry level, covering the universe of goods
and services. We combine the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) with the U.S.
Input-Output table. For a representative sample of households, the CEX reports
expenditures on all goods and services by 668 detailed spending categories, yielding
expenditure shares by income and education group. The IO table, in turn, allows us
to measure both direct and indirect import shares for 389 six-digit industries. We
use additional tabulations from the U.S. Census Bureau to compute import shares
for specific trading partners: China, NAFTA countries (Mexico and Canada), and
34 developed economies (OECD members, excluding NAFTA, plus Taiwan and Sin-
gapore). We focus on the year 2007, the most recent year for which the detailed
IO table is available; we check robustness to other years with more aggregated data.
Matching CEX spending categories to final consumption industries in the IO table,
we obtain a dataset with both consumer group-specific expenditure shares and total
(direct plus indirect) import shares across 170 final IO industries.

Consumer packaged goods at the firm level: Nielsen-Census data. We
then measure import shares by consumer group for consumer packaged goods --
goods typically purchased in supermarkets. We use detailed expenditure data from
the Nielsen Homescan Consumer Panel (henceforth Nielsen) and match them to the
confidential U.S. Census Bureau data on domestic production and imports at the firm
level.
    The Nielsen data record spending by a representative panel of households at the
level of barcode. The data cover three product classes: (i) food, alcohol, and tobacco
(henceforth "food"), (ii) health, beauty, and household products (henceforth "health
and household"), and (iii) general merchandize (e.g., tableware, stationery, and some
electronics). These products are classified into 1,165 product modules (e.g. Frozen
Soup), which we match to 71 IO industry codes. Overall, the data cover around


                                         11
30­35% of expenditures on goods.15
    To measure the direct and indirect import share of each barcode, we find the
product's manufacturer or distributor in the confidential U.S. Census data. We proxy
for a product's import share by the ratio of imports (measured in the Customs dataset,
LFTTD) to total sales of the corresponding firm. This measure captures imports
of both final products and intermediate inputs (except those imported through a
domestic intermediary). It is also available for imports from China, NAFTA, and 34
developed economies specifically.
    To obtain the linked dataset, we build a novel match between Nielsen barcodes and
firms in the Census datasets, which yields 12,700 matched firm-years for years 2007
and 2012, covering 83% of consumer packaged goods sales. The multi-step procedure
for matching is described in the Appendix, along with adjustments for multi-product
firms, match statistics, quality checks, and examples.

Motor vehicles at the brand level: CEX-Ward's and CEX-Census data.
Finally, we measure import shares by consumer group for motor vehicles, which ac-
count for 8% of personal expenditures on goods, according to the IO table.
    We rely on the vehicle ownership data from the CEX, which asks households to
report the brands of cars and light trucks (e.g., SUVs) they own, allowing us to
measure the fractions of brands by income and education groups. Chevrolet and
Buick are examples of brands, which are more detailed than firms (e.g. Chevrolet
and Buick are both produced by GM) but not as detailed as models (e.g. Chevrolet
Camaro). We combine the CEX with Ward's Automotive Yearbooks (henceforth
Ward's) -- a leading publication for statistics on the automotive industry -- as a
source of import shares for each brand. Ward's provides information on the country
of assembly of each model, from which we measure import shares by brand. We pool
the data for 2009­2015 to reduce noise in both datasets. Our final sample includes
45 brands and 99,048 vehicles.
    We also investigate the role of imported car parts, which are not accounted for
in the CEX-Ward's dataset. To address this potential limitation, we match the auto
manufacturers in the CEX to the confidential Census of Manufactures and LFTTD.
These Census dataset allow us to measure both direct and indirect import shares.
  15
    The data offer comprehensive coverage of at least food and beverages consumed at home, which
represent 24% of expenditures on goods in the IO table. In the Nielsen data those categories
constitute 72% of expenditures, with 24%/0.72  33%.


                                              12
Direct imports are defined as the ratio of imports of assembled cars in LFTTD to the
value of car shipments from the Census of Manufactures, while indirect imports have
imports of car parts in the numerator.16


3      Import Shares Across the Income Distribution
In this section, we measure differences in import shares across income and education
groups, first across industries and then within consumer packaged goods and motor
vehicles. At all levels of aggregation, we find that the import shares are similar across
groups, implying that the expenditure channel of trade is distributionally neutral.


3.1     Imports Shares with Industry-Level Data
Panel A of Figure 1 reports the import shares of expenditures across the income
distribution, for overall imports and for several decompositions, using industry-level
data from the CEX linked to the IO table. It shows little variation in the total
import share around the national average of 12.6%. For example, the import share is
11.7% for households with annual earnings below $10k a year, compared with 12.4%
for households earning $50­60k, 12.9% for those earning $90-110k, and 12.3% for
those earning above $150k. The panel also shows that the import shares remain flat
across the income distribution when considering various subsets of imports: direct
(via imported final goods) and indirect (via imported intermediate inputs), as well as
for imports from China, NAFTA, and developed economies.
    The small heterogeneity in import shares across income groups results from two
offsetting patterns. On the one hand, lower-income groups tend to consume more
goods, which are more traded, and less services, suggesting a "pro-poor" expenditure
channel.17 On the other hand, within goods higher-income groups purchase products
with higher import shares. Panel B of Figure 1 shows these offsetting forces by
grouping all industries into 39 subsectors and plotting their import shares against the
fraction of purchases by "rich" households (defined as those earning above $60k; the
  16
     A downside of the CEX-Census sample is that we have to aggregate the data from brands
to firms, overlooking the heterogeneity of consumption patterns and import shares across different
brands within the same firm. For this reason, our main analysis is based on the CEX-Ward's sample.
  17
     The average share of imports (direct and indirect) is 28.8% for goods and only 4.9% for services.
See Supplementary Figure S1 for how the spending share on goods varies with income.


                                                 13
                                       Figure 1: Import Shares by Household Income Bin, CEX-IO Data


                                                                                                                                                                  B: Import Shares and Consumer Base
                                            A: Main Results
                                                                                                                                                                             by Subsector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Computers and electronics




                                                                                                                                                                         50
                 12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Motor vehicles


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apparel




                                                                                                                                                                         40
    % of Imports in Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petroleum and coal
                           9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Miscellaneous mfg




                                                                                                                                                               Total Import Share, %
                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Goods
               6




                                                                                                                                                                                        Chemicals                                                                       Furniture




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Farms
    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Food




                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Finance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Information                   Accommodation and food
                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Health         Services              Other services                    Education
                                   0        50                 100                150                                                   200
                                                     Bin of Household Income, $000                                                                                                                                     Real Estate




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                          All Imports                                                         Direct                 Indirect
                                                                                                                                                                                       45                                55                         65                              75
                                          Developed Economies                                                 NAFTA                  China                                                                                    % of Rich Households in Purchases




                                                                                              C: Within-Between Decompositions
                                                                                                          1
                                                                     Import Shares Relative to Mean, p.p.
                                                                         -1      -.5      0
                                                                                       -1.5       .5

                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                                                                                                  10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0+
                                                                                                                       -2

                                                                                                                              -3

                                                                                                                                        -4

                                                                                                                                                 -5

                                                                                                                                                        -6

                                                                                                                                                                     -7

                                                                                                                                                                                        -9




                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                              5-




                                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                      30

                                                                                                                                                40

                                                                                                                                                        50

                                                                                                                                                               60

                                                                                                                                                                                       75




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                                                                                                               90

                                                                                                                                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                                              Bin of Household Income, $000
                                                                                                                              Total                                                            Across goods/services
                                                                                                                              Within g/s, across subsectors                                    Within subsectors



Notes : The binned scatterplots in Panel A group CEX panelists into 11 bins by household
income before tax. Using the merged CEX-IO sample, this panel reports the average import
share in expenditures of each bin, as well as its components arising from direct or indirect
imports separately and for selected import origins. The 34 developed economies are OECD
members, excluding NAFTA countries (Mexico and Canada), plus Taiwan and Singapore.
In Panel B, each circle corresponds to a subsector from Supplementary Table S2; the circle
size indicates final spending and subsectors that account for less than 3% of the sectoral
expenditure are not shown. The x-axis shows the fraction of consumers with income above
$60k in final purchases in the industry, while the y-axis reports the average import share of
the subsector. Panel C decomposes the differences in imports shares across the income dis-
tribution (as in Panel A, with the aggregate share normalized to zero), isolating differences
arising at different levels, via equation (3).




                                                                                                                                                        14
patterns are the same with other thresholds). There is a strong positive association
for goods: subsectors with a high import share, such as Computers and Electronics,
are purchased disproportionately more by high-income consumers, while subsectors
without much imports, such as Food, are purchased relatively more by low-income
groups.
    Panel C of Figure 1 quantifies these offsetting forces using the decomposition
for import shares (compared with the representative consumer) at different levels
of industry aggregation, as in equation (3). It shows that if consumption baskets
of different income groups varied only by the share of goods vs. services, but were
identical within each sector, the import spending share for households making less
than $10k would have been 0.5p.p. higher than average, and 0.9p.p. smaller than
the average for households making above $150k. Differences in consumption baskets
within goods and services offset this pattern, primarily due to the composition of
subsectors (rather than of detailed industries within subsectors).
    In sum, considering spending patterns across 170 categories of final consumption
defined by industries, we have shown that consumers at different income levels have
similar spending shares on imports, whether overall or from specific trading part-
ners.18 Our analysis so far could suffer from aggregation bias: for instance, it could
be the case that low-income groups consume a larger fraction of imported varieties
within industries, as in the structural analysis of Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016).
We now turn to this question and provide evidence that there is no such pattern for
consumer packaged goods and motor vehicles.


3.2     Import Shares within Consumer Packaged Goods
To examine within-industry spending on imports for consumer packaged goods, we
use the linked Nielsen-Census database. We find that richer consumers buy relatively
more imports, except from China; but the differences are small as a fraction of average
import shares.
   Figure 2 reports import shares by consumer income bin. Panel A shows the overall
imports shares within consumer packaged goods, which increase monotonically across
  18
    Since spending shares are flat but richer households have higher expenditures, the dollar amount
spent on imports increases with income, as reported in Supplementary Figure S2. Therefore, in
absolute dollar value, the expenditure channel favors richer households.



                                                15
                                                           Figure 2: Import Shares within Consumer Packaged Goods
                                                               by Household Income Bin, Nielsen-Census Sample

                                                                                                                    A: All Imports




                                                                                              11.5
                                                                                 % of Imports in Expenditures
                                                                                 10.5         10     11




                                                                                                                0     50                          100                                        150
                                                                                                                       Bin of Household Income, $000



  B: Imports Excluding China, All Products                                                                                                           C: Imports from China, All Products

                                                                                                                                                            4.3
                         7.5
    % of Imports excluding China in Expenditures




                                                                                                                                         % of Imports from China in Expenditures
                                                                                                                                                                         4.2
                                  7




                                                                                                                                                           4.1
             6.5




                                                                                                                                            4               3.9
                         6




                                                   0            50                          100                         150                                                        0         50                          100   150
                                                                 Bin of Household Income, $000                                                                                                Bin of Household Income, $000



                                                         D: Imports from China,                                                                                                        E: Imports from China,
                                                       Health & Household Products                                                                                                      General Merchandize
                                                                                                                                                            19.5
                         6.8
    % of Imports from China in Expenditures




                                                                                                                                         % of Imports from China in Expenditures
                                                                                                                                                                          19
                                   6.7




                                                                                                                                                          18.5
                     6.6




                                                                                                                                            18
      6.5




                                                                                                                                                            17.5
                         6.4




                                                   0            50                          100                         150                                                        0         50                          100   150
                                                                 Bin of Household Income, $000                                                                                                Bin of Household Income, $000




Notes : These binned scatterplots group Nielsen panelists into 15 bins by household income.
They report the average share of imports in the spending of each bin, computed using the
merged Nielsen-Census sample. Panel A accounts for all imports, while Panel B excludes
imports from China. The other panels measure imports from China only: for all prod-
uct classes together (Panel C), Health and Household products (Panel D), and General
Merchandize (Panel E).
                                                                                                                              16
Table 1: Within-Between Decompositions for Import Shares, Nielsen-Census Sample

                                             All          Imports          Imports
                                           Imports    Excluding China    From China
                                             (1)            (2)              (3)
      All households, %                      11.10          6.95             4.15
      Households earning above $60k, %       11.42          7.30             4.12
      Households earning below $60k, %       10.79          6.62             4.17

      Above minus below, p.p.               +0.63          +0.68             -0.05
       Within IO industries                 +0.38          +0.47             -0.09
         Within product modules             +0.24          +0.38             -0.13

Notes : This table reports the fraction of imports in expenditure on consumer packaged
goods for households with annual earnings above or below $60k, using the merged Nielsen-
Census sample. Imports are proxied by the share of total imports in firm sales, and firms
are weighted by the square-root of Nielsen sales. The "within" components of differences in
import shares are shown for 6-digit IO industries and for Nielsen product modules, according
to equation (3).


the income distribution, from 10.3% at the bottom to 11.6% at the top, compared
with an average of 11.1%. Next, we investigate potential differences across trading
partners. Considering imports from all countries except China in Panel B, we find
that import shares still increase monotonically with income, from 6.3% for the very
poor to 7.6% for the very rich.
     In Panel C, the relationship between the share of imports from China and house-
hold income is less stark, hovering non-monotonically between 3.9% and 4.2%. In
panels D and E, we investigate this relationship by product class. For health and
household products alone, shown in Panel D, the fraction of imports from China falls
with income from 6.8% to 6.4%. For general merchandize in Panel E, import shares
fall from around 19.1% to 17.6%. The overall pattern of non-monotonic import shares
from China stems from compositional differences across product classes (e.g., higher
income groups buy relatively more general merchandize than food).
     Table 1 analyzes differences in import shares arising at different levels of product
aggregation, focusing on the difference between households earning above or below
$60k per year. Column 1 reports that import shares are higher for richer households,
at 11.4% for those earning above $60k versus 10.8% for those earning below. The


                                            17
"pro-rich" difference of 0.63 percentage points (henceforth p.p.) is equal to 5.7% of the
average import share. Using equation (3), we assess whether this difference in import
shares arises within or across the 71 IO industries covered by the Nielsen data and
the 1,165 detailed product modules. This decomposition helps avoid double-counting,
given that the "across" heterogeneity arising from IO industries was accounted for
in Section 3.1. We find that, out of the 0.63p.p. difference in overall import shares
between rich and poor consumers, the majority (0.38p.p.) arises within IO industry
groups. Moreover, this decomposition provides an anatomy of spending on imports:
we find that a substantial part of the difference in import shares (0.24p.p.) arises
within product modules, i.e. at a high level of disaggregation. The results are similar
for imports excluding China (Column 2), while differences are weak for imports from
China regardless of the aggregation level (Column 3).
    Product quality may be a natural mechanism for these relationships between im-
ports and income. Richer consumers may value quality more, and richer countries
may specialize in higher-quality products (e.g., Fajgelbaum et al. (2011)). We pro-
vide support for this mechanism empirically by proxying for quality with detailed
barcode-level prices, reported in Nielsen. We convert prices into comparable units
within product modules, e.g. per ounce of soda rather than per bottle, and split the
distribution of prices within the module into deciles.
    Supplementary Figure S3 shows average import shares across the distribution of
prices. Consistent with quality differentiation, products in the top price deciles of their
modules tend to have more imports from countries other than China, with most of the
effect coming from developed countries (Panels A and B, respectively). Conversely,
imports from China in the Health and Household product class are substantially more
prevalent at the bottom of the price distribution (Panel C).19
    Overall, we find that higher-income households buy more imports, in particu-
lar from countries other than China, consistent with differences in product quality.
But the differences in import shares are relatively small, confirming the finding of a
distributionally neutral expenditure channel.
  19
    This pattern is not present for imports from China within General Merchandize (Panel D),
because differences in spending across consumer groups are weaker in that product class.




                                            18
Figure 3: Import Shares within Motor Vehicles by Household Income, CEX-Ward's
                                     Data

                                                                                                                  B: Import Shares and Consumer Base
                                                     A: Main results
                                                                                                                         across Vehicle Brands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MIN         AUD




                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SCI          JAG   VOV         LEX   SAA         LAN
                                             Imported, Total                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POR

                                                                                                                                                                                                               MAZ
                                             Canada and Mexico                                                                                                                                                                                                    BMW
                    50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    INF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MRB
                                             Outside NAFTA                                                                                                            SUZ                                                        VOK




                                                                                                                                             80
    Imports as % of Purchased Vehicles




                                                                                                             Imported Vehicles as % of Sales
                                                                                                                                                        MEC     LIN           DOD
                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                    MIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SUB




                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                              KIA
                                                                                                                                                                              CHR

                                                                                                                                                                                                NIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        HYU
                30




                                                                                                                                                                       ISU                                     TOY




                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GMC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACU
                                                                                                                                                                             SAT                                     HON
                                                                                                                                                              PON                         CAD
                                                                                                                                                                              FOR
    20




                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                  BUI




                                                                                                                                                                                                         JEE
                    10




                                                                                                                             0
                                         0          50                   100                150   200                                                   30                           40                 50                                60                                70
                                                               Bin of Household Income, $000                                                                                          % of Rich Households in Brand Sales




Notes : Panel A splits motor vehicle purchases in the CEX into 11 bins by the owner's
household income. Each vehicle in the data is assigned a probability of being imported,
overall or specifically from NAFTA, based on the average import share of the car brand in
the Ward's data. In Panel B, each circle corresponds to a vehicle brand (see Supplementary
Table S3 for the brand codes). The size of each circle indicates the number of purchases in
the CEX data; brands that account for less than 100 purchases are not shown. The x-axis
shows the fraction of vehicle owners with income above $60k, while the y-axis reports the
average import share of the brand.


3.3                                      Import Shares within Motor Vehicles
The motor vehicles industry differs substantially from consumer packaged goods, with
a much higher import share overall and a different composition of origin countries (see
Supplementary Table S1). Studying motor vehicles thus provides complementary ev-
idence on the potential within-industry differences in import shares across the income
distribution. Using the CEX-Ward's and CEX-Census linked datasets, we find that
rich consumers have a slightly higher share of imports for car purchases; the difference
is substantial for specific trade partners.
    In Figure 3 we examine spending shares on vehicles assembled outside of the
United States, leaving aside indirect imports (i.e., imported parts of domestically
produced vehicles), using the CEX-Ward's dataset. Panel A shows that import shares
are nearly flat, around 44%, for most of the income distribution. Import shares
increase at the top, reaching 50.8% for those earning over $150k.
    The overall pattern hides substantial heterogeneity by country of origin. Vehicles

                                                                                                        19
assembled in Canada and Mexico account for 27% of total purchases at the bottom of
the income distribution, compared with 21% at the top. In contrast, there is a steep
positive relationship for vehicles assembled in foreign countries outside NAFTA--
mostly in developed countries. Imports shares excluding NAFTA double across the
income distribution: from around 15% at the bottom to 30% at the top.
    Panel B of Figure 3 unpacks these findings by showing which brands drive the
effect. We plot the import share of a brand against the fraction of its sales to house-
holds with annual earnings above $60k. Two clusters of brands become apparent.
High-end foreign brands tend to sell to high-income households, e.g., Lexus, Porsche,
and Mercedes-Benz. Brands selling to less affluent consumers are almost all domestic
(e.g., Chevrolet, Buick, and Dodge), although their import shares are still positive
due to assembly in Mexico and Canada. These within-industry patterns are again
consistent with the idea of quality specialization across countries.
    Supplementary Figure S4 provides additional decompositions for the overall im-
port shares. It shows that differences in import spending exist for cars but are very
small for light trucks. The results are robust to considering vehicles purchased new
or used separately.
    Finally, since the CEX-Ward's data do not account for imported intermediate in-
puts, we use the linked CEX-Census sample to address this limitation. We find that
accounting for indirect imports slightly mutes the differences in import shares across
income groups. Because data confidentiality does not allow us to show individual
firms, as in Figure 3, we report the results via regressions at the firm (i.e., car man-
ufacturer) level. We first regress a firm's direct import share on the average income
percentile of households purchasing its cars, weighting by the number of cars sold.
We then compare the coefficient to a similar regression with the total import share as
the outcome. Table 2 reports the results, separately for new and used cars. In both
cases, the coefficient for total imports is slightly smaller, and the difference is not
statistically significant. These results indicate that rich consumers spend slightly less
on indirect import of vehicles (as they buy fewer domestic models) but this offsetting
effect is very small, which confirms our baseline estimates for direct imports.
    Taking stock, several lessons can be drawn from the patterns we found for con-
sumer packaged goods and motor vehicles. There are some differences in import shares
from specific trade patterns across the income distribution, in line with patterns of


                                           20
        Table 2: Household Income and Direct and Indirect Imports of Cars

                                             Imports as % of Car Sales
                                      New Cars                         Used Cars
                            Direct    Direct & Indirect      Direct     Direct & Indirect
                             (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
    Average percentile of    1.955          1.829             2.546           2.389
      household income      (0.538)        (0.495)           (0.474)         (0.414)

    N firms                   20             20                20              20

Notes: This level of observation in this table is a car manufacturer. The dependent variables
in the Ordinary Least Squares regressions are the manufacturer-level shares of imports
of assembled cars ("Direct") or of both assembled cars and imported inputs ("Direct &
Indirect") in the value of car sales. The independent variable is the average percentile of
household income in the CEX sample of car purchases, computed separately for new cars
in Columns 1 and 2 and used cars in Columns 3 and 4. Each regression is weighted by the
number of purchases recorded in the CEX. The sample size is rounded to the nearest 10 to
protect confidentiality. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.


quality specialization. These partner-specific differences tend to offset each other:
between China and developed countries for consumer packaged goods, and between
NAFTA and developed countries for motor vehicles. When imports from all trade
partners are considered together, import shares are slightly higher for high-income
consumers within the industries we studied. Combining this result with our finding of
no heterogeneity in import shares at the level of detailed industries in Section 3.1, we
conclude that the distributional effects through the expenditure channel are modest
and, if anything, favor higher-income households.


3.4    Extensions
We conclude this section by reporting additional results documenting the heterogene-
ity in import shares across other socio-demographic groups, notably education groups,
as well as its evolution over a long time period. We find weak differences in import
shares to be a very robust pattern.

Import shares across education groups. We report the import shares for house-
holds with and without a college degree using all three datasets in Supplementary

                                             21
Table S4. Differences are small: import shares measured at the industry level are
0.6p.p. (i.e., 5.1% of the average import share) lower for college-educated consumers,
compared to those without a college degree. Within-industry differences have the
opposite sign. Within consumer packaged goods, the import share is 0.6p.p. larger
for college-educated households (or 5.4% of the average).20 The difference is larger
for motor vehicles, where the import share is 5.1p.p. higher for college graduates (or
11.4% of the average).
    The offsetting pattern of across- and within-industry differences applies to spe-
cific trade partners as well. Although college graduates purchase relatively more
from industries with higher shares of imports from China, they spend less on Chi-
nese imports within consumer packaged goods. Conversely, they purchase less from
industries with imports from developed economies but more on imports from those
countries for consumer packaged goods and especially for motor vehicles.

Import shares for other socio-demographic groups. Using industry-level data,
Supplementary Figure S5 shows that the fraction of spending on imports is also sim-
ilar across other socio-demographic groups. We consider more detailed education
groups, age groups, households who live in the four Census regions, in the states that
voted for Hillary Clinton vs. Donald Trump in the 2016 election, households who are
homeowners or not, or who differ by household size.

Stability of import share differences over time. Supplementary Figure S6
shows the stability of the patterns across income and education groups over time,
using available panel data on 71 more aggregated industries. Each year between 2002
and 2015, the spending shares on imports were very similar for these groups.


4      Comparison with Parametric Approaches
In this section, we reconcile our results with the very strong pro-poor distributional
effects from trade found in the study of the expenditure channel by Fajgelbaum
and Khandelwal (2016, henceforth FK). After reviewing the patterns FK obtained,
  20
     Supplementary Table S5 shows that this difference likely arises from direct, rather than indirect,
imports. We do not classify products into final and intermediate but instead consider the main
activity of the firm that registered the barcode. We find that most of the difference in import shares
across education groups, both overall and for Chinese imports in health and household products,
arises from imports registered by wholesalers, which are likely imports of final products.


                                                  22
we present a theoretical argument explaining that the AIDS demand system they
employ tends to mechanically generate such a pro-poor expenditure channel. We then
estimate an alternative demand system that does not have this mechanical feature
and find that the expenditure channel is small, consistent with the evidence presented
earlier. We leave various details to Appendix B.
    FK use widely available bilateral trade data for 40 countries and 35 industries.
For each country they observe spending shares on imported products on average, but
not at different points of the income distribution. Therefore, they infer these missing
data structurally, by estimating a non-homothetic demand system. Specifically, they
employ the Almost-Ideal Demand System in which each variety, defined by a pair
of industry j and producing country c, is characterized by an income semi-elasticity
parameter jc . They estimate these parameters using a non-homothetic gravity equa-
tion, assuming that all goods are used for final consumption only.
    They find that the gains from trade relative to autarky are larger for low-income
consumers in all countries, and by over an order of magnitude in the United States.
For example, the gains equal 65.6% at the 10th percentile of the U.S. income distri-
bution compared with 2.5% at the 90th; the interquartile range is also large, from
51.2% at the 25th percentile to 14.1% at the 75th. In contrast, we found that the ex-
penditure channel of trade is distributionally neutral, to a first order. What explains
these differences?
    To understand the source of the discrepancy with our results, it is instructive
to first examine the import spending shares inferred by the AIDS demand system
with the parameters estimated by FK. In their model, like in our Section 2.1, import
shares are directly informative about the effects of small shocks.21 We replicate their
estimates and extract the imputed spending shares for the U.S., which are shown in
Panel A of Figure 4. The figure indicates strong heterogeneity across income groups,
e.g. at 21.9% for the 25th percentile and only 8.1% at the 75th.
    Applying the within-between decomposition of equation (3), Panel A further shows
that most of the imputed differences in import shares across the income distribution
occur within industries. That is, according to AIDS, the poor tend to buy much more
foreign varieties when they purchase from the same industry as the rich. In contrast,
only around one tenth of the overall difference in imports shares (comparing the 25th
  21
   We have verified that our first-order approximation is accurate for measuring the gains from a
5% reduction in foreign tariffs, reported in Section V.E of FK.


                                               23
                                       Figure 4: U.S. Import Shares by Income Percentile
                                            Estimated with Parametric Approaches

  A: Imports Shares across Income Groups: AIDS                                                                                                             B: Within-Industry Differences in
 Estimated by Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016)                                                                                                            Import Shares: NNHCES vs. AIDS




                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                            Predicted share                                                                                                                         AIDS
                                                                            Across-industry component                                                                                                               NNHCES
                 25




                                                                            Across goods and services




                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                        Within-industry component, p.p.
    Imports as % of Expenditure
                  15        20




                                                                                                                                       10
       10




                                                                                                                        5
                 5




                                                                                                                                       0
                 0




                                  .1   .3                  .5                   .7                      .9                                                .1         .3                       .5               .7        .9
                                            Percentile of consumer income                                                                                                      Percentile of consumer income




                                                                   C: Import Share Heterogeneity
                                                               under Alternative Estimation Strategies

                                                                  AIDS Baseline




                                                                    AIDS + CEX




                                                              NNHCES Baseline




                                                                NNHCES + CEX



                                                                                  0                       5                      10                                       15
                                                                                                  Difference between 25th and 75th pctile, p.p.

                                                                                          By goods/services:                              Across                 Within




Notes : This figure reports statistics on import shares across the U.S. income distribution,
using international trade data to estimate income elasticities in two demand systems: AIDS
(with parameters from Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016, FK)) and NNHCES. Panel A
shows the import shares predicted by AIDS. It also decomposes them into different aggre-
gation levels via equation (3), but adding back the import share of the representative agent
(defined as in FK). Panel B compares the within-industry component of the difference in
import shares relative to the representative agent between the two demand systems. Panel
C reports the predicted gap in import shares between the 75th and 25th income percentiles
for different estimation methods, as well as its component arising between goods and ser-
vices. While bars 1 and 3 use the baseline versions of AIDS and NNHCES, respectively,
bars 2 and 4 use constrained estimation aimed to match the income elasticity of goods with
the CEX estimates.


                                                                                                24
and 75th percentiles) arises across industries, i.e. because richer households buy more
from industries with lower average import shares, such as service industries.22
    Large within-industry heterogeneity in import shares is found even in the indus-
tries most comparable to those for which we presented evidence from micro data.
Supplementary Figure S7 shows the imports shares across the income distribution
within food and motor vehicles (Panels A and B), according to the imputation of FK.
For food, the demand system imputes the spending share on imports to be 44.7% at
the 25th percentile and only 14.0% at the 75th, while we found essentially no het-
erogeneity using the Nielsen-Census data. Similarly, for motor vehicles the predicted
import shares are 46.5% at the 25th percentile and 34.0% at the 75th, while our
CEX-Ward's data indicate the opposite pattern: weakly higher shares of imported
cars for richer households. There is thus a striking contrast between the import shares
imputed by AIDS and our data.
    This large within-industry heterogeneity in import shares proves to be an intrinsic
feature of the AIDS demand system used by FK, which mechanically results in a large
pro-poor expenditure channel. We first present the theoretical mechanism at play
and then show that the expenditure channel becomes close to distributionally neutral
when estimating an alternative demand system immune to this issue. Specifically,
the strong pro-poor expenditure channel in FK stems from the conjunction of three
features: constant income semi-elasticities imposed by AIDS, home bias, and income-
inelastic tradables.
    Identical AIDS preferences across countries, as assumed by FK, imply that for
any variety jc the income semi-elasticity of expenditure shares sn     jc is the same in
                                                            sn (pn ,w)
                                                                jc
all purchasing countries n (and for all consumers):               log w
                                                                         jc , where w is con-
sumer income and pn is the price vector in n. As an immediate consequence, the
income elasticity of the expenditure share is closer to zero when the share is higher:
 log sn
      jc (pn ,w )      
     log w
                  = sn (pjc    . This relationship is important because it interacts with home
                     jc n ,w )
bias: spending shares on a given variety are generally larger in the country where it
is produced. As a result, spending shares are always more income-sensitive abroad
than at home. This could in principle make them either more income-elastic or
more income-inelastic, depending on the sign of jc . However, tradables tend to be
income-inelastic, and thus foreign tradables are particularly income-inelastic under
  22
    The panel also shows that this across-industry component primarily results from the fact that
the rich purchase relatively more services, which are less tradable than goods.


                                               25
AIDS. This mechanically makes the share of imports in spending on tradables quickly
decline with income.23
    Next, we assess the quantitative importance of this mechanical property of AIDS
and whether it can explain the discrepancy with our Section 3 results. Using the data
from FK, we estimate an alternative demand system which is not affected by the issue
described above: nested non-homothetic CES (NNHCES), introduced in Appendix
B.2 building on Comin et al. (2021). This demand system is as flexible as AIDS in
having a free Engel curve parameter per variety, which we label jc . However, the
income elasticity is not mechanically linked to the spending share: if two country-
specific varieties in the same industry have the same value of , then in every country
they are guaranteed to have equal income elasticities. This demand system therefore
allows for, but does not mechanically generate, within-industry differences in import
shares.24 We estimate the NNHCES parameters by combining a gravity approach
similar to that of FK with the non-homothetic CES estimation procedure of Comin
et al. (2021), as described in the Appendix. We then compute the import shares by
consumer income for the U.S. and apply the within-between decomposition.
    In line with the theoretical argument above, Panel B of Figure 4 shows that within-
industry differences in import shares across the U.S. income distribution, which are
large with AIDS, become modest with NNHCES. Specifically, the difference between
the 25th and 75th percentiles is 12.1p.p. for AIDS but nine times smaller, at 1.35p.p.,
with NNHCES. These results illustrate how AIDS mechanically generates large differ-
ences in import shares, which are significantly attenuated with an alternative demand
system like NNHCES.
    To assess whether the expenditure channel is close to distributionally neutral with
NNHCES, we must also take into account the across-industry differences in import
shares implied by that demand system. Using international trade data to estimate
the income elasticity of goods relative to services, which drives the across-industry
component, turns out to be challenging, since services are largely non-traded. In
the baseline estimates of FK, for example, goods are strongly income-inelastic (see
Panel C of our Supplementary Figure S7 for U.S. consumers), much more so than
  23
     In Appendix B.2, we provide formal derivations for this argument. In particular, we show
that there is no offsetting pattern within income-elastic services, because spending shares of foreign
services cannot fall below zero.
  24
     More generally, we show that, among varieties in the same industry, higher jc means higher
income elasticity in every country; see equation (23) in the Appendix.


                                                 26
implied by the observed differences in expenditure shares on goods across the income
distribution in the CEX (Supplementary Figure S1). This point was noted by FK
(Section V.D), who then re-estimate their AIDS demand system under the constraint
that the average income elasticity for goods should be consistent with the expenditure
patterns in the CEX for the U.S.
    Emulating the approach taken by FK, we re-estimate NNHCES with a constraint
ensuring that the income elasticity of the goods sector for the U.S. matches the corre-
sponding elasticity in the CEX. This approach, described in detail in the Appendix,
keeps the parameters driving the within-industry component identical to Panel B of
Figure 4 by design, but disciplines the across component with the CEX.
    Panel C of Figure 4 reports the findings with this approach, in comparison to the
ones discussed above. The first bar replicates the baseline results of FK using AIDS,
which imply a 13.8p.p. higher import share at the 25th percentile of the U.S. income
distribution compared to the 75th. The gap shrinks to 9.5p.p. with FK's estimation
of AIDS constrained by the CEX (second bar): although the component across goods
and services becomes much smaller, the overall difference in import shares remains
large due to the within component inherent to AIDS. The third and fourth bars
present the results for NNHCES. The across component is sizable in the baseline
(row three), but falls when estimation is constrained by the CEX in row four. The
overall difference in import shares between the 25th and 75th percentiles becomes
only 1.3p.p. there.
    These results show that the structural approach of FK can be reconciled with
direct measurement. When using a demand system like NNHCES, which does not
inherit the mechanical features of the AIDS demand system of FK, the expenditure
channel of trade turns out to be small. More broadly, this analysis shows that the
choice of the demand system can have a large quantitative impact on the estimated
expenditure channel, highlighting the value of a direct measurement approach.25
  25
      We proposed a simple refinement for the structural approach of FK, using NNHCES instead
of AIDS to avoid a mechanical tendency to find a pro-poor expenditure channel. It seems fruitful
to investigate other potential refinements in future work, such as: (i) using expenditure microdata
from multiple countries for estimation; (ii) allowing for heterogeneous preferences across countries;
(iii) introducing additional gravity controls to mitigate the limitation that prices are not observed;
and (iv) deriving standard errors to assess how precise estimates of the imputed import shares are,
especially for extreme (high or low) income levels.




                                                 27
5      The Distributional Effects of Trade Shocks in
       General Equilibrium
In this section, we first characterize theoretically the distributional effects of coun-
terfactual trade shocks in general equilibrium (with details and proofs relegated to
Appendix C). We then calibrate the relevant elasticity parameters, document the ex-
posure patterns governing the characterization, and perform counterfactual analysis.


5.1     An Exposure-Based Characterization of Changes in Fac-
        tor Prices
We consider a standard setting for the product market, labor market, and the do-
mestic production function. Products  = (j, c) are defined as pairs of industry
j = 1, . . . , J and country of origin c, as in multi-sector versions of Armington (1969).
Consumer preferences across industries are unrestricted; preferences over varieties
within each industry are CES, with the same parameters for both final and interme-
diate demand. These preferences imply industry-level gravity, with trade elasticities
denoted j - 1.26
    In the labor market, workers are exogenously grouped into types i = 1, . . . , I with
wages wi per efficiency unit. Workers of the same type supply labor inelastically
and can be endowed with different efficiency units, capturing within-group income
inequality.27 Type-i workers are freely mobile within a set of industries Ji , but are
not employed outside it. This formulation allows for a scenario with no mobility
across industries (i.e., i are industry groups and Ji = {i}), as well as a scenario in
which i corresponds to education groups freely mobile across all domestic industries,
as in our calibrations below.28
  26
     For tractability, we follow, e.g., Caron et al. (2014) in allowing for non-homothetic utility across
industries but not within. This specification is in line with our finding that import spending shares
within industries do not vary systematically across income groups, and it delivers the standard
proportionality assumption embedded in country-specific IO tables. Non-homothetic demand within
industries, for example via NNHCES, can be accommodated and would yield a characterization
similar to Proposition 2 below.
  27
     The theory allows for unrestricted factor types, such as different types of workers or capital
investments. Empirically, we will focus on worker groups in the main analysis and consider capital
in a robustness check.
  28
     This approach can be generalized to a finite elasticity of labor supply in each industry via a Roy
model; see Appendix A.4 in our working paper (Borusyak and Jaravel 2018) and Galle et al. (2020).


                                                   28
    Domestic production in industry j combines primary factors Lj i with compos-
             j
ite inputs Q from all industries . We assume a Cobb-Douglas production func-
                                                                                j 1-j
tion in terms of value added and intermediate inputs, QjH = FjV A Lj
                                                                   1 , . . . , LI     ·
           j
J=1 Qj , with            j = j , but allow for any homothetic value-added aggregator
FjV A . The Cobb-Douglas assumption for intermediate inputs is standard (e.g. Ace-
moglu et al. 2012; Caliendo and Parro 2015) and consistent with the stability of input
shares in the U.S. IO table over time.
    We consider how domestic factor prices adjust in general equilibrium (GE) fol-
lowing a bilateral reduction in trade costs between Home and some country (or set of
countries) c in all industries, d log  < 0. Since our detailed data only cover the U.S.,
we rule out changes in relative factor prices abroad by imposing:

Assumption 4 (Foreign numeraire). For every industry and foreign country, exports
to Home are a small fraction of sales, and imports from Home are a small fraction
of industry absorption.

    Assumption 4 implies that relative product demand and price indices abroad do
not significantly move after the trade shock with Home. Under Assumption 4, we
can disregard both that the Home economy may be embedded into GVCs (as with
our Assumption 3) and that relative foreign factor prices (across or within countries)
may change after the shock. We thus take all foreign prices as the single numeraire.29
    Finally, we allow for a trade imbalance in the domestic economy assuming, as in
Costinot and Rodr´  iguez-Clare (2015), that it is fixed in proportion to Home's GDP.
Specifically, we assume that every consumer spends the same exogenous multiple of
their income.
    To state our main result, we introduce some notation. On the import side, we
define IPjc as the share of imports from c in domestic absorption of j at the initial
equilibrium (with IPj for the total import penetration); IP jc is the share of imports in
industry absorption both directly and indirectly via IO linkages. The share of inputs
imported from c, both directly and indirectly, in the domestic cost structure is denoted
  29
    In the quantitative analysis, we focus on a uniform change in trade costs with all countries,
where the assumption of fixed relative factor prices outside Home appears plausible. Indeed, the
U.S. economy accounts for a small share of sales and absorption in the rest of the world. While the
U.S. accounts for a substantial fraction of world GDP, exports from the U.S. constitute only 3.9%
of absorption in other countries according to the World Development Indicators database for 2007.
Exports to the U.S. similarly account for only 5.5% of foreign production.


                                                29
   Int
IP jc , as in Section 2.1. On the export side, ExShjc denotes the share of exports to
country c in j 's domestic output. DomSalesShj denotes the share of domestic sales
(both final and intermediate) in j 's total sales. The share of final domestic customers
in total sales is DF Sj , and µx|j are the shares of sales to consumers with income x
in j 's final sales. We characterize domestic final demand of consumers with income x
by the income elasticity xj and the own- and cross-price elasticities xjk measuring
the response of j 's expenditure share to industry k 's price index change. Then, we
have (see Appendix C.1 for the details and proof):

Proposition 2. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 4 hold. Then after a uniform reduction
in bilateral trade costs with country c, changes in wages w = (w1 , . . . , wI ) satisfy
                              d log w                ~                  ~
                                      =              G           ·     ED          .                        (4)
                              -d log 
                                            inverse labor demand labor demand
                                               elasticity matrix    response

Here  is a J × 1 vector of direct industry exposure to the shock via several channels:
                                                                     Int
j = (j - 1) ExShjc - IPjc · DomSalesShj + IP jc · (ExShj + IPj · DomSalesShj )
                  export effect   import competition effect                     intermediate input effect
                                                          J
      + DF Sj ·        µx|j (xj - 1) ImpShx
                                          c -                  xjk IP kc - ImpShx
                                                                                c                 .         (5)
                   x                                     k=1
                                  income effect
                                                                     substitution effects

                                 ~ is such that D
The "IO adjustment" J × J matrix D              ~                              is the sum of direct industry
                                                                           j
j exposure j and indirect exposure in industries downstream from j . The "payroll
composition" I × J matrix E captures the shares of industries j in type i payroll, such
that E D~  measures the payroll-weighted average shock exposure by labor type. Finally,
G~ is the (negative of the) I × I inverse matrix of macro labor demand elasticities with
respect to w, given by (47) in the Appendix.

    The intuition behind equation (4) is that, with fixed labor supply, trade shocks
affect wages via shifts in labor demand. Shifts in labor demand arise from product
demand in industries which employ each type of labor. The novel characterization
in equation (5) shows that the product demand response to a small shock can be
decomposed into several channels, each driven by observable exposure measures scaled
by corresponding elasticities, which we discuss in turn.30
 30
      Proposition 2 immediately extends to shocks that are not uniform across industries or affect

                                                     30
    The first two terms in (5) show the export and import competition effects. As
export trade costs fall, export demand grows according to the trade elasticity j - 1,
contributing to industry labor demand growth in proportion to the export share
ExShjc . Similarly, falling import trade costs lower import prices, which drives the
industry price index down in proportion to import penetration IPjc . This leads to
reallocation of spending between domestic and foreign varieties within each industry.
Because this effect only influences domestic consumption, it is scaled by the domestic
share of industry sales, DomSalesShj .31
    The third term relates to imported intermediate inputs. Access to cheaper inter-
mediate inputs makes domestic varieties more competitive, helping them gain market
shares both abroad at at home. Industries are more exposed to this channel when
                                                  Int
they have a higher share of imported inputs IP jc in production costs.
    The final terms are the income and substitution effects. Partial equilibrium welfare
gains, driven by the import share ImpShx  c , lead to higher spending on income-elastic
industries (those with xj > 1). Moreover, demand for a domestic industry falls if
substitute industries k (those with xjk > 0) become relatively cheaper, due to their
above-average import share, and if complement industries have below-average import
shares. Both effects only influence domestic final sales, as combining consumers of
different income, hence the scaling by their shares in total sales.
    Proposition 2 provides a transparent way of connecting theory to data and guides
our empirical analysis, which proceeds in five steps. First, we measure each statistic of
direct industry exposure to trade in (5). Second, we adjust these statistics for input-
output linkages (via the D  ~ matrix), for example measuring the share of industry
output that is exported to c not only directly but also in downstream industries.
Third, we obtain labor demand shifts for each group by averaging industry exposure
with using the fractions of different industries in the group's payroll (captured by
the E matrix). Fourth, we translate these labor demand shifts into the general
equilibrium wage changes by applying the G   ~ matrix. Finally, we measure the welfare

only importing or only exporting costs. We present the benchmark case for notational brevity; see
Appendix S.2.7 for the general case.
  31
     Unlike traditional factor content statistics, the measure of exposure to import competition in
Proposition 2 is valid in the presence of international specialization. Consider an industry, such as
toys, in which the U.S. has largely stopped producing. Then its factor intensity is largely irrelevant
for factor domestic demand and prices. Accordingly, it does not have a sizable effect on our exposure
measure, while it can have large effects on the factor content of trade (e.g. Wood 1995).



                                                 31
effects, d log W , accounting for changes in both wages and cost-of-living in general
equilibrium, via equation (2).
    Given d log W , we analyze the distributional effects of the shock, i.e. the hetero-
geneity in d log W . We decompose it into the "vertical" and "horizontal" components,
i.e. the unequal effects across and within groups of initial earnings, X , using a vari-
ance decomposition:

            Var [d log W ] = Var [E [d log W | X ]] +               E [Var [d log W | X ]]             .   (6)
                             "vertical" distributional effects   "horizontal" distributional effects

We further analyze the effects of the trade shock on measures of inequality, which,
at the first order, arise from the vertical component only. For instance, the change
in the standard deviation of log-earnings is non-zero only if the distributional effects
are correlated with the initial income:32

       SD (log X + d log W ) - SD (log X )  Corr [d log W , log X ] · SD (d log W ) .                      (7)

    We apply these results in two calibrations. To assess both vertical and horizontal
distributional effects, we first consider a setting with no mobility of workers across
industries. In this calibration, worker types i are defined by industries, but the
results would be identical if each worker was a distinct type; we therefore refer to
this setting as the "worker-level calibration." Second, to shed more light on the
distributional effects that may arise across groups of ex-ante similar workers, we
consider a calibration at the level of two education groups, assuming perfect mobility
of each group of workers across industries.


5.2       From Theory to Data
We now take Proposition 2 to the data, combining exposure statistics with corre-
sponding elasticities.
   To measure worker exposure to trade, we augment our industry-level data from
Section 2.2 (on trade shares, IO linkages, etc.) with the worker composition of each
industry. We rely on the 2007 American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the
payroll shares corresponding to college and non-college workers, as well as deciles of
earnings; see Appendix S.2.4 on the data construction.
  32
     This follows because d log W has only a second-order effect on Var [d log X + d log W ], unless
d log W and log X are correlated. See Appendix C.3 for the proof.


                                                    32
    To characterize the income effects, we estimate income elasticities for each industry
using CEX data, as described in Appendix S.2.5. We ignore the possibility that they
vary with income, setting xj  j .
    We calibrate substitution elasticities by using prevalent values from the literature
and considering robustness to a range of other values.33 We set the baseline elasticity
of substitution between domestic and foreign varieties j to 3.5 in all industries, which
is equivalent to a trade elasticity of j - 1 = 2.5. To discipline the across-industry
substitution effects, we employ the nested non-homothetic CES demand system . We
allow for two tiers: goods versus services, and IO industries within goods and services
(see equation (49) in the Appendix). We set the elasticity of substitution between
goods and services to  = 0.6, indicating complementarity in consumption, and the
elasticity of substitution across industries within each sector r  {goods, services} to
r = 2. A calibrated NNHCES demand system implies jxk (see equation (50)).
                                                       ~ matrix. While in general it may
    Proposition 2 finally requires us to calibrate the G
depend on the patterns of local labor substitution in each industry (through the FjV A
functions), Appendix C.2 shows how it simplifies in the two calibrations we consider.
Specifically, absent labor mobility, within-industry substitution plays no role. With
free labor mobility but only two labor types, as in our analysis across education
                                                                        ~ matrix via one
groups, labor substitution elasticities of various industries enter the G
composite value: the macro elasticity of labor substitution, macro . We follow Burstein
and Vogel (2017), Cravino and Sotelo (2019), and Caron et al. (2020) by calibrating
the macro elasticity directly rather than aggregating it from micro estimates. For the
baseline calibration we use an estimate of 1.41 obtained by Katz and Murphy (1992).


5.3     Distributional Effects: A Worker-Level Calibration
We start with the worker-level calibration. Figure 5 depicts the measures of worker
exposure to trade by decile of the income distribution, showing that exposure varies
primarily within deciles rather than across. Using Proposition 2, we present the five
components of worker exposure, E D   ~  , multiplying these terms by the 10% change
in trade costs. The results are directly informative about the drivers of the labor
demand response to trade liberalizations for different workers. For each income decile,
  33
    Appendix S.2.6 discusses the literature from which we borrow these elasticities, as well as their
ranges that we consider in robustness checks.


                                                 33
                                      Figure 5: Worker-Level Exposure to the Labor Market Effects
                                             of Trade Shocks across the Income Distribution

                                              A: Exports                                                                                B: Import competition




                                                                                                              0
                 5            4




                                                                                                                           -1
    Labor demand change, p.p.




                                                                                                 Labor demand change, p.p.
                   3




                                                                                                              -2
           2




                                                                                                   -3
                 1




                                                                                                              -4
                 0




                                  1   2   3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10                                       1   2     3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10
                                                  Decile of earnings                                                                              Decile of earnings

                                                   Mean                90/10                                                                       Mean                90/10



                                          C: "Net exports"                                                                               D: Imported inputs
                                                                                                              1.5
                 3          2
    Labor demand change, p.p.




                                                                                                 Labor demand change, p.p.
                                                                                                                    1
               1




                                                                                                    .5
    0            -1




                                                                                                              0




                                  1   2   3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10                                       1   2     3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10
                                                  Decile of earnings                                                                              Decile of earnings

                                                   Mean                90/10                                                                       Mean                90/10



                                          E: Income effects                                                                             F: Substitution effects
                 .6




                                                                                                              .6           .4
                            .4
    Labor demand change, p.p.




                                                                                                 Labor demand change, p.p.
                                                                                                                 .2
               .2




                                                                                                        0
    0




                                                                                                              -.2
                 -.2




                                                                                                              -.4




                                  1   2   3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10                                       1   2     3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10
                                                  Decile of earnings                                                                              Decile of earnings

                                                   Mean                90/10                                                                       Mean                90/10




Notes : This figure groups workers from the ACS data by decile of earnings and plots the
channels of the labor demand response following a uniform 10% fall in trade costs. Panels
A­B and D­F correspond to the five components of E D  ~  · 10% in Proposition 2, while Panel
C shows the sum of exposures to exports and import competition. Each panel reports the
average, the 10th percentile, and the 90th percentile across workers in each bin.


                                                                                            34
we report average worker exposure along with the 10th and 90th percentiles of the
worker-level exposure distribution. The within-decile variation arises from different
industries employing workers from the same income decile.
    Panel A shows changes in labor demand resulting from the export channel after
a 10% fall in trade costs. The increase in labor demand is larger for higher-income
workers, ranging from about +1.2% for the average worker in the first decile to about
+2.5% on average within the top decile. The change in labor demand varies sub-
stantially more across workers within deciles, with 90-10 gaps between 3.6p.p. and
5.1p.p.. Panel B reports the changes in labor demand from the import competition
channel: the fall in labor demand is more pronounced for higher-income workers, with
a change of about -1.8% in the top decile compared with -0.9% in the bottom decile.
Heterogeneity in the labor demand effects of import competition is large within each
decile, with 90-10 gaps of 1.9 to 4.4p.p.34 On net, increases in labor demand from ex-
posure to both export opportunities and import competition, reported in Panel C, are
stronger for richer workers.This "net exports" composite channel ranges from about
0.3% on average in the bottom decile to 0.8% in the top decile, while the variation
within each decile is substantial, with 90-10 gaps over 1.5p.p.
    Next, Panel D shows that the increase in labor demand from the imported inputs
channel is also largest in the top decile relative to the bottom (at 0.6% vs 0.3%),
again with large heterogeneity within deciles shown by the 90-10 gaps of 0.7-1.5p.p.
Panel E reports changes in labor demand from income effects, which are relatively flat
across deciles and close to zero on average, but vary substantially within each decile,
with 90-10 gaps of 0.2-0.5p.p. Similarly, Panel F shows that changes in labor demand
from substitution effects are essentially flat across the distribution, with 90-10 gaps
of 0.7-0.9p.p.35
    Following Proposition 2, Panel A of Figure 6 reports the overall change in labor
  34
     The finding that high-earning workers are on average more exposed to import competition
contrasts with the traditional two-sector, two-factor formulation of the Heckscher-Ohlin model, in
which low-paid workers are more exposed to import competition and lose from trade. Instead, our
results highlight the importance of trade costs to understand the distributional effects of trade:
high-earning workers are more likely to be employed in the more tradable manufacturing sector, as
well as in more tradable industries within both manufacturing and services.
  35
     We find that these patterns are driven primarily by the heterogeneity of worker exposure to
export ratios, import penetration, cost shares of intermediate inputs, and income elasticities of their
industries, rather than by IO and other adjustments from Proposition 2. We show this result in
Supplementary Figure S8, which reports "raw" exposure statistics and finds patterns similar to
Figure 5, both within and across income groups.


                                                  35
demand, combining the five channels from Figure 5. Panel A(i) shows that there is
higher growth of labor demand at higher income deciles, from +0.8% at the bottom
to +1.5% at the top. Heterogeneity between workers occurs primarily within rather
across deciles: the spread between the 10th and 90th percentiles is 2­4p.p. To facil-
itate the comparison of magnitudes of the various channels, Panel A(ii) normalizes
the change in the bottom decile to zero. The most important channels explaining the
heterogeneous labor demand change across deciles are the differences in exposure to
net exports and intermediate inputs, which both favor richer workers. Income and
substitution effects do not play a significant role.
    Panel B of Figure 6 reports the distributional effects of the 10% trade shock in
general equilibrium. As with labor demand, heterogeneity in the equivalent variation
is much larger within income deciles than across (Panel B(i)). Within each decile,
the 10-90 gap in welfare effects is over 2 percentage points, while variation across
income deciles is much smaller, from 2.1% in the first decile to 1.8% at the tenth. As
a consequence, only 0.3% of the cross-worker variance is explained by income decile
dummies (using the equation (6) decomposition). Supplementary Figure S9 reports
the share of workers who experience a negative welfare change after the shock. Despite
positive average gains at all income levels, there are 4.4­8.5% of losers in each decile.36
    It is notable that, in contrast to Panel A, the average gains in Panel B are slightly
higher at the bottom of the income distribution. The change in slope when accounting
for the G ~ matrix is explained by the role of the service sector. In Appendix C.2
we show that when labor demand grows, less traded industries, such as services,
experience a larger increase in wages. Since services also have relatively more lower-
income workers, this larger wage response benefits the low-income group more.37
    Next, Panel B(ii) of Figure 6 decomposes welfare changes in GE, relative to the
first decile, into the earnings and expenditure channels. The panel shows that the
  36
     The fraction of losers varies non-monotonically with income. While Panel A of Figure S9 reports
the overall fraction of losers, Panel B shows that they are found especially within goods-producing
industries, in which some industries suffer from import competition.
  37
     Intuitively, the own-wage elasticity of labor demand is higher for more traded industries because
the strongest substitutability in our model is between domestic and foreign varieties within an
industry. When domestic wages grow, prices of domestic varieties increase, inducing shifts in demand.
Both domestic and foreign buyers can substitute away to foreign varieties in manufacturing, but not
so much in services. To the best of our knowledge, this channel has not been analyzed in prior work.
In particular, it is distinct from the "manufacturing-services substitution channel" in Cravino and
Sotelo (2019), which is subsumed in our analysis of substitution effects in Panel F of Figure 5.



                                                 36
                                      Figure 6: Worker-Level Welfare Effects of a 10% Fall in Trade Costs
                                                              by Income Decile
                                                     A: Partial equilibrium labor demand response
                  (i) Across and within income deciles                                                                                       (ii) Decomposition into channels




                                                                                                                      .8
                 4




                                                                                                   Labor demand change, % rel. to decile 1
                              3




                                                                                                                                  .6
    Labor demand change, p.p.
                    2




                                                                                                                    .4
           1




                                                                                                           .2
                 0




                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                             1   2       3           4     5           6       7         8         9        10
                 -1




                                  1     2   3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10                                                                              Decile of earnings
                                                    Decile of earnings
                                                                                                                                                      Total              NX                           Intermediate inputs
                                                     Mean                90/10                                                                                           Income effect                Substitution effect




                                                            B: General equilibrium welfare response
                  (i) Across and within income deciles                                                                                       (ii) Decomposition into channels
                                                                                                                      .1
                 3




                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                   EV, p.p. rel. to decile 1
     Welfare change, p.p.
                   2




                                                                                                              -.1     -.2
    1




                                                                                                                      -.3




                                                                                                                                             1   2       3           4     5           6       7         8         9        10
                 0




                                  1     2   3   4     5           6      7       8   9   10                                                                              Decile of earnings
                                                    Decile of earnings
                                                                                                                                                     Total EV                      Earnings channel
                                                     Mean                90/10                                                                       Price effects of:             Trade costs                     Wages




Notes : For the worker-level calibration of Section 5.3, this figure plots the labor demand
(Panel A) and welfare (Panel B) responses following a uniform 10% fall in trade costs across
and within deciles of worker initial earnings. Welfare changes are defined as the equivalent
variation as a fraction of initial expenditures. For each decile, Panels A(i) and B(i) report
the averages along with 10th and 90th percentiles. Panels A(ii) and B(ii) consider decile
averages, with the bottom decile normalized to zero, and decompose them into different
channels according to Proposition 2 and equation (2).




                                                                                              37
Table 3: Distributional Effects vs. Changes in Inequality (Worker-Level Calibration)
                      A: Unequal effects of the shock across workers

                                             SD       p10      p50    p90
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)
                     Welfare change, p.p.    1.44     0.73   2.30     3.16

                            B: Effects of the shock on inequality

                          SD(log wage)         p10       p50          p90      Gini index
                               (1)             (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)
   Initial income level      0.8230         10,700     32,500        90,000      0.4509
   Counterfactual            0.8225         10,838     33,086        90,517      0.4507
   Change                   ­0.0005         +1.29%     +1.80%        +0.57%      ­0.0002

Notes : Panel A reports statistics of the distribution of welfare changes across workers after
a uniform 10% fall in trade costs in the worker-level calibration of Section 5.3. Panel B
shows how the same shocks affects the income distribution, by reporting statistics for two
income distributions: the one observed in the data and the counterfactual one, in which
the estimated welfare effects is added to each worker's initial wage. Both panels show the
standard deviation and 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles, while Panel B additionally reports
Gini indices.

lower welfare gain for higher-income workers is explained primarily by the earnings
channel. Compared with the first income decile, the fall in prices from lower trade
costs, which affect both direct and indirect imports, benefits richer workers slightly
more because the import share of their consumption baskets is slightly higher, ex-
actly as in Figure 1. Prices also change because domestic wages increase in general
equilibrium; the figure shows that this channel is biased against high-income workers.
    Finally, Table 3 contrasts the unequal distribution of the welfare gains with the
impact of the shock on inequality. Panel A shows that the shock has very hetero-
geneous effects across workers: while the median welfare gain is 2.30%, it is below
0.73% for 10% of workers and over four times larger, above 3.16% for another 10%
of them. The standard deviation of the welfare changes is 1.44p.p. Despite this large
heterogeneity in welfare gains, Panel B shows that the effect of the shock on inequal-
ity is very small. To measure this effect, we add the estimated welfare change to
the initial (nominal) income of each worker and obtain changes in the distribution
of "real wages," e.g. SD (log X + log W ) - SD (log X ). The shock leaves the income


                                             38
distribution essentially unchanged: the Gini index fall by 0.0002 points, while the
standard deviation of (real) log-wages falls by 0.0005. As shown in equation (7) the
standard deviation of real wages can remain unchanged despite large distributional
effects of the shocks, if the magnitude of welfare gains does not covary with the initial
level of income. Thus, we find that the standard deviation of welfare effects is 26
times larger than the change in the standard deviation of the log-income distribution.
    This analysis yields three lessons. First, the distributional effects are primarily
concentrated within income deciles, rather than across. There is little impact of a
fall in trade costs on overall inequality, but there are substantial distributional effects
creating sizable changes in relative wages, as well as winners and losers at all income
levels. This finding is not a mechanical feature of the model but results from the fact
that the welfare effects of trade shocks are only weakly correlated with income. If
specialization patterns had been sufficiently different across income deciles, we could
have found an effect across deciles as large as the effect obtained within deciles.38
Second, the average gains from trade liberalizations are positive for all income deciles.
Third, the expenditure channel remains distributionally neutral even after accounting
changes in domestic wages.


5.4     Distributional Effects across Education Groups
To verify that there is a robust pattern of weak distributional effects across groups
of observably similar workers in general equilibrium, we now study a calibration with
two groups -- those with and without a college degree -- assuming they are freely
mobile across industries. Our focus is therefore on the college wage premium, which
has played an important role in the evolution of U.S. income inequality (e.g. Autor
et al. (2008) and Goldin and Katz (2007)). Figure 7 reports the effects of a 10%
reduction in trade costs in this setting.
    Using Proposition 2, Panel A reports shifts in labor demand and their drivers
across education groups. We find that labor demand grows by more for college grad-
  38
    This first lesson from our analysis echoes the empirical findings of Hummels et al. (2014) who
estimate the effects of exports and offshoring on wages of different groups of workers in a reduced-
form framework. The economic mechanisms they study are different, as our framework does not
incorporate offshoring (although it can be introduced by modeling it as skill-biased import com-
petition, as in our previous working paper (Borusyak and Jaravel 2018)). Yet, they find that the
distributional effects of globalization arise primarily within groups of ex-ante similar workers because
of their heterogeneous exposure (Table 6).


                                                  39
  Figure 7: Welfare Effects of a 10% Fall in Trade Costs across Education Groups

                                  A: Labor demand response                                                                                        B: Welfare response in GE
               1.5




                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                           1.42
                                                                                                                                                3.11   3.23

                                                                                                    1.19
   Labor demand change, p.p.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.71




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.60




                                                                                                                       Welfare change, p.p.
                                                                                                                                                                         1.26
                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                 1.25


                                      0.71

                                                    0.58




                                                                                                                            0
                               0.49                        0.50
      .5




                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                        0.16
                                                                                 0.12
                                                                         0.04
                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2.77   -2.77
               0




                                  NX              Interm.inputs   Inc.effect    Subst.effect       Total labor                                    Wages                 Price effects              Price effects              Total EV
                                                                                                 demand change                                                          of trade costs              of wages

                                             Non-college           College              Total across channels                                             Non-college                    College                   Total across channels




Notes : For the calibration of Section 5.4, this figure plots the partial equilibrium change
in labor demand (Panel A) and the welfare change in GE (Panel B) for workers with and
without a college degree, following a uniform 10% reduction in trade costs. Welfare changes
are defined as the equivalent variation as a fraction of initial expenditures. Each panel
decomposes the effects into several channels according to Proposition 2 and equation (2).


uates, mainly because they are employed in industries with higher "net exports."
Favorable income and substitution effects magnify the difference slightly, while expo-
sure to imported inputs is lower for college graduates, which partially offsets the gap.
In total, labor demand grows by 1.4% for the group of college graduates and 1.2% for
the workers without a college degree in response to the shock.
    Panel B reports welfare changes across education groups in general equilibrium.
We find that both groups benefit from reduced trade costs and the college wage
premium remains almost unchanged. The equivalent variation is 1.7% for college-
educated workers, compared with 1.6% for those without a college degree; the small
difference of 0.11p.p. arises from the earnings channel.
    Taken together, the results of our two calibrations show that the distributional
effects of trade arise when labor mobility is limited, and primarily within groups of
ex-ante similar workers; cross-group differential effects are not found either with or
without labor mobility. These results also illustrate how Proposition 2 can be used to
assess the importance of different mechanisms and different labor market assumptions
in governing the distributional effects of trade shocks.




                                                                                                                  40
5.5     Extensions
We now consider several extensions, allowing for other counterfactual shocks, within-
industry heterogeneity, capital as a separate factor, and other choices of elasticities.

Non-uniform changes in trade costs. First, we consider reductions of trade costs
with specific trading partners, as well as counterfactuals inspired by recent changes
in trade policy and trade costs. Supplementary Figure S10 analyzes a 10% fall in
iceberg costs for imports from China, NAFTA or 34 advanced economies separately,
for the worker-level calibration. Figure S11 investigates the impact of the import
tariffs introduced by the Trump administration in 2018 (on solar panels, washing
machines, steel and aluminum products, and a large set of products from China),
the observed change in U.S. import tariffs in 1992­2007, and the observed change in
transportation and insurance costs in the same period.39 Figure S12 repeats the same
analyses across education groups. The results are similar to the baseline analyses:
the expenditure channel is modest, and substantial distributional effects of trade are
found only within income deciles in the absence of labor mobility.

Within-industry heterogeneity. To assess the potential importance of within-
industry heterogeneity, in Supplementary Table S6 we use the plant-level microdata
from the Census of Manufactures and the Management and Organizational Practices
Survey (see Appendix S.2.8 for data construction). These data allow us to analyze,
at a more granular level, one of the channels from Proposition 2: the difference
in exposure to exports between skill groups, as measured by education groups or
groups of non-production and production workers. We find that more skill-intensive
plants within the same industry tend to export more (in line with Burstein and Vogel
(2017)). However, this within component is small relative to differences arising across
manufacturing industries, which we have analyzed previously.

Relative factor demand for capital and labor. Supplementary Figure S13 doc-
uments changes in factor demand for capital vs. labor after a fall in trade costs,
quantifying all channels from Proposition 2: exposure to net exports, intermediate
inputs, income, and substitution effects. We find that relative factor demand remains
similar after a uniform fall in trade costs.
  39
    Appendix S.2.7 describes the data sources and explains how to apply Proposition 2 to shocks
which are not uniform across industries.


                                              41
Robustness to choice of elasticities. Supplementary Figure S14 shows that the
welfare effects of the uniform 10% in both our calibrations remain similar when we
vary the trade elasticity  - 1, substitution elasticities in demand ( and ) or the
labor substitution elasticity macro within the ranges used in the literature. Since
exposure to trade is similar across worker groups, elasticities do not play a decisive
role.


6    Conclusion
This paper has presented new evidence on the distributional effects of trade in the
United States. Using new linked datasets, we found that import shares are flat across
the income distribution, implying ­ contrary to a still widely held view ­ that the
gains from lower trade costs via the expenditure channel are distributionally neutral.
In addition, we accounted for changes in both prices and wages in a unified general
equilibrium framework and found that the distributional effects of trade are mostly
"horizontal" (within income groups) rather than "vertical" (across groups). Thus,
our findings run against a popular narrative that "trade wars are class wars" (Klein
and Pettis 2020).
    The approach we took to investigate the distributional effects of trade in the
United States could serve as a blueprint to investigate the expenditure and earnings
channels of shocks in other contexts, including other major changes in trade policy
(e.g., Brexit), but also changes in technology or immigration. Indeed, the effect of
technology and migration shocks on price indices and wages across households groups
can be studied using the unified exposure approach we applied to trade shocks. The
framework could also be extended to analyze the impacts of shocks on regional in-
equality, provided that suitable data are available to measure exposure at the regional
level. These extensions constitute promising avenues for research and policy design.


References
Acemoglu, D., D. H. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and B. Price. 2016. "Import
  Competition and the Great U.S . Employment Sag of the 2000s." Journal of Labor
  Economics 34:S141­S198.


                                          42
Acemoglu, D., V. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi. 2012. "The Network
  Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations." Econometrica 80:1977­2016.
Ad~ao, R., P. Carrillo, A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and D. Pomeranz. 2020. "Interna-
  tional Trade and Earnings Inequality: A New Factor Content Approach." Mimeo.
Amiti, M., M. Dai, R. C. Feenstra, and J. Romalis. 2020. "How Did China' s WTO
  Entry Affect U.S. Prices?" Journal of International Economics 126.
Amiti, M., O. Itskhoki, and J. Konings. 2014. "Imports, Exports, and Exchange Rate
  Disconnect." American Economic Review 104:1942­1978.
Amiti, M., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein. 2019. "The Impact of the 2018 Trade
  War on U.S. Prices and Welfare." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33:187­210.
Armington, P. S. 1969. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place
  of Production." IMF Staff Papers 16:159­178.
Auer, R., A. Burstein, S. Lein, and J. Vogel. 2021. "Unequal expenditure switching:
  Evidence from Switzerland." Mimeo.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney. 2008. "Trends in U. S. Wage Inequality:
  Revising the Revisionists." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90:300­323.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local Labor
  Market Impacts of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic
  Review 103:2121­2168.
Bai, L., and S. Stumpner. 2019. "Estimating US Consumer Gains from Chinese Im-
  ports." American Economic Review: Insights 1:209­224.
Borusyak, K., and X. Jaravel. 2018. "The Distributional Effects of Trade: Theory and
  Evidence from the United States." Mimeo.
Breinlich, H., E. Leromain, D. Novy, and T. Sampson. 2017. "The Brexit Vote and
  Inflation." CEP Discussion Paper.
Burstein, A., and J. Vogel. 2017. "International Trade, Technology, and the Skill
  Premium." Journal of Political Economy 125:1356­1412.
Caliendo, L., and F. Parro. 2015. "Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of
  NAFTA." Review of Economic Studies 82:1­44.
Caron, J., T. Fally, and J. R. Markusen. 2014. "International trade puzzles: A solution
  linking production and preferences." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129:1501­
  1552.




                                          43
Caron, J., T. Fally, and J. R. Markusen. 2020. "Per Capita Income and the Demand
  for Skills." Journal of International Economics 123.
Comin, D., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri. 2021. "Structural Change with Long-run
  Income and Price Effects." Econometrica 89:311­374.
Costinot, A., and A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare. 2015. "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantify-
  ing the Consequences of Globalization." In Handbook of International Economics,
  4:197­261.
Cravino, J., and S. Sotelo. 2019. "Trade Induced Structural Change and the Skill
  Premium." American Economic Journal: Macro 11:289­326.
Deardorff, A. V., and R. W. Staiger. 1988. "An interpretation of the factor content
  of trade." Journal of International Economics 24:93­107.
Deaton, A. 1989. "Rice Prices and Income Distribution in Thailand: A Non-Parametric
  Analysis." The Economic Journal 99:1­37.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum. 2002. "Technology, geography, and trade." Econometrica
  70:1741­1779.
Faber, B. 2014. "Trade Liberalization, the Price of Quality, and Inequality: Evidence
  from Mexican Store Prices." Mimeo.
Fajgelbaum, P., P. Goldberg, P. Kennedy, and A. Khandelwal. 2020. "The Return to
  Protectionism." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135:1­55.
Fajgelbaum, P., G. M. Grossman, and E. Helpman. 2011. "Income Distribution, Prod-
  uct Quality, and International Trade." Journal of Political Economy 119:721­765.
Fajgelbaum, P., and A. K. Khandelwal. 2016. "Measuring the Unequal Gains from
  Trade." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131:1113­1180.
Furman, J., K. Russ, and J. Shambaugh. 2017. "US tariffs are an arbitrary and
  regressive tax." VOX CEPR's Policy Portal.
Gailes, A., T. Gurevich, S. Shikher, and M. Tsigas. 2018. "Gender and Income In-
  equality in United States Tariff Burden." Mimeo.
Galle, S., A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare, and M. Yi. 2020. "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the
  Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade." Mimeo.
Goldberg, L. S., and J. M. Campa. 2010. "The sensitivity of the CPI to exchange rates:
  Distribution margins, imported inputs, and trade exposure." Review of Economics
  and Statistics 92:392­407.




                                         44
Goldin, C., and L. Katz. 2007. "Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure: Narrowing,
  Widening, Polarizing." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 38:135­168.
He, Z. 2020. "Trade and Real Wages of Skilled and Unskilled Workers: Cross-Region
  Evidence." Mimeo.
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M.-A. Muendler, and S. J. Redding. 2017. "Trade and
  Inequality: From Theory to Estimation." Review of Economic Studies 84:357­405.
Hottman, C., and R. Monarch. 2020. "A Matter of Taste: Estimating Import Price In-
  flation across US Income Groups." Journal of International Economics 127:103382.
Hummels, D., R. Jorgensen, J. Munch, and C. Xiang. 2014. "The Wage Effects of Off-
  shoring: Evidence From Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data." American Economic
  Review 104:1597­1629.
Jaravel, X., and E. Sager. 2020. "What are the Price Effects of Trade? Evidence from
  the U.S. and Implications for Quantitative Trade Models." Mimeo.
Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy. 1992. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987 -
  Supply and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:35­78.
Klein, M. C., and M. Pettis. 2020. Trade wars are class wars: How rising inequality
  distorts the global economy and threatens international peace. Yale University Press.
Krugman, P. 2000. "Technology, trade and factor prices." Journal of International
  Economics 50:51­71.
Kucheryavyy, K., G. Lyn, and A. Rodr´    iguez-clare. 2020. "Grounded by Gravity: A
  Well-Behaved Trade Model with Industry-Level Economies of Scale." Mimeo.
Levell, P., M. O'Connell, and K. Smith. 2017. "The exposure of households' food
  spending to tariff changes and exchange rate movements." IFS Briefing Note.
Nigai, S. 2016. "On Measuring the Welfare Gains from Trade Under Consumer Het-
  erogeneity." The Economic Journal 126:1193­1237.
Porto, G. G. 2006. "Using survey data to assess the distributional effects of trade
  policy." Journal of International Economics 70:140­160.
Stolper, W. F., and P. A. Samuelson. 1941. "Protection and Real Wages." The Review
  of Economic Studies 9:58­73.
Wood, A. 1995. "How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers." Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 9:57­80.




                                          45
