                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            NEIGHBORHOODS MATTER:
                    ASSESSING THE EVIDENCE FOR PLACE EFFECTS

                                           Eric Chyn
                                        Lawrence F. Katz

                                      Working Paper 28953
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28953


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Peter Bergman, Raj Chetty, Nathan Hendren, Erik Hurst, Jens Ludwig, Christopher
Palmer, Tim Taylor, and Heidi Williams for helpful suggestions and comments. We also thank
Camille Baker and the team at Opportunity Insights for creating the maps that are included in this
work. This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eric Chyn and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Neighborhoods Matter: Assessing the Evidence for Place Effects
Eric Chyn and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 28953
June 2021
JEL No. H75,I38,R23,R38

                                         ABSTRACT

How does one's place of residence affect individual behavior and long-run outcomes?
Understanding neighborhood and place effects has been a leading question for social scientists
during the past half-century. Recent empirical studies using experimental and quasi-experimental
research designs have generated new insights on the importance of residential neighborhoods in
childhood and adulthood. This paper summarizes the recent neighborhood effects literature and
interprets the findings. Childhood neighborhoods affect long-run economic and educational
outcomes in a manner consistent with exposure models of neighborhood effects. For adults,
neighborhood environments matter for their health and well-being but have more ambiguous
impacts on labor market outcomes. We discuss the evidence on the mechanisms behind the
observed patterns and conclude by highlighting directions for future research.


Eric Chyn
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
eric.t.chyn@dartmouth.edu

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu
1   Introduction

    In 1966, Dorothy Gautreaux and three other Chicago residents sued the Chicago Housing
Authority (CHA) in the first major public housing desegregation lawsuit in the United
States. Their case highlighted the fact that only 63 of the more than 10,000 public housing
units the CHA had built in the previous decade were outside of low-income and racially
segregated areas. The resulting settlement reached in 1976 between the CHA and the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development created the Gautreaux Assisted Housing
Program, which provided housing vouchers and mobility assistance to a limited number of
African American residents from public housing projects in Chicago. From 1976 to 1998, the
Gautreaux program helped around 7,100 families move to private rental housing in areas
ranging from inner-city neighborhoods to upper-middle-class suburbs.
    The Gautreaux program provided a promising opportunity for researchers to study the
importance of neighborhoods. Social scientists have long hypothesized that living in a disad-
vantaged area directly affects the outcomes of adults and life courses of children. Descriptive
research has supported this idea by showing that individuals living in high-poverty areas fare
worse both contemporaneously and over the long-run in terms of important outcomes such
as education, criminal involvement, health, and earnings (Wilson, 1987; Jencks and Mayer,
1990; Brooks-Gunn et al., 1993; Sampson, Morenoff and Gannon-Rowley, 2002; Sharkey and
Faber, 2014). Yet, a lingering concern is that such correlations between individual outcomes
and neighborhood characteristics may reflect unmeasured differences in individual character-
istics that affect both outcomes and selection into living in a disadvantaged area. After all,
under everyday circumstances, a household's decision on where to live is not random. Prior
observational studies suggest that the magnitude of estimated neighborhood effects is often
reduced when researchers control for detailed family background measures (Solon, 1999).
    A crucial feature in the Gautreaux setting was what appeared to be a substantial de-


                                              1
gree of randomness in the process by which households were matched to available rental
units in different neighborhoods. Housing counselors identified rental units--regardless of
whether the units were in the city or a suburb of Chicago--and offered them to families
based on their position on a waiting list. This process potentially limited the extent to which
difficult-to-measure household advantages and disadvantages drove the neighborhood choices
of Gautreaux families.
   Influential early work on Gautreaux strongly suggested that place of residence mattered:
families who moved to the more advantaged suburbs had better outcomes. Popkin, Rosen-
baum and Meaden (1993) studied a survey of female household heads from Gautreaux,
finding substantially higher employment rates for the suburban movers compared with their
counterparts who stayed in the city. Children from Gautreaux households that moved to the
suburbs were less likely to drop out from high school, were more likely to attend a four-year
college, and had higher rates of employment relative to those whose families moved within
the city of Chicago (Kaufman and Rosenbaum, 1992; Rosenbaum, 1995).
   Yet, the Gautreaux results became less clear as further evidence accumulated. When
Mendenhall, DeLuca and Duncan (2006) conducted a longer-term and more comprehensive
follow-up analysis, they found little systematic effects of suburban (versus city) relocation on
employment or welfare receipt for the female household heads. Their work and subsequent
studies provide evidence that the placement type (i.e., a suburban or city rental unit) was
systematically related to pre-move household characteristics, suggesting that the Gautreaux
setting may not approximate a randomized experiment (Votruba and Kling, 2009; DeLuca
et al., 2010).
   Inspired by the early promising findings from Gautreaux as well as by its methodological
limitations, the subsequent generation of neighborhood effects studies have addressed selec-
tion bias by relying on randomized field experiments and on quasi-experimental sources of
variation. For example, several studies use data from the U.S. Department of Housing and


                                               2
Urban Development's Moving to Opportunity randomized housing mobility demonstration,
which helped a treatment group of public housing families move to lower-poverty areas by
providing them with housing vouchers and mobility counseling. Other studies have relied on
quasi-experimental research designs including comparisons of children who moved to new
areas at different ages and examinations of individuals forced to relocate due to plausibly
exogenous events such as natural disasters or public housing demolitions.
   In this essay, we summarize what has been learned about the causal impact of neighbor-
hoods in the two decades since the early research on Gautreaux. Our discussion is motivated
by new findings that have reshaped how scholars understand the importance of neighbor-
hood environments for adults and children. We concentrate on empirical studies and do
not attempt to comprehensively review the methodological and econometric issues covered
in prior reviews such as Durlauf (2004) and Graham (2018). Our work complements and
extends other recent reviews of neighborhood effects research such as Sharkey and Faber
(2014) and Galster and Sharkey (2017). Although our focus is on evidence from high-income
countries, we believe that lessons regarding neighborhood effects in developed countries may
have relevance for understanding neighborhood influences in developing countries as well.
   We begin with descriptive evidence indicating that key outcomes of adults and children
are strongly correlated with neighborhood poverty rates. Such patterns have motivated the
search for compelling approaches to estimate the causal effects of neighborhoods on a range
of outcomes. We then sketch a conceptual model that highlights the potential influences of
current neighborhoods through contemporaneous (or situational) effects and of past neigh-
borhoods through exposure (or developmental) effects that accumulate during childhood.
The hypothesis that neighborhood effects on socioeconomic and health outcomes operate
through the length of exposure to different neighborhood environments has been empha-
sized by Wilson (1987), Jencks and Mayer (1990), and Sampson (2012). A key prediction
of the exposure hypothesis is that the gains to moving to neighborhoods with beneficial at-


                                             3
tributes will be larger for children who are younger at the time of a move and thus exposed
for a longer period.
   Next, we discuss the findings from recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies
for adults and children separately. Our review of the evidence can be summarized in two
main points. First, the findings for adults require a nuanced interpretation. Recent work
provides little evidence that changing neighborhoods within a city (or commuting zone)
has impacts on contemporaneous economic outcomes (at least for adult heads of low-income
households). The within-city pattern contrasts with several studies that show longer-distance
relocations by adults to higher-wage labor markets (cities or regions) can improve their
economic outcomes. The evidence for health outcomes and health-related behaviors (like
smoking) is more consistent and suggests that adults benefit from both local and longer-
distance moves to higher-opportunity areas. Second, studies of children strongly support the
existence of effects in which longer exposure to "better" neighborhood environments during
childhood leads to improved long-run outcomes.
   We also assess the evidence for different mechanisms that could drive the observed neigh-
borhood impacts. For adults, we discuss how the evidence on the effects of within-city relo-
cation is at least superficially inconsistent with the influential spatial mismatch hypothesis of
Kain (1968). The analysis of adult health outcomes suggests that neighborhood stressors and
health-related behaviors (e.g., smoking) are key channels. For children, at least five factors
appear to be mediators of place effects: school quality, peer influences, pollution, exposure
to violence, and criminal justice policies.
   Finally, we discuss the implications of recent studies of neighborhood effects for the design
of housing policies and conclude by raising outstanding research questions. Open issues
include understanding the relative importance of different mechanisms behind neighborhood
effects, assessing the general equilibrium impacts of housing mobility policies and other low-
income housing assistance programs, and examining the impacts of place-based neighborhood


                                               4
revitalization policies on the pre-existing residents of targeted areas.

2   Background on Neighborhoods and Outcomes

    In this section, we use publicly available U.S. data to conduct descriptive analyses that
motivate the idea that place of residence matters. For the unit of analysis, we focus on
several geographies analyzed in prior studies of neighborhood effects. The largest units of
geography that we consider are commuting zones, which are aggregations of counties based
on commuting patterns in the 1990 Census and can be viewed as approximating a local labor
market. There are 741 U.S. commuting zones. We also examine relationships at more granular
levels such as school districts and census tracts. There are over 12,000 school districts and
about 72,000 census tracts in the United States. Census tracts typically have a few thousand
residents and come closer to what most people commonly refer to as a "neighborhood." To
classify these geographic areas by economic opportunity, we use the poverty rate from the
2000 Decennial Census.1 Poverty rates are a widely used measure in the neighborhood effects
literature (Sampson and Sharkey, 2008) and can be broadly interpreted as a summary index
of the bundle of characteristics associated with a neighborhood (Kling, Liebman and Katz,
2007).
    Figure 1 illustrates a strong association between an area's poverty rate and the outcomes
for adults and children. Each panel plots averages based on grouping commuting zones (in
panels A, B, and C) or school districts (in panel D) into one of 20 "bins" by poverty rate.
The results in Panel A show that a one percentage point increase in the poverty rate in a
commuting zone is associated with a 0.8 percentage point decline in the adult employment
rate using data from the 2000 Decennial Census. Panel B shows that adult health (as mea-
sured by life expectancy at age 40) also decreases with the poverty rate. Life expectancy is
measured using data from Chetty et al. (2016a) and is based on mortality records from the
    1
   For our analysis of school district test scores, we rely on poverty rates using measures from the American
Community Survey for the years 2007-2011 and 2012-2016.

                                                     5
Social Security Administration.
   The results in Figure 1 also show that upward mobility and academic achievement of
children both decrease with the poverty rate. The measure of upward mobility is the mean
household income (measured at ages 31-37) for children who grew up in each commuting zone
and were born to low-income parents (those at the 25th percentile of the income distribution)
from the Opportunity Atlas (Chetty et al., 2020a).2 The measure of achievement is based
on the mean of standardized test scores for school districts from the Stanford Education
Data Archive. Panels C and D of Figure 1 show that a one percentage point increase in the
poverty rate is associated with declines of $371 in a child's expected adult income and 0.025
standard deviations in academic achievement, respectively. All the relationships in Figure
1 are statistically significant at the one percent level, as indicated in the regression results
reported in Columns 1-4 of Table 1.
   The correlations between the poverty rate and outcomes are not simply due to broad dif-
ferences across metropolitan areas. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 1 present correlations between
poverty rates and resident outcomes at the census-tract level using data on all U.S. tracts
and specifications that control for county fixed effects. These within-county results generate
estimates that are similar to what we observe in the commuting zone level analysis.
   Figure 2 provides another illustration of within-city patterns using Chicago as an example
and providing maps of tract level poverty rates, adult employment, and child outcomes. Dark
red indicates areas with relatively worse outcomes (e.g., higher poverty) while dark blue areas
have better outcomes (e.g., lower poverty). Panel A shows that there is substantial variation
in poverty rates within the city. The tracts that are high poverty are predominately located

   2
     Chetty et al. (2020a) created the Opportunity Atlas using data from the U.S. Census and federal
income tax returns. They study a sample of 20.5 million children born between 1978-1983 who are in their
mid-30s in 2014-2015. Children are mapped back to Census tracts where they lived until age 23. They
construct a measure of average outcomes by measuring parent and child percentile ranks in the national
distribution. The Opportunity Atlas contains measures of the average percentile for children in each area.
To aid interpretation of this outcome, we converted their rank outcomes into real 2015 U.S. dollars using
the national income distribution.

                                                    6
in the western and southern areas. In line with the results from Table 1, Panels B and C
show that these high-poverty areas are also those where adults have the lowest employment
rates and low-income children have the least upward mobility.
    Associations between neighborhood poverty and individual contemporaneous and longer-
term outcomes could be driven by two very different sources. One possibility is that neigh-
borhood environments have causal impacts on adults and children. Another possibility is
that the observed patterns reflect the non-random sorting of the types of people who end
up living in disadvantaged areas. In the next section, we sketch a model of neighborhood
effects and use it to illuminate the need for experimental or quasi-experimental approaches
to estimate causal neighborhood effects.

3   Conceptual Framework for Neighborhood Effects

    Models in economics and sociology postulate a "production function" relationship in
which the outcomes for an individual (such as earnings, health status, or academic achieve-
ment) are influenced by both contemporaneous and developmental neighborhood effects, in
addition to family inputs.3 Developmental neighborhood effects (also called exposure effects)
are typically hypothesized to depend on the length of past exposure to neighborhoods of dif-
ferent quality, especially during childhood. In addition, neighborhood environments might
also have larger and long-lasting impacts at certain ages (e.g., early childhood or the start of
adolescence) as embodied in the "critical age effects" hypothesis (Almond and Currie, 2011;
Heckman and Mosso, 2014). Note that neighborhood effects can operate through multiple
channels including peer influences, neighborhood safety and exposure to violence, school
quality, the physical environment, and access to employment and criminal opportunities
(Kain, 1968; Jencks and Mayer, 1990; Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 1996).

    3
     For a formal exposition of the model behind our thinking in this paper, and how it leads to some of the
prominent equations that are estimated in empirical work, see Online Appendix A. Topa and Zenou (2015)
provides a more-detailed overview of theoretical models of neighborhood effects.

                                                     7
   A prominent approach to analyzing neighborhood effects is the canonical linear-in-means
model of social interactions that features only contemporaneous effects (Manski, 1993; Brock
and Durlauf, 2001). In this model, the impact of neighborhoods stems from three sources.
First, endogenous (peer) effects arise due to the propensity for individual behavior to depend
on the expected (mean) behavior of their neighborhood peers. Second, exogenous effects
represent the possibility that individual behavior is shaped by the average characteristics of
neighbors (such as their income and education). Third, correlated effects refer to the fact
that individuals within a neighborhood face the same institutional and physical environments
including schools, law enforcement policies, and levels of pollution.
   In this canonical model, it is typically not possible to identify endogenous effects sepa-
rately either from exogenous effects or from unmeasured correlated effects (Manski, 1993).
However, a reduced form can be estimated to provide evidence of contemporaneous neighbor-
hood effects by regressing the outcome of interest on an individual's own characteristics, the
mean characteristics of current residential neighbors (like their socioeconomic background),
and other current neighborhood characteristics (like school resources). The reduced form
estimates can provide suggestive evidence for the presence of peer effects (from the impacts
of mean neighbor background characteristics) and effects of neighborhood attributes (from
the impacts of specific neighborhood characteristics). Experimental or quasi-experimental
variation in peer behavior is needed to estimate causal endogenous peer effects as in the
randomized field experiments analyzed by Duflo and Saez (2003) and Bursztyn et al. (2014).
   More recently, much attention has focused on models that center solely on developmen-
tal neighborhood effects for children. For example, Chetty and Hendren (2018) study the
impacts of moving a child to a new neighborhood where other children typically do well.
They characterize neighborhoods by measuring the mean adult outcomes of children who
spend their entire childhood in an area ("permanent residents"). Their approach studies
children who moved at different ages and examines how their later-life adult outcomes vary


                                              8
with the duration of childhood exposure to more advantaged neighborhoods. The idea that
neighborhoods have exposure effects also has been examined in observational studies in so-
ciology (Wodtke, Harding and Elwert, 2011; Sharkey and Faber, 2014) and is closely related
to models of social capital in economics (Loury, 1977; Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman,
1996).
    Persuasive statistical identification of contemporaneous or development neighborhood
effects can be challenging due to non-random selection of people into neighborhoods. The
neighborhood effects literature has followed broader trends in economics to address self-
selection bias by using experimental and quasi-experimental approaches. The key feature is
that the analysts study settings in which there is substantial random (exogenous) variation
in exposure to different neighborhood environments. Such an approach is clearest in research
using the experimental data from the Moving to Opportunity demonstration. Other studies
that rely on quasi-experimental methods address concerns over selection bias by comparing
groups where the variation in neighborhood exposure approximates random assignment.

4   Evidence on Neighborhood Effects for Adults

    Beginning in 1994, the Moving to Opportunity housing mobility demonstration random-
ized access to housing vouchers and assistance in moving to less-distressed communities
to about 4,600 families living in public housing projects located in deeply impoverished
neighborhoods in five cities (Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York). The
program randomized families into three groups: 1) a low-poverty voucher group (also called
the "experimental group") that was offered housing-mobility counseling and restricted hous-
ing vouchers that could only be used to move to low-poverty areas (Census tracts with 1990
poverty rates below 10 percent); 2) a traditional voucher group that was offered regular Sec-
tion 8 housing vouchers that had no additional locational constraints (also called the Section
8 group); and 3) a control group that received no assistance through the program.


                                              9
   The Moving to Opportunity experiment generated large changes in neighborhood en-
vironments. One year after baseline, the average adult in the control group was living in
a neighborhood with a tract poverty rate of 50 percent. Moving with a low poverty or
traditional voucher reduced average tract poverty rates by 35 and 21 percentage points, re-
spectively (Ludwig et al., 2013). At the time of the final follow-up survey conducted 10 to 15
years after random assignment, the Moving to Opportunity groups showed large differences
in duration-weighted average neighborhood poverty rates since program entry. And families
in the experimental voucher group reported feeling safer in their neighborhoods and less
likely to have observed conditions of local disorder such as drug activity.
   Policymakers had hoped that moves through Moving to Opportunity would generate
gains in work and reductions in welfare participation for the adult household heads, but
there is little evidence of improved economic self-sufficiency from moves to lower-poverty
neighborhoods for adults. For example, Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) find no detectable
impacts on economic self-sufficiency four to seven years after random assignment, and Ludwig
et al. (2013) find a similar pattern 10 to 15 years after random assignment. Chetty, Hendren
and Katz (2016b) use administrative Internal Revenue Service records to conduct a longer-
term analysis and similarly find no statistically significant effects of Moving to Opportunity
vouchers on earnings or employment of adults.
   At the same time, the Moving to Opportunity program did generate statistically signifi-
cant improvements in physical and mental health as well as subjective well-being for adults.
Specifically, the low-poverty voucher group experienced decreased incidence of extreme obe-
sity and diabetes (Ludwig et al., 2011), a reduction in psychological stress and increase in
calmness and tranquility (Katz, Kling and Liebman, 2001; Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007),
and an increase in subjective well-being (Ludwig et al., 2012) in the short-run (one to three
years after random assignment), interim (four to seven years after random assignment), and
final (10 to 15 years after random assignment) follow-up surveys.


                                              10
    Since the launch of the Moving to Opportunity demonstration experiment, studies of
natural experiments generated by housing assistance policies have provided further evidence
on neighborhood effects for adults.4 Chyn (2018) examined neighborhood effects for adults
by studying public housing demolitions in Chicago during the 1990s. To estimate causal im-
pacts, Chyn compared ex ante similar displaced and non-displaced public housing residents.
This approach revealed that demolition notably improved residential outcomes, as displaced
households typically relocated to areas with less poverty and lower crime rates. Despite
improvements in neighborhood quality, there were no statistically significant impacts on em-
ployment, earnings or participation in social assistance programs for the displaced adults
who had children. In line with these results from Chicago, Haltiwanger et al. (2020) study a
broader national set of public housing demolitions and find that displaced adult household
heads experience no employment or earnings gains over the next 10 years even when moving
to neighborhoods with greater nearby job accessibility.
    Recent studies of within-country regional migration provide additional evidence on the
importance of place effects for adults.5 Deryugina, Kawano and Levitt (2018) and Deryugina
and Molitor (2020) used a quasi-experimental approach to estimate impacts of relocation
due to Hurricane Katrina on income and health, respectively: specifically they compared
outcomes for displaced New Orleans residents with a comparison group living in similar U.S.
cities using a difference-in-difference framework. They found long-run improvements in labor
market outcomes and reductions in mortality for the elderly, which were likely driven by the

   4
      In the context of a low-income county, Barnhardt, Field and Pande (2017) studied an urban housing
lottery in India which provided winning residents of slums with the opportunity to move to improved housing
in a new neighborhood. They found that 14 years after the housing allocation, lottery winners lived in safer
and cleaner locations, but there was no evidence of improvements in other socioeconomic outcomes such as
income or labor force participation.
    5
      Studies of international immigration also provide evidence on the impacts of place of residence.
Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2012) estimate large economic returns to immigration from Norway
to the United States during the late 19th century. Clemens (2013) shows that Indian software workers who
win a US visa lottery to immigrate earn substantially more than their coworkers who perform similar du-
ties but lost the lottery. McKenzie, Stillman and Gibson (2010) find large earnings gains for Tongans who
randomly win the opportunity to migrate to New Zealand.

                                                    11
fact that Hurricane Katrina victims typically moved to areas with stronger labor markets
and better health outcomes. Collins and Wanamaker (2014) and Boustan (2016) studied
the Great Migration--the massive movement of African Americans from the rural South to
urban areas in the North--and find large increases in earnings based on a sibling fixed effects
approach. Finally, Black et al. (2015) and Johnson and Taylor (2019) study historical U.S.
rural-urban migration using instrumental variable strategies. Their results show that moving
to urban areas was damaging for health and that this impact may have been mediated by
changes in migrant health-related behaviors.
    The experimental and quasi-experimental evidence on adults suggests two main findings.
First, relocation within a city or commuting zone does not seem to improve earnings or
other economic outcomes for adults, but long-distance migration to higher-wage areas or
stronger labor markets generates notable economic gains. The significant negative cross-
sectional relationship for adult employment and neighborhood poverty within a commuting
zone (Column 5 of Table 1) appears to largely reflect selection and residential sorting. Place
effects on contemporaneous adult labor market outcomes appear to operate at a broader
geographic level (the local labor market, commuting zone, region, or country) than one's
residential neighborhood within a commuting zone. Second, place of residence has large
impacts on physical and mental health outcomes for adults in studies of both within-city
and cross-city moves.

5   Mechanisms for Adults

    What do the empirical findings for adults imply for theories of neighborhood effects?
The conclusion that within-commuting-zone moves into areas with higher employment have
little impact on economic outcomes for low-income minority household heads superficially
appears inconsistent with the "spatial mismatch hypothesis" (Kain, 1968; Wilson, 1987;




                                               12
Holzer, 1991).6 This hypothesis posits that racial economic disparities have resulted in part
from unequal access to suburban job opportunities: that is, as a large number of jobs and
white residents shifted from urban to suburban areas in the post-1950s period, a combination
of housing market discrimination and poor public transportation options limited the access
of racial and ethnic minorities to those jobs. A contributing factor could be greater dis-
crimination against minority job applicants by employers in more affluent and mostly white
neighborhoods, as found by Agan and Starr (2020) in a recent randomized audit study.
An augmented spatial mismatch model potentially consistent with the findings in mobility
studies is one in which housing market discrimination coupled with high commuting costs
could reduce the labor market options for minority workers, effectively increase employer
monopsony power in the low-wage labor market, and thereby serve to reduce employment
rates and wages for less-advantaged minorities throughout a metropolitan area.
    For adult health, recent studies are consistent with two broad conclusions regarding the-
ory and mechanisms. First, exposure to community disorder and violence has adverse impacts
on mental health. Participants in the Moving to Opportunity demonstration stated that con-
cerns about neighborhood violence and crime were the primary motivations for their desire
to move out of public housing, and the moves to lower-poverty areas were associated with
reductions in neighborhoods crime rates and increases in neighborhood collective efficacy.
These moves to higher-opportunity neighborhoods also led to lower self-reports of criminal
victimization and improved perceptions of neighborhood safety (Katz, Kling and Liebman,
2001; Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007; Ludwig et al., 2013). Second, place of residence may
help to shape health behaviors. For example, Black et al. (2015) and Johnson and Tay-
lor (2019) provide suggestive evidence that historical U.S. rural-urban migration increased
mortality due to changes in smoking behavior and alcohol consumption. Moreover, Kling,

   6
     In contrast, the finding of Haltiwanger et al. (2020) that labor market outcomes at age 26 for children
displaced in public housing demolitions are positively related to neighborhood job accessibility is consistent
with the traditional spatial mismatch hypothesis playing a role for young minority adults.

                                                     13
Liebman and Katz (2007) find that the reductions in obesity and the mental health gains for
the low-poverty voucher treatment group in Moving to Opportunity were modestly associ-
ated in the medium-term with increases in physical exercise and dietary shifts toward fruits
and vegetables.

6   Evidence on Neighborhood Effects for Children

    In the initial Moving to Opportunity studies, researchers focused on older children and
found mixed evidence on the effects of moving to low-poverty neighborhoods. For example,
Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) found beneficial effects on education, risky behaviors, and
physical health for female youth in the five-year post-enrollment survey. However, the ben-
eficial impacts for teenage girls stood in contrast to adverse effects of moving for teenage
boys. To study these gender differences in effects, Clampet-Lundquist et al. (2011) collected
in-depth interviews for a subsample of children in the experiment. They found that gender
differences in daily routines, the ability to fit in with neighborhood norms, and neighborhood
navigation strategies may have contributed to how girls appeared to benefit more than boys
from moves to lower-poverty neighborhoods.
    Only recently has enough time passed to study long-run outcomes for the younger children
in the Moving to Opportunity demonstration. Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016b) linked the
Moving to Opportunity sample to administrative tax records to study impacts for children of
all ages. A major goal of their analysis is to study whether the duration of childhood exposure
to new neighborhood environments matters. They do this by comparing program impacts on
younger children (those younger than age 13 at random assignment) to older children (those
who were 13 to 18 years old at random assignment). They found substantial positive effects on
adult earnings and the likelihood of attending college for younger children in the experimental
treatment group.7 However, Chetty, Hendren and Katz found no detectable effects (or even
    7
     Other studies have considered long-run impacts of Moving to Opportunity on additional outcomes.
Pollack et al. (2019) find that moving led to reductions in annual hospital spending for younger children.

                                                   14
negative impacts) on longer-run measures of adult earnings and college attendance for older
children in the experimental treatment group. The long-run economic gains from moves to
lower-poverty areas for the younger children and the, if anything, adverse effects for the
older children in Moving to Opportunity are apparent and similar in magnitude for both
male and female children, despite the observed gender differences in short-run adjustments
to new neighborhood environments.
    The differential pattern of treatment effects on economic outcomes for younger and older
children in the Moving to Opportunity experiment are consistent with a model that contains
a disruption cost for moving to a different type of neighborhood and allows the benefits
from relocating to lower poverty areas to be proportional to the duration of exposure during
childhood. Exposure effects can be sufficiently large to outweigh a disruption cost when moves
occur at early ages. Disruption effects may occur because moving to a different environment
in childhood, especially during adolescence, could have negative impacts on social ties or
other adverse effects on development (Wood et al., 1993).
    Chyn (2018) provided further evidence on the importance of childhood neighborhoods by
exploiting the vagaries of timing and choice of units impacted by public housing demolitions.
He found that public housing demolitions in Chicago led to relocations to lower-poverty
neighborhoods and significantly improved the later-life labor market and criminal justice
outcomes for children.8 Notably, he found the long-run positive impacts are larger for children
displaced Notably, he found the long-run positive impacts are larger for children displaced
before age 13.9 In a similar vein, Nakamura, Sigurdsson and Steinsson (2020) studied long-

Miller and Soo (2020) detect increases in credit scores and credit use for those making Moving to Opportunity
moves as young children.
    8
      Additional work by Chyn and Haggag (2019) shows that children displaced by public housing demolitions
were much more likely to be politically active relative to their non-displaced counterparts.
    9
      Jacob (2004) similarly provides evidence of the short-run effects on children of public housing demolitions
in Chicago. He used data from Chicago Public Schools and found no beneficial impacts of relocation due to
demolition on high school graduation or academic achievement. Haltiwanger et al. (2020) studied a national
sample of public housing demolitions and found large long-run labor market gains from public housing
demolition for children at ages 10 to 18 years at the time of the demolition.

                                                       15
term effects of forced relocation due to a 1973 volcanic eruption in Iceland. They found
increased earnings and educational outcomes for the displaced, but only for those who were
younger than age 25 at the time of the eruption. Overall, the results from these two quasi-
experimental settings are in line with the childhood exposure evidence in Chetty, Hendren
and Katz (2016b).
   Some of the most compelling evidence of neighborhood exposure effects for children can
be found in Chetty and Hendren (2018). They used quasi-experimental methods and tax
records to study U.S. children (born from 1980 to 1988) from seven million families that
moved across commuting zones. They compared outcomes for children whose families moved
when they were different ages to understand how effects vary with the duration of time
spent living in more-advantaged areas (those where the children of permanent residents have
higher average outcomes). Their approach identifies childhood neighborhood exposure effects
under the assumption that selection effects do not vary with the child's age at move among
families moving across the same types of locations. Chetty and Hendren used three primary
approaches to support the reasonableness of this assumption: 1) their results are robust to
controlling for family fixed effects (thereby relying only on the variation in neighborhood
exposure among siblings); 2) their findings are robust to controlling for time-varying ob-
servable family characteristics reflecting changes in parental economic circumstances; and 3)
they obtain similar results when focusing on a subset of moves that are likely to be driven
by plausibly exogenous regional shocks such as natural disasters.
   The findings of Chetty and Hendren (2018) revealed significant neighborhood exposure
effects on intergenerational mobility: the adult incomes of children who moved converge to
the adult incomes of children of permanent residents in the destination at a rate of four
percent per year of childhood exposure. In other words, this estimate suggests that a young
child who moves at birth to a better area and stays there for 15 years would pick up 60 percent
of the difference in permanent resident adult economic outcomes between their origin and


                                              16
destinations. Additional work has shown that there are similarly large exposure effects for
other long-term outcomes such as college attendance, marriage, teenage birth rates, and
incarceration (Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Chetty et al., 2020a).
    Several recent papers have used the same empirical framework from Chetty and Hendren
(2018) and replicated their findings using data from other countries. Deutscher (2020) found
evidence of exposure effects on labor market outcomes using tax records from Australia.
Notably, his analysis estimated exposure effects from infancy onward and showed that expo-
sure effects in his setting are largest in the teenage years. Laliberte (2021) detected exposure
effects on educational attainment in Canada using academic records from Montreal. His es-
timates are of similar magnitude in Chetty and Hendren (2018): educational attainment of
movers converges linearly at a rate of 4.5 percent per year.
    Broadly speaking, these recent experimental and quasi-experimental studies provide ro-
bust evidence that childhood neighborhood of residence matters for long-run outcomes.10
In particular, the effects of moving at early ages to more advantaged neighborhoods seem
positive for labor market outcomes (Chetty, Hendren and Katz, 2016b; Chyn, 2018; Chetty
and Hendren, 2018; Nakamura, Sigurdsson and Steinsson, 2020; Deutscher, 2020) and long-
run schooling (Chetty, Hendren and Katz, 2016b; Chyn, 2018; Chetty and Hendren, 2018;
Laliberte, 2021). In terms of adverse outcomes, the effects of moving at early ages to higher
opportunity neighborhoods is negative for teenage pregnancy (Chetty and Hendren, 2018),
incarcerations (Chetty et al., 2020b), and hospitalizations (Pollack et al., 2019). Thus, in-
creased childhood exposure to better neighborhood environments generates beneficial im-


   10
     In contrast, Oreopoulos (2003) is a compelling quasi-experimental study that found no evidence of
childhood neighborhoods affecting adult economic outcomes. Specifically, he compared long-run outcomes for
children who were assigned to live in different public housing projects in Toronto and found that the children's
long-run labor market outcomes are not systematically related to the neighborhood environments surrounding
their residential public housing projects. One possible explanation is that neighborhood effects operate at
a hyperlocal level (limited to the area within the public housing project), and the environment within
public housing projects is similar across projects despite substantial variation in the broader surrounding
neighborhood environments.

                                                      17
pacts on long-run economic, schooling, social, and health outcomes.

7   Mechanisms for Children

    This section discusses the evidence on several mechanisms thought to mediate the impacts
of childhood neighborhoods on long-run outcomes: school quality, peer influences, pollution,
exposure to violence, and criminal justice policies. Each of these channels varies substan-
tially across U.S. cities and neighborhoods due to socioeconomic and race-based residential
segregation. Recent studies provide compelling causal evidence in support of each of these
mechanisms. In contrast, the recent evidence suggests the causal component of childhood
neighborhood exposure effects is not mediated by improvements in parental income.
    First, lower poverty neighborhoods might also have greater school resources and better-
performing schools. During the past decade or so, many studies have used lottery-based
admissions to experimentally estimate the effect of attending schools with higher-levels of
teacher quality or school value-added. These studies have found that attending higher-quality
schools improves academic achievement as measured by standardized exams, increases post-
secondary education attendance, and reduces the incidence of risky behaviors such as crim-
inal activity or teenage pregnancy (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008; Deming, 2011; Dobbie
and Fryer, 2015). In addition, research using quasi-experimental methods has shown that
increases in school funding have large impacts on academic achievement, educational at-
tainment, and adult earnings and health outcomes for students from low-income families
(Jackson, Johnson and Persico, 2016; Jackson and Mackevicius, 2021). In this vein, Lalib-
erte (2021) finds that 50 percent or more of the gains in educational attainment from moving
to a better neighborhood in Montreal is driven by increased access to higher-quality schools.
    However, the findings from the Moving to Opportunity experiment and the Chicago public
housing demolitions indicate that increased academic achievement as measured by standard-
ized test scores was not a mediating factor for increases in college attendance and improved


                                             18
adult incomes for younger children moving to lower-poverty areas (Jacob, 2004; Ludwig et
al., 2013; Chyn, 2018). One possibility is that schools in more affluent neighborhoods may
still play a role for less advantaged students through improvements in non-cognitive skills
and non-academic schooling outcomes such as disciplinary infractions. Jackson (2018) finds
strong evidence that teacher value-added in non-cognitive skills as measured by non-test
score behaviors (absences, suspensions, course grades, and grade repetition) is distinct from
test score effects and has substantial impacts on student longer-run outcomes. Childhood
exposure effects from schools and broader neighborhood environments could also partially be
mediated by factors associated with cultural adaptability, as suggested by the finding that
moves to lower-poverty areas for younger Black children in Moving to Opportunity increased
the use of Standard American English as compared to African American Vernacular English
(Rickford et al., 2015).
   Second, strong evidence on the impact of the influence of peers in one's community
comes from studies of criminal behavior. Damm and Dustmann (2014) study a Danish nat-
ural experiment generated by a policy that quasi-randomly assigned refugee households to
municipalities throughout the country: refugee children assigned to areas with higher shares
of youth criminals are significantly more likely to have later-life criminal convictions. Billings,
Deming and Ross (2019) study children within small neighborhood areas in North Carolina
and show that their likelihood of being arrested together (i.e., being criminal partners) is
higher when they attend the same school, especially for neighborhood peers who are the
same race and gender.
   Third, high-poverty neighborhoods typically have the greatest exposure to air pollution,
water quality problems, and lead (Bernard and McGeehin, 2003; Colmer et al., 2020). For
children, greater exposure to air pollution has negative impacts on early-life health (Chay
and Greenstone, 2003; Currie and Walker, 2011), human capital (Heissel, Persico and Simon,
2020), and labor market outcomes (Isen, Rossin-Slater and Walker, 2017). Childhood expo-


                                                19
sure to lead has negative effects on a wide range of outcomes (Aizer et al., 2018; Aizer and
Currie, 2019). High-poverty and high-minority share neighborhoods (especially historically
redlined areas) also have land surface features leading to higher temperatures and more ex-
treme heat exposure for residents than more advantaged (and non-redlined) neighborhoods
(Hoffman, Shandas and Pendleton, 2020). A growing literature indicates adverse impacts on
children's learning and school performance from cumulative heat exposure (Park, Goodman,
Hurwitz and Smith, 2020).
   Fourth, exposure to neighborhood violence affects children. Sharkey (2010) studies the
impact of local homicides using a difference-in-difference approach that relies on variation in
the location and timing of homicides. He finds notable short-run effects for minority children:
African American children recently exposed to homicides in their block group have lower
scores on vocabulary and reading assessments. Ang (2020) uses a similar research design and
shows hyperlocal exposure to violence in the form of killings by police during adolescence
has longer-lasting impacts in the form of reduced rates of high school graduation and college
enrollment.
   Fifth, local public goods related to the criminal justice system have important impacts on
long-run child outcomes. Derenoncourt (2020) finds that Northern cities that received more
Black migrants during the twentieth century had lower rates of upward mobility for Black
children born in the 1980s. As potential meditators driving this negative impact on mobility,
she shows that Black migration also resulted in greater spending on police and higher rates
of incarceration. Similarly, Baran, Chyn and Stuart (2020) provide complementary evidence
suggesting that increases in county-level incarceration rates reduced rates of Black upward
mobility between 1940 and 1990. More aggressive local policing behavior and increased in-
carceration risk could negatively affect children by reducing the incentive to invest in human
capital (Lochner, 2004).
   Finally, an important implication of recent housing mobility research is that causal child-


                                              20
hood exposure effects from moving to higher opportunity areas are not driven by parental
income gains. Studies of the Moving to Opportunity demonstration and Chicago public hous-
ing demolitions found no evidence that relocating to less distressed areas had impacts on
the economic outcomes of adults, but both settings revealed large long-run gains for younger
children (Ludwig et al., 2013; Chetty, Hendren and Katz, 2016b; Chyn, 2018).

8   Some Implications for the Design of Housing Voucher Policies

    Policymakers have become increasingly concerned about the effects of neighborhoods,
given persistently high and rising levels of residential segregation by income--particularly
for households with children (Owens, 2016; Reardon et al., 2018). Rental vouchers and hous-
ing allowance programs for low-income households are major forms of assistance provided in
developed countries (Priemus, Kemp and Varady, 2005). The Housing Choice Voucher pro-
gram (previously known as the Section 8 program) is the largest form of housing aid for U.S.
disadvantaged households and aids approximately 2.3 million low-income families annually
(Collinson, Ellen and Ludwig, 2015). There are similarly large housing subsidy programs in
the United Kingdom and Chile.
    The latest generation of neighborhood effects studies suggest three lessons for housing
voucher policies that provide portable rental support to low-income families. First, designing
vouchers so that families are encouraged and helped to move to low-poverty or otherwise
more advantaged areas is a crucial program feature. U.S. housing voucher recipients typically
do not use their vouchers to move to high-opportunity areas (Collinson and Ganong, 2018).
Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity demonstration, the Baltimore Regional Housing
Program (DeLuca and Rosenblatt, 2017), and the more recent Creating Moves to Opportu-
nity program in Seattle (Bergman et al., 2020) indicates that housing mobility counseling
services that provide customized assistance and encouragement can notably increase the rate




                                             21
at which voucher recipients move to higher-opportunity areas.11
    Second, the social benefit-cost ratio (or the marginal value of public funds) for housing
voucher programs are likely highest if the vouchers are targeted to families with young
children (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2020). Children who move to higher-opportunity
areas at younger ages have longer potential childhood exposure, which consistently leads
to improved long-run outcomes. This implies that the common use of voucher waitlists--
where eligible families may wait years while their children age--may be ineffective relative
to prioritizing families with younger children.
    What are the estimated benefits and costs to targeting housing vouchers to families
with young children and encouraging moves to better neighborhoods? Chetty, Hendren and
Katz (2016b) provide an assessment of this question from the perspective of the public
housing families that participated in the Moving to Opportunity experiment. They find that
the experimental vouchers increased annual earnings by $3,477 for children whose families
moved before they were age 13. Using relatively conservative assumptions, they estimate that
using a voucher to move to a high-opportunity neighborhood for a typical public housing
family with two young children would increase the children's lifetime earnings by $198,000
and tax revenue by $22,400 (in present value). On the cost side, their estimate is based on
the cost of providing housing mobility counseling since the fiscal costs of housing vouchers
are equivalent to or less than those of providing place-based public housing (Olsen, 2009). In
the Moving to Opportunity program, the average cost of mobility counseling was $3,789 per
family who took up a voucher (Goering et al., 1999). The findings suggest that the benefits

   11
     Recent studies show that several alternatives to intensive mobility counseling (such as financial incentives
or low-intensity counseling) are much less effective in increasing the share of voucher holders moving to high-
opportunity neighborhoods (Bergman et al., 2020; Schwartz, Mihaly and Gala, 2017). For example, one
prominent approach, termed Small Area Fair Market Rents (SAFMRs), is to encourage families to move to
higher-opportunity areas by offering higher voucher payment standards in high-rent ZIP codes. Collinson
and Ganong (2018) and Bergman et al. (2020) find that SAFMRs induced modest increases in moves to
higher-quality neighborhoods in Dallas and in Seattle-King County, but not nearly as large an impact as
when SAFMRs are combined with customized mobility counseling as in the Creating Moves to Opportunity
demonstration.

                                                       22
substantially exceed the cost of providing a targeted voucher with mobility counseling instead
of traditional public housing support both for taxpayers and for the low-income families with
young children themselves.
   Finally, a third lesson is that using vouchers to facilitate low-income households to move
to higher-opportunity neighborhoods within the same metropolitan area is unlikely on its
own to improve the economic outcomes of adults in the relocating households. Macroeco-
nomic or regional policies that increase overall local economic activity and labor market
tightness appear more promising. Much research has found that economic conditions at the
commuting zone (or state) level have strong impacts on the employment outcomes of mi-
norities and those with less-education (Hoynes, Miller and Schaller, 2012). Recent literature
also uncovers persistent effects on employment outcomes from commuting zone-level reces-
sion shocks (Yagan, 2019), declines in manufacturing (Charles, Hurst and Schwartz, 2019),
and international trade shocks (Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013). Policies that improve the
human capital, occupational skills, and connections to employers of low-wage workers liv-
ing in high-poverty areas also have potential. An experimental evaluation of the Jobs Plus
program, an employment program operating in high-poverty public housing projects, found
long-lasting positive impacts on earnings (Riccio, 2010).12 In addition, some combination of
better access to public transportation and housing opportunities could lower job search and
commuting costs, thereby improving work outcomes for residents of disadvantaged neighbor-
hoods. Holzer, Quigley and Raphael (2003) found such a pattern in the case of the expansion
of BART in the San Francisco Bay Area.




  12
     Sectoral employment programs also appear particularly promising for disadvantaged workers. Evidence
from the WorkAdvance demonstration and the Year Up program show that providing training and placement
into higher-wage occupations notably improves worker outcomes (Katz et al., 2020).

                                                  23
9   Discussion and Conclusion

    In the past two decades, new experimental and quasi-experimental studies have pushed
the frontier of research on neighborhood effects. The work surveyed indicates that residential
neighborhoods within a metropolitan area matter for adult health and well-being but have
little causal impact on contemporaneous adult labor market outcomes (at least for the heads
of low-income households). Adult economic outcomes are shaped more by overall commuting
zone or regional labor market opportunities. In contrast, the emerging consensus for children
is that living in a higher-opportunity neighborhood has substantial beneficial causal impacts
on a number of socioeconomic outcomes.
    How do the results from the recent studies discussed in this essay change the interpre-
tation of previous studies of neighborhood effects? There are two main implications. First,
the findings strongly imply that traditional observational studies of the neighborhood effects
are likely to suffer from substantial selection bias leading to overestimates of neighborhood
influences on adult economic outcomes within a metropolitan area. For example, several
studies have used non-experimental methods to study adult movers and found large effects
on labor market outcomes (Fauth, Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2004; Weinberg, Reagan
and Yankow, 2004; Clampet-Lundquist and Massey, 2008). Although selection bias is not
the only explanation for the discrepancy between earlier observational studies and more
recent work based on experiments and plausible quasi-experiments, Harding et al. (2021)
provide evidence suggesting that selection bias plays a large role in driving the findings of
traditional non-experimental studies of neighborhood effects on adult economic outcomes.
    Second, recent findings reshape our understanding of the nature of neighborhood effects
for children. Specifically, the analyses by Chetty and Hendren (2018), Chetty, Hendren and
Katz (2016b), and Chyn (2018) provide strong evidence that neighborhoods affect outcomes
through childhood exposure effects. The Moving to Opportunity experiment generated ben-


                                             24
eficial impacts on long-run economic outcomes of moves to higher-opportunity areas only for
younger children who received a larger "dosage" of childhood exposure to improved neigh-
borhood environments relative to their older counterparts. Disruption costs of moves across
different types of neighborhoods could potentially outweigh the small exposure gains for
older children.
   We conclude by discussing several directions for further research. Future work related
to mechanisms remains an ongoing research issue. For example, we know little about the
relative importance of the different mechanisms that are typically "bundled" together within
a neighborhood. In other words, how much does school quality matter relative to other
characteristics of a local area such as peers or neighborhood safety? A better understanding
of the weight of each of these neighborhood factors may improve policy responses. The deep
integration of qualitative (ethnographic) research into experimental and quasi-experimental
research designs, as in the Moving to Opportunity and the Creating Moves to Opportunity
projects, also represents a promising direction to generate more nuanced and realistic insights
into the mechanisms behind neighborhood effects (Clampet-Lundquist et al., 2011; Bergman
et al., 2020).
   More work is also needed to understand both the general equilibrium effects of scaling-up
housing mobility policies and the impact of other policies that shape residential choice. For
example, increases in the share of low-income to high-income residents in high-opportunity
neighborhoods could generate aggregate gains since neighborhoods appear to matter less for
outcomes of high-income children (Chetty et al., 2020a) and may be desirable on distribu-
tional grounds. Changes in the supply of housing might also occur in the long-run from shifts
in housing demand across neighborhoods due to housing mobility programs. These general
equilibrium effects could be quantified through research methods combining experimental
and quasi-experiment sources of variation in neighborhood choices with more structural ap-
proaches as in Galiani, Murphy and Pantano (2015), Davis, Gregory and Hartley (2019),


                                              25
Diamond and McQuade (2019), and Chyn and Daruich (2021). In addition, understanding
the effects of local land-use regulations (e.g., restrictions on multi-family housing) and hous-
ing market discrimination on access to high-opportunity neighborhoods for low-income and
minority families remains a crucial related research area (Glaeser, 2017; Rothstein, 2017).
   A final frontier research area involves the estimation of the impact of place-based policies
to improve low-income neighborhoods on the intended beneficiaries--the incumbent (pre-
existing) adult residents and their children. Place-based policies focusing on business tax
incentives such as Enterprise Zones and Opportunity Zones do not appear to be effective
in improving job creation and economic opportunities in low-income areas (Bartik, 2020).
Public housing redevelopment efforts via the federal HOPE VI program have improved the
trajectories of high-poverty and racially segregated neighborhoods--but possibly by dis-
placing poorer and nonwhite residents (Tach and Emory, 2017). More comprehensive and
community-driven place-based investment policies such as the federal Empowerment Zones
appear to have improved area economic outcomes in repeated cross-section analyses (Busso,
Gregory and Kline, 2013), but it is less clear if the gains accrue to pre-existing residents or
reflect changes in neighborhood sorting and accrue to in-migrants.
   Newly available longitudinal administrative data sets should allow future research to
examine effects of place-based policies on pre-existing residents. Haltiwanger et al. (2020)
is a start in this direction specifically for understanding the impacts of place-based urban
renewal programs such as the HOPE VI public housing demolitions. Similarly, Garin and
Rothbaum (2020) link individuals from the 1940 Census of Population to their economic
outcomes many years later in Social Security earnings data. They exploit quasi-experimental
variation across counties in the construction of government-financed manufacturing plants
for World War II, finding substantial positive impacts on local economic development and
persistent gains in the adult earnings of children who lived in treated counties prior to the
war. Further analyses of contemporary place-based policies and community development


                                              26
programs using linked administrative data sets (from the U.S. Census Bureau and for many
European countries) would be a valuable addition.




                                           27
References

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "Europe's Tired,
 Poor, Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migra-
 tion," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 1832­1856.

Agan, Amanda Y. and Sonja B. Starr, "Employer Neighborhoods and Racial Discrim-
 ination," 2020, NBER Working Paper No. 28153, November.

Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie, "Lead and Juvenile Delinquency: New Evidence from
 Linked Birth, School, and Juvenile Detention Records," The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2019, 101 (4), 575­587.

  , , Peter Simon, and Patrick Vivier, "Do Low Levels of Blood Lead Reduce Chil-
  dren's Future Test Scores?," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10
  (1), 307­341.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, "Chapter 15 - Human capital development before
 age five," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor
 Economics, Vol. 4, Part B, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 1315­1486.

Ang, Desmond, "The Effects of Police Violence on Inner-City Students," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2020, 136 (1), 115­68.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, "The China Syndrome: Local
 Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic
 Review, 2013, 103 (6), 2121­2168.

Baran, Cavit, Eric Chyn, and Bryan A Stuart, "The Great Migration and Educational
 Opportunity," 2020, Working Paper.

Barnhardt, Sharon, Erica Field, and Rohini Pande, "Moving to Opportunity or Iso-
 lation? Network Effects of a Randomized Housing Lottery in Urban India," American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 1­32.

Bartik, Timothy J., "Using Place-Based Jobs Policies to Help Distressed Communities,"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2020, 34 (3), 99­127.

Bergman, Peter, Raj Chetty, Stefanie DeLuca, Nathaniel Hendren, Lawrence F
 Katz, and Christopher Palmer, "Creating Moves to Opportunity: Experimental Evi-
 dence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice," 2020, Working Paper.

Bernard, S. M. and M. A. McGeehin, "Prevalence of Blood Lead Levels >=5 g/DL
 Among US Children 1 to 5 Years of Age and Socioeconomic and Demographic Factors
 Associated with Blood of Lead Levels 5 to 10 g/DL, Third National Health and Nutrition
 Examination Survey, 1988-1994.," Pediatrics, 2003, 112 (6), 1308­1313.


                                          28
Billings, Stephen B., David J. Deming, and Stephen L. Ross, "Partners in Crime,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 126­150.

Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor, "The
  Impact of the Great Migration on Mortality of African Americans: Evidence from the
  Deep South," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (2), 477­503.

Boustan, Leah Platt, Competition in the Promised Land, Princeton University Press,
 November 2016.

Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf, "Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,"
 The Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68 (2), 235­260.

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Greg J. Duncan, Pamela Kato Klebanov, and Naomi
 Sealand, "Do Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?," American
 Journal of Sociology, 1993, 99 (2), 353­395.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman, "Un-
 derstanding Mechanisms Underlying Peer Effects: Evidence From a Field Experiment on
 Financial Decisions," Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1273­1301.

Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, "Assessing the Incidence and Ef-
 ficiency of a Prominent Place Based Policy," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2),
 897­947.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Mariel Schwartz, "The Transformation
 of Manufacturing and the Decline in US Employment," in Martin Eichenbaum and
 Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 33, The University of
 Chicago Press, 2019, pp. 307­372.

Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, "The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
 Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Reces-
 sion," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 1121­1167.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergener-
 ational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2018, 133 (3), 1107­62.

  , John Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie Jones, and Sonya Porter, "The
  Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," 2020, Opportunity
  Insights, Harvard University, January.

  , Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas
  Turner, Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler, "The Association between Income
  and Life Expectancy in the United States 2001-2014," JAMA, 2016, 315 (16), 1750.



                                          29
  , Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Effects of Exposure to Better
  Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,"
  American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (4), 855­902.

  , , Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter, "Race and Economic Opportunity in
  the United States: an Intergenerational Perspective," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2020, 135 (2), 711­783.

Chyn, Eric, "Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition
 on Children," The American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (10), 3028­3056.

  and Diego Daruich, "The Equilibrium Effects of Neighborhood Interventions," 2021,
  Working Paper.

   and Kareem Haggag, "Moved to Vote: The Long-Run Effects of Neighborhoods on
  Political Participation," 2019, NBER Working Paper No. 26515.

Clampet-Lundquist, Susan, Kathryn Edin, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Greg J. Duncan,
  "Moving Teenagers Out of High-Risk Neighborhoods: How Girls Fare Better than Boys,"
  American Journal of Sociology, 2011, 116 (4), 1154­89.

Clampet-Lundquist, Susan and Douglas S. Massey, "Neighborhood Effects on Eco-
  nomic Self-Sufficiency: A Reconsideration of the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,"
  American Journal of Sociology, 2008, 114 (1), 107­143.

Clemens, Michael A, "Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston than Hyderabad?
  Evidence from Randomized Processing of US Visas," American Economic Review, 2013,
  103 (3), 198­202.

Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker, "Selection and Economic Gains
 in the Great Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data,"
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 220­252.

Collinson, Robert and Peter Ganong, "How Do Changes in Housing Voucher Design
 Affect Rent and Neighborhood Quality?," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 2018, 10 (2), 62­89.

  , Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Jens Ludwig, "Low-Income Housing Policy," in "Economics
  of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States," Vol. 2, University of Chicago
  Press, 2015, pp. 59­126.

Colmer, Jonathan, Ian Hardman, Jay Shimshack, and John Voorheis, "Disparities
 in PM2.5 air pollution in the United States," Science, 2020, 369 (6503), 575­578.

Currie, Janet and Reed Walker, "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
 E-ZPass," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 65­90.


                                            30
Damm, Anna Piil and Christian Dustmann, "Does Growing Up in a High Crime
 Neighborhood Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?," American Economic Review, 2014, 104
 (6), 1806­1832.

Davis, Morris A, Jesse Gregory, and Daniel A Hartley, "The Long-Run Effects of
 Low-Income Housing on Neighborhood Composition," 2019, Working Paper.

DeLuca, Stefanie and Peter Rosenblatt, "Walking Away From The Wire: Housing
 Mobility and Neighborhood Opportunity in Baltimore," Housing Policy Debate, 2017.

  , Greg J. Duncan, Micere Keels, and Ruby M. Mendenhall, "Gautreaux Mothers
  and Their Children: An Update," Housing Policy Debate, 2010, 20 (1), 7­25.

Deming, David J., "Better Schools, Less Crime?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2011, 126 (4), 2063­2115.

Derenoncourt, Ellora, "Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migra-
 tion," 2020, Working Paper.

Deryugina, Tatyana and David Molitor, "Does When You Die Depend on Where You
 Live? Evidence from Hurricane Katrina," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (11),
 3602­3633.

  , Laura Kawano, and Steven Levitt, "The Economic Impact of Hurricane Katrina on
  Its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns," American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2018, 10 (2), 202­233.

Deutscher, Nathan, "Place, Peers, and the Teenage Years: Long-Run Neighborhood Ef-
 fects in Australia," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2020, 12 (2), 220­
 249.

Diamond, Rebecca and Tim McQuade, "Who Wants Affordable Housing in Their
 Backyard? An Equilibrium Analysis of Low-Income Property Development," Journal of
 Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3), 1063­1117.

Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer, "The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving
 Charter Schools," Journal of Political Economy, 2015, 123 (5), 985­1037.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, "The Role of Information and Social Interactions
 in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 815­842.

Durlauf, Steven N., "Chapter 50 Neighborhood effects," in J. Vernon Henderson and
 Jacques-Fran¸cois Thisse, ed., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. Volume 4
 of Cities and Geography, Elsevier, 2004, pp. 2173­2242.



                                          31
Fahle, Erin M., Benjamin R. Shear, Dementra Kalogrides, Sean F. Reardon,
  Belen Chavez, and Andrew D. Ho, Stanford Education Data Archive: Technical Doc-
  umentation (Version 3.0) 2019. Retrieved from http://purl.stanford.edu/db586ns4974.
Fauth, Rebecca C., Tama Leventhal, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, "Short-Term Effects
  of Moving from Public Housing in Poor to Middle-Class Neighborhoods on Low-Income,
  Minority Adults' Outcomes," Social Science & Medicine, 2004, 59 (11), 2271­2284.
Galiani, Sebastian, Alvin Murphy, and Juan Pantano, "Estimating Neighborhood
 Choice Models: Lessons from a Housing Assistance Experiment," American Economic
 Review, 2015, 105 (11), 3385­3415.
Galster, George and Patrick Sharkey, "Spatial Foundations of Inequality: A Conceptual
 Model and Empirical Overview," RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social
 Sciences, 2017, 3 (2), 1­33.
Garin, Andrew and Jonathan Rothbaum, "Was the Arsenal of Democracy an En-
 gine of Mobility? The World War II Industrial Expansion and the Roots of Mid-century
 Manufacturing Opportunity," 2020, Working Paper.
Glaeser, Edward, "Reforming Land Use Regulations," July 2017. The Brookings Institu-
 tion.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jos´    e A. Scheinkman, "Crime and Social
 Interactions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 507­548.
Goering, John, Joan Kraft, Feins Judith, Dennis McInnis, Mary Holin, and Huda
 Elhassan, "Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program: Current
 Status and Initial Findings," 1999.
Graham, Bryan S., "Identifying and Estimating Neighborhood Effects," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Literature, 2018, 56 (2), 450­500.
Haltiwanger, John C, Mark J Kutzbach, Giordano E Palloni, Henry Pollakowski,
 Matthew Staiger, and Daniel Weinberg, "The Children of HOPE VI Demolitions:
 National Evidence on Labor Market Outcomes," November 2020, NBER Working Paper
 No. 28157, November.
Harding, David J., Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian,
 Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Matthew Sciandra,
 and Jens Ludwig, "Evaluating Contradictory Experimental and Non-Experimental Es-
 timates of Neighborhood Effects on Economic Outcomes for Adults," 2021, NBER Working
 Paper No. 28454, February.
Hastings, Justine S. and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, "Information, School Choice, and
 Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2008, 123 (4), 1373­1414.

                                         32
Heckman, James J. and Stefano Mosso, "The Economics of Human Development and
 Social Mobility," Annual Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 689­733.

Heissel, Jennifer A., Claudia Persico, and David Simon, "Does Pollution Drive
 Achievement? The Effect of Traffic Pollution on Academic Performance," Journal of Hu-
 man Resources, 2020, pp. 1218­9903R2.

Hendren, Nathaniel and Ben Sprung-Keyser, "A Unified Welfare Analysis of Govern-
 ment Policies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (3), 1209­1318.

Hoffman, Jeremy S., Vivek Shandas, and Nicholas Pendleton, "The Effects of His-
 torical Housing Policies on Resident Exposure to Intra-Urban Heat: A Study of 108 US
 Urban Areas," Climate, 2020, 8 (1), 12.

Holzer, Harry J., "The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Has the Evidence Shown?,"
 Urban Studies, 1991, 28 (1), 105­122.

  , John M. Quigley, and Steven Raphael, "Public transit and the spatial distribution
  of minority employment: Evidence from a natural experiment," Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 2003, 22 (3), 415­441.

Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller, "Who Suffers During
 Recessions?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (3), 27­48.

Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and W. Reed Walker, "Every Breath You
  Take--Every Dollar You'll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act
  of 1970," Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (3), 848­902.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, "Does School Spending Matter? The New Literature on an Old
  Question," 2018, NBER Working Paper 25368, December.

  and Claire Mackevicius, "The Distribution of School Spending Impacts," 2021, NBER
  Working Paper No. 28517, March.

  , Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico, "The Effects of School Spending on Edu-
  cational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 157­218.

Jacob, Brian A., "Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
  from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago," The American Economic Review, 2004, 94
  (1), 233­258.

Jencks, Christopher and Susan E. Mayer, "The Social Consequences of Growing Up
  in a Poor Neighborhood: A Review," in Laurence Lynn, Jr. and Michael G. H. McGeary,
  eds., Inner-City Poverty in the United States, Washington, D.C: National Academies Press,
  1990.


                                            33
Johnson, Janna E. and Evan J. Taylor, "The Long Run Health Consequences of Rural-
  urban Migration," Quantitative Economics, 2019, 10 (2), 565­606.

Kain, John F., "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentraliza-
 tion," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1968, 82 (2), 175.

Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, "Moving to Oppor-
 tunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (2), 607­654.

Katz, Lawrence F, Jonathan Roth, Richard Hendra, and Kelsey Schaberg, "Why
 Do Sectoral Employment Programs Work? Lessons from WorkAdvance," 2020, Working
 Paper.

Kaufman, Julie E. and James Rosenbaum, "The Education and Employment of Low-
 Income Black Youth in White Suburbs," Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
 1992, p. 13.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Experimental Anal-
 ysis of Neighborhood Effects," Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1), 83­119.

Laliberte, Jean-William, "Long-term Contextual Effects in Education: Schools and Neigh-
  borhoods," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2021, 13 (2), 336­377.

Lochner, Lance, "Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach," Interna-
  tional Economic Review, 2004, 45 (3), 811­843.

Loury, Glenn C., "A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences," in Phyllis A. Wallace
  and Annette LaMond, eds., Women, Minorities, and Employment Discrimination, Heath,
  1977, pp. 153­186.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C.
 Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, "Neighborhood Effects on the
 Long-Term Well-Being of Low-Income Adults," Science, 2012, 337 (6101), 1505­1510.

  , , , , , , and , "Long-Term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families:
  Evidence from Moving to Opportunity," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 226­
  231.

  , Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan,
  Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Stacy Tessler Lin-
  dau, Robert C. Whitaker, and Thomas W. McDade, "Neighborhoods, Obesity,
  and Diabetes -- A Randomized Social Experiment," New England Journal of Medicine,
  2011, 365 (16), 1509­1519.

Manski, Charles F., "Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Prob-
 lem," The Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531.

                                          34
McKenzie, David, Steven Stillman, and John Gibson, "How Important is Selection?
 Experimental vs. Non-Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration," Jour-
 nal of the European Economic Association, 2010, 8 (4), 913­945.

Mendenhall, Ruby, Stefanie DeLuca, and Greg Duncan, "Neighborhood Resources,
 Racial Segregation, and Economic Mobility: Results from the Gautreaux Program," Social
 Science Research, 2006, 35 (4), 892­923.

Miller, Sarah and Cindy K. Soo, "Do Neighborhoods Affect the Credit Market Decisions
 of Low-Income Borrowers? Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment," The
 Review of Financial Studies, 2020, 34 (2), 827­863.

Nakamura, Emi, J´  osef Sigurdsson, and J´  on Steinsson, "The Gift of Moving: Inter-
 generational Consequences of a Mobility Shock," 2020, Working Paper, UC Berkeley.

Olsen, Edgar O., "The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Methods of Delivering Housing
 Subsidies," University of Virginia, Working Paper, 2009.

Oreopoulos, Philip, "The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1533­1575.

Owens, Ann, "Inequality in Children's Contexts: Income Segregation of Households with
 and without Children," American Sociological Review, 2016, 81 (3), 549­574.

Park, R. Jisung, Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith, "Heat
 and Learning," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020, 12 (2), 306­339.

Pollack, Craig Evan, Amanda L. Blackford, Shawn Du, Stefanie Deluca, Rachel
 L. J. Thornton, and Bradley Herring, "Association of Receipt of a Housing Voucher
 With Subsequent Hospital Utilization and Spending," JAMA, 2019, 322 (21), 2115­2124.

Popkin, Susan J., James E. Rosenbaum, and Patricia M. Meaden, "Labor Market
 Experiences of Low-income Black Women in Middle-class Suburbs: Evidence from a Survey
 of Gautreaux Program Participants," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1993,
 12 (3), 556­573.

Priemus, Hugo, Peter A. Kemp, and David P. Varady, "Housing Vouchers in the
 United States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands: Current Issues and Future Perspec-
 tives," Housing Policy Debate, 2005, 16 (3-4), 575­609.

Reardon, Sean F., Kendra Bischoff, Ann Owens, and Joseph B. Townsend, "Has
 Income Segregation Really Increased? Bias and Bias Correction in Sample-Based Segre-
 gation Estimates," Demography, 2018, 55 (6), 2129­2160.

Riccio, James A., Sustained Earnings Gains for Residents in a Public Housing Jobs Pro-
 gram: Seven-Year Findings from the Jobs-Plus Demonstration, New York City: MDRC,
 2010.

                                          35
Rickford, John R., Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Ray Yun Gou, Rebecca
 Greene, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Lisa Sanbon-
 matsu, Andres E. Sanchez-Ordo~     nez, Matthew Sciandra, Ewart Thomas, and
 Jens Ludwig, "Neighborhood Effects on Use of African-American Vernacular English,"
 PNAS, 2015, 112 (38), 11817­11822.

Rosenbaum, James E., "Changing the Geography of Opportunity by Expanding Residen-
 tial Choice: Lessons from the Gautreaux Program," Housing Policy Debate, 1995, 6 (1),
 231­269.

Rothstein, Richard, The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government
 Segregated America, New York: Liveright Publishing, 2017.

Sampson, Robert J., Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect,
  Chicago, IL.: University of Chicago Press, 2012.

   and Patrick Sharkey, "Neighborhood Selection and the Social Reproduction of Con-
  centrated Racial Inequality," Demography, 2008, 45 (1), 1­29.

  , Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley, "Assessing "Neighborhood
  Effects": Social Processes and New Directions in Research," Annual Review of Sociology,
  2002, 28 (1), 443­478.

Schwartz, Heather L., Kata Mihaly, and Breann Gala, "Encouraging Residential
  Moves to Opportunity Neighborhoods: An Experiment Testing Incentives Offered to Hous-
  ing Voucher Recipients," Housing Policy Debate, 2017, 27 (2), 230­260.

Sharkey, Patrick, "The Acute Effect of Local Homicides on Children's Cognitive Perfor-
  mance," PNAS, 2010, 107 (26), 11733­11738.

   and Jacob W. Faber, "Where, When, Why, and For Whom Do Residential Contexts
  Matter? Moving Away from the Dichotomous Understanding of Neighborhood Effects,"
  Annual Review of Sociology, 2014, 40 (1), 559­579.

Solon, Gary, "Chapter 29 Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market," in Orley C.
  Ashenfelter and David Card, ed., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, Part A, Elsevier,
  1999, pp. 1761­1800.

Tach, Laura and Allison Dwyer Emory, "Public Housing Redevelopment, Neighborhood
  Change, and the Restructuring of Urban Inequality," American Journal of Sociology, 2017,
  123 (3), 686­739.

Topa, Giorgio and Yves Zenou, "Neighborhood and Network Effects," in "Handbook of
  Regional and Urban Economics," Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2015, pp. 561­624.




                                           36
Votruba, Mark Edward and Jeffrey R. Kling, "Effects of neighborhood characteristics
 on the mortality of black male youth: Evidence from Gautreaux, Chicago," Social Science
 & Medicine, 2009, 68 (5), 814­823.

Weinberg, Bruce A., Patricia B. Reagan, and Jeffrey J. Yankow, "Do Neighbor-
 hoods Affect Hours Worked? Evidence from Longitudinal Data," Journal of Labor Eco-
 nomics, 2004, 22 (4), 891­924.

Wilson, William J., The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
 Policy, University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Wodtke, Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert, "Neighborhood Effects in
 Temporal Perspective: The Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Concentrated Disadvantage
 on High School Graduation," American Sociological Review, 2011, 76 (5), 713­736.

Wood, David, Neal Halfon, Debra Scarlata, and Paul Newacheck, "Impact of Family
 Relocation on Children's Growth, Development, School Function, and Behavior," Journal
 of the American Medical Association, 1993, 270 (11), 1334­38.

Yagan, Danny, "Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession," Journal of Political
 Economy, 2019, 127 (5), 2505­2558.




                                          37
  Figure 1: Associations between Adult and Child Outcomes and Neighborhood Poverty

                                                                  (a) Adult Employment Rate (2000)                                                                                        (b) Life Expectancy
        Employment Rate (CZ-Level)




                                                                                                                                                         84




                                                                                                                            Life Expectancy (CZ-Level)
                                           .65

                                            .6                                                                                                           83

                                           .55
                                                                                                                                                         82
                                            .5
                                                  A one percentage point increase in the poverty rate                                                          A one percentage point increase in the poverty rate
                                                  decreases employment by 0.8 percentage points.                                                               decreases life expectancy by 0.11 years.
                                           .45                                                                                                           81
                                                  5                  10               15                20   25   30                                           5               10                15                  20        25   30
                                                                      Poverty Rate (Percentage Points)                                                                          Poverty Rate (Percentage Points)


                                             (c) Intergenerational Mobility for Low-Income Children                                                                                 (d) Academic Achievement
        Upward Mobility, p25 (CZ-Level)




                                                                                                                            Mean Test Score (SD-Level)
                                          38000                                                                                                          .5


                                          36000

                                          34000                                                                                                           0

                                          32000
                                                      A one percentage point increase in the poverty rate                                                      A one percentage point increase in the poverty rate
                                          30000       decreases upward mobility by $371.                                                                       decreases test scores by 0.024 std. deviations.
                                                                                                                                                         -.5

                                                   5                  10               15               20   25   30                                           0                    10                    20              30        40
                                                                       Poverty Rate (Percentage Points)                                                                          Poverty Rate (Percentage Points)



Notes: This figure provides binned scatter plots of the relationship between the poverty rate and the following
measures of average resident outcomes: employment rates, life expectancy, upward mobility and test scores.
The unit of analysis in Panels A, B and C is a commuting zone. In Panel D, the unit of analysis is a school
district. Details on data sources are provided in the notes to Table 1.




                                                                                                                       38
     Figure 2: Within City Associations between Adult and Child Outcomes and Neighborhood Poverty, by Census Tract in
     Chicago
                                                                                                      (c) Intergenerational Mobility for
                 (a) Poverty Rate (2000)                (b) Adult Employment Rate (2000)                    Low-Income Children
39




     Notes: This figure provides maps of tract-level poverty rates in 2000 (Panel A), mean adult employment rates in 2000 (Panel B), and upward
     mobility for low-income children (Panel C) in Chicago. Details on data sources are provided in the notes to Table 1.
                             Table 1: Associations Between Adult and Child Outcomes and Neighborhood Poverty

                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                     Adult                         Upward                            Adult         Upward
                                                                     Life                          Test-based
                      Dependent Variables:         Employment                    Mobility, p25                     Employment    Mobility, p25
                                                                  Expectancy                      Achievement
                                                   Rate (2000)                     Parents                         Rate (2000)     Parents

                      Poverty Rate (Pct. Points)   -0.00821***     -0.109***      -371.5***        -0.0248***      -0.00524***    -384.3***
                                                      (0.000)       (0.011)        (39.907)         (0.0003)         (0.0001)      (9.875)

                      N                                741            595             741            12,601          72,416         71,923
                      Level of Analysis                CZ             CZ              CZ         School District     Tract          Tract
                      Controls                        None           None            None             None         County FE      County FE
                      Mean                            0.578          82.58          35,469           0.0245          0.594          34,455
40




                      R-squared                       0.533          0.241           0.096            0.456          0.537           0.539

         Notes: This table reports estimates from a regression model where the dependent variable is a measure of adult or child outcomes (specified
         in each column header) in a geographic area. Geographic areas are commuting zones (CZ), school districts, or Census tracts. The independent
         variable of interest is a location specific measure of the poverty rate (the fraction of residents living below the poverty line). Columns 1,
         2, 3, 5, and 6 use poverty rates from the 2000 Decennial Census. Column 4 uses poverty rates averaged over 2007-2016 from the American
         Community Survey (combined files for the years 2007-2011 and 2012-2016). The dependent variables in columns 1 and 5 are measures from the
     1




         2000 Decennial Census. Column 2 uses the life expectancy measure from Chetty et al. (2016a) based on mortality data from Social Security
         Administration death records. Columns 3 and 6 use the "Upward Mobility" measure from the Opportunity Atlas (Chetty et al., 2020a) which is
         the mean later-life household income rank (measured at ages 31-37) for children whose parents were at the 25th percentile of the national income
         distribution. Column 4 uses the test-based achievement measure from the Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA) which is an estimate of
         mean test scores on a cohort standardized scale. The test score means are constructed using data from the National Assessment of Educational
         Progress (NAEP) as detailed in Fahle et al. (2019). Standard errors are clustered at the county level in Columns 5 and 6. Statistical significance
         is denoted by: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
                           Online Appendix

     Neighborhoods Matter: Assessing the Evidence for
                     Place Effects

                         Eric Chyn and Lawrence F. Katz

                                        June 16, 2021


                   A.   Econometric Models of Neighborhood Effects

     To aid our review of the empirical literature on neighborhood effects, we present formal
econometric models of individual outcomes that allow for contemporaneous and develop-
                                                                    j
mental neighborhood effects and discuss identification issues. Let yit denote outcome j (e.g.,
earnings or health status) of individual i in year t. Define the index n(i)t to denote the
neighborhood where individual i lives in year t, and let c(i, a) represent the neighborhood in
which individual i grew up at ages a  {1, . . . , A}. We assume A < t and denote the years
associated with childhood ages using the index t(a). Let the vector Wn(i)t have entries that
contain indicators of neighborhood quality and other neighborhood characteristics measured
in a given year. Finally, for current outcome j , let the term i be the impact of family or
individual background factors, such as family inputs or genetic endowments, and let the term

it   represent time-varying idiosyncratic influences, such as household-level shocks.




                                         Appendix - 1
                           j
   A simple model assumes yit is an additive function of neighborhood effects and other
factors:

                                            A
                           j
                          yit = Wn(i)t  +         Wc(i,a)t(a) µa + i +   it .               (1)
                                            a=1


The contemporaneous effects of current neighborhood characteristics are captured by the
coefficients contained in the vector . The possibility that neighborhoods have lasting expo-
sure effects due to impacts on child development is captured by the coefficients contained in
the age-specific vector µa . These effects may vary (i.e., µa = µa-1 ) which embodies the "crit-
ical age effects" hypothesis that some childhood ages may be more important than others.
Note that Equation 1 assumes that there are no lingering effects from an individual's pre-
vious adult neighborhoods (residential locations in the years between childhood and t)--an
assumption that is often tested in the empirical literature (e.g., Chetty and Hendren 2018).
   The production function for current outcomes embodied in Equation 1 encompasses a
range of models from the neighborhood effects literature. Theoretically, much attention has
focused on a canonical linear-in-means model of social interactions that assumes the presence
of only contemporaneous neighborhood effects (Manski 1993; Brock and Durlauf 2001). In
this model, there are three sources of neighborhoods effects. First, endogenous peer effects
arise due to the propensity for individual behavior to depend on the expected (mean) be-
havior of their neighborhood peers. Second, exogenous effects represent the possibility that
individual behavior is shaped by a vector of average characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic back-
ground) of neighbor peers. Third, correlated effects refer to the fact that individuals within a
neighborhood face the same institutional and physical environments (e.g., access to schools,
law enforcement practices, temperature, or air pollution). As discussed in Manski (1993),
it is typically not possible to separately identify endogenous effects from exogenous effects
(or from unmeasured correlated effects) in the canonical linear-in-means model. Rather, a


                                         Appendix - 2
reduced form can be examined and estimated to test for evidence of some form of contem-
poraneous neighborhood effects:


                                  j
                                 yi =  + xi  + xn  + zn  + i ,                              (2)


where xi is a vector for individual characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic background), xn is
a vector of the averages of the individual background characteristics for the residents of
neighborhood n, zn is a vector of other neighborhood characteristics (e.g., school resources),
and   i    is an error term. In this framework, the main coefficient of interest is the vector 
as a measure of the reduced form impacts of both endogenous and exogenous neighborhood
effects.
    There has been much recent attention on models that focus solely on childhood neighbor-
hood effects. Chetty and Hendren (2018) study the effects of moving a child to a new area
where other children do well. They characterize neighborhoods in terms of the mean adult
outcomes of children who spend their entire childhood in an area (those who are "perma-
nent residents"). Since place effects may vary based on parent income and the child's birth
cohort, Chetty and Hendren examine the impact of the mean outcome of children who are
permanent residents of place n with parents at the percentile p of the income distribution
in birth cohort s denoted as y j
                               nps . Formally, they focus on a restricted version of Equation 1

for children who moved across areas:


                                       j
                                      yi =  m + m y j
                                                    nps + i ,                               (3)


       j
where yi is an adult-age outcome (e.g., income at age 24) for child i who moved to commuting
zone n at age m  {1, . . . , A} and stayed for the rest of their childhood, and i is an error
term. The coefficient of interest m represents the mean impact of spending year m of one's
childhood onward in an area where permanent residents have better outcomes. In this model,

                                          Appendix - 3
the exposure effect at age m is defined as m = m - m+1 .
   Identification of neighborhood effect parameters is empirically challenging due to the non-
random sorting of families into neighborhoods. Formally, the concern is that cov (xn , i ) = 0
and cov (y j
           nps , i ) = 0 in Equations 2 and 3, respectively. In line with broader trends in

economics and social science, the recent neighborhood effects literature has addressed self-
selection using experimental and quasi-experimental approaches. As discussed in the main
text, several studies rely on experimental data from the MTO demonstration, which provided
housing vouchers to a randomly selected group of low-income households living in distressed
public housing. For example, Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) use the MTO treatment
group variable as an instrument for the neighborhood poverty rate and estimate a variant of
Equation 2. The quasi-experimental approach in Chetty and Hendren (2018) studies movers
and estimates exposure effects by assuming that selection effects for movers to different areas
do not vary with the child's age at move. This allows for the possibility that families that
move to better areas may differ from those that move to worse areas. This assumption implies
that selection effects in the estimates from Equation 3 will cancel out when estimating the
exposure effect.




                                        Appendix - 4
