                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         WHEN INTEREST RATES GO LOW, SHOULD PUBLIC DEBT GO HIGH?

                                       Johannes Brumm
                                         Xiangyu Feng
                                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                          Felix Kubler

                                       Working Paper 28951
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28951


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Oliver Blanchard, Werner Roeger, and seminar participants at the European
Commission (DG-ECFIN) and the International Monetary Fund (FAD) for very helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28951.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Johannes Brumm, Xiangyu Feng, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Felix Kubler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Interest Rates Go Low, Should Public Debt Go High?
Johannes Brumm, Xiangyu Feng, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Felix Kubler
NBER Working Paper No. 28951
June 2021
JEL No. H0,H2,H21,H22,H5,H6

                                          ABSTRACT

Is deficit finance, explicit or implicit, free when borrowing rates are routinely lower than growth
rates? Specifically, can the government make all generations better off by perpetually taking from
the young and giving to the old? We study this question in simple closed and open economies and
show that achieving Pareto gains requires implausible calibrations. Even then, the gains reflect,
depending on the economy's openness, improved intergenerational risk-sharing, improved
international risk-sharing, and beggaring thy neighbor ­ not intergenerational redistribution per
se. Low government borrowing rates, including borrowing rates running far below growth rates,
justify improved risk-sharing between generations and countries. They provide no convincing
basis for using deficit finance to redistribute from young and future generations or other
countries.

Johannes Brumm                                   Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology                Department of Economics
Waldhornstr. 27                                  Boston University
76131 Karlsruhe                                  270 Bay State Road
Germany                                          Boston, MA 02215
jo.brumm@gmail.com                               and NBER
                                                 kotlikoff@gmail.com
Xiangyu Feng
Boston University                                Felix Kubler
270 Bay State Road                               University of Zurich
Boston, MA 02215                                 Plattenstrasse 32
xyfeng@xmu.edu.cn                                CH-8032 Zurich
                                                 Switzerland
                                                 and Swiss Financial Institute
                                                 fkubler@gmail.com
1     Introduction
In his thought-provoking article Blanchard (2019), Olivier Blanchard suggests that implicit
and explicit intergenerational redistribution ­ henceforth, deficit finance ­ may come at no cost
to future generations given the average historical gap between the U.S. growth rate and the
real interest rate on U.S. Treasuries. His analysis is framed within a stochastic, two-period
overlapping-generations (OLG) economy. We revisit Blanchard's simple closed-economy model
and also examine two open-economy variants with three questions in mind. First, can deficit
finance effect Pareto improvements in the ex-ante (pre-policy) expected utility levels of current
and future generations? Second, do potential closed-economy Pareto gains reflect intergen-
erational redistribution per se or simply improved intergenerational risk-sharing? Third, do
potential domestic Pareto gains in open economies reflect domestic intergenerational redistri-
bution or simply improved intergenerational and international risk-sharing as well as beggaring
thy neighbor's capital stock?
    To preview our findings, deficit finance, which we implement via a defined-benefit, pay-go,
social security system (henceforth DB) can Pareto-improve Blanchard's economy, but only un-
der, in our view, implausible assumptions. Moreover, when such domestic efficiency gains arise,
improved risk-sharing, beggar-thy-neighbor effects, or both are the reason. Stated differently,
when deficit finance Pareto improves ex-ante expected utility (henceforth EAU) of current and
future domestic residents, it does so because it improves risk-sharing, free rides on global capital
formation, or both. Indeed, in Blanchard's closed-economy model, if one first implements an
efficient risk-sharing policy ­ in which the young give to the old in some states and receive from
the old in other states ­ adding deficit finance to the policy mix serves only to redistribute,
helping early generations at the price of hurting future generations. In the open economy,
improved risk-sharing, including improved international risk-sharing, not deficit finance, is the
path to making all generations, including foreign generations, better off.
    Like Blanchard (2019), we assume Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences, but apply these
preferences consistently in deriving EAU. Doing so entails, in contrast to Blanchard's approach,
evaluating uncertainty over the state in which an agent is born with the same degree of risk
aversion with which the agent evaluates the uncertainty of old-age consumption. This neither
influences agents' behavior, nor the model's calibration. But it does provide greater scope
for Pareto improvements via deficit finance, which makes our results ­ the inability to Pareto
improve under realistic calibrations and uncovering the underlying sources of Pareto gains
(when they arise) ­ even more striking.
    We begin with Blanchard's closed economy and then add a second country, considering both
a stylized symmetric case and one in which the two countries represent the U.S. and the rest
of the world (RoW). In the closed economy, we convey the importance of risk-sharing to the
success of DB pay-go in four ways. First, we decompose a generation's EAU gains into three
components ­ a risk-neutral effect, a life-cycle-risk effect, and a cohort-risk effect. The risk-
neutral effect (RNE) isolates the EAU impact of policy-induced changes in average, realized,
cohort-specific consumption levels. The life-cycle-risk effect (LRE) captures the EAU impact

                                                 2
of old-age consumption risk given an agent's state of birth. And the cohort-risk effect (CRE)
captures the EAU impact of agents not knowing the state into which they will be born. Our
decomposition relates the percent change in EAU to the sum of RNE, LRE, and CRE. As we
show, increases in EAU of those alive in the long run (henceforth, long-run EAU) are fully
explained by LRE and CRE, which capture improved risk-sharing both post- and pre-birth.1
    Second, we show that running deficits of the same average size, but with less inherent risk-
sharing can vitiate what we view as the slender prospects for a Pareto improvement. Third, we
consider a two-way transfer scheme where the old transfer to the young when shocks are good
and the young transfer to the old when shocks are bad ­ with the policy redistributing nothing,
on average, across generations. We show that such a scheme a) is Pareto improving when DB
pay-go is not, b) Pareto dominates DB pay-go even when such policy is Pareto improving, and,
once implemented, c) exhausts the potential for additional Pareto gains via deficit finance.
Fourth, we show that Pareto gains to EAU, in the special cases in which they arise, disappear
in the absence of Blanchard (2019)'s assumption that the young receive a safe endowment in
addition to their risky wages.2
    Adding an equally large second country expands somewhat the scope for domestic efficiency
gains. I.e., generating higher EAU levels for domestic residents is feasible for a slightly larger
range of parameters than in the closed economy. However, this home-country improvement
typically reflects beggaring thy neighbor, specifically the ability of the home country to consume
not just some of its own seed corn, but also some of the seed corn that would otherwise be
planted (invested) abroad. With sufficiently low risk-free rates as well as exceedingly small
risk premia, both countries can gain from domestic deficits. But what's good for the goose is
good for its symmetric gander. Since the home country gains more than the foreign country,
the foreign country will, surely, engage in its own deficit finance. The Nash equilibrium to
the game of free riding on the global supply of capital entails each country setting its own
intergenerational redistribution above the cooperative outcome. This leaves both countries
worse off for their effort.
    Our third model takes the U.S. as the home country and the RoW as the foreign country.
The model includes compensated foreign-investment taxes to achieve a realistic pattern of cross-
country asset holdings.3 Surprisingly, in this more realistic setting, the domestic EAU effects of
DB pay-go are only slightly more favorable than in the closed economy. The reduction in U.S.
saving and, thus, global capital formation does produce a beggar-thy-neighbor effect. Indeed,
the U.S. experiences only about one quarter of the reduction in domestic capital that would arise
were the economy closed. Stated differently, the RoW takes most of the hit to global investment.
But given our assumed incomplete, international financial markets, domestic DB pay-go also
benefits foreigners through improved international risk-sharing. Specifically, the reduction in
   1
     Since increases in EAU decline monotonically as one moves from early to later generations, increases in
long-run EAU ensures that all prior generations are also better off, i.e., it implies a Pareto improvement in the
path of EAU.
   2
     By analogy, Samuelson (1958)'s Pareto improvement from his Ponzi scheme disappears if one drops his
no-storage assumption.
   3
     Assuming real transaction costs of investing abroad would serve equally well.


                                                       3
saving in the home country reduces the global demand for the domestically-supplied safe bond,
raising its return. This lets foreign agents build safer portfolios at lower cost.
    To summarize, in the special cases in which they occur, the secret sauce underlying domestic
Pareto-improving deficits in Blanchard's model is improved risk-sharing, intergenerationally and
internationally, plus beggaring thy neighbor. Appropriate bilateral risk-sharing policy can make
all generations, foreign and domestic, better off. But beggaring thy children or thy neighbor is
not an ingredient in the recipe. Indeed, as risk-sharing becomes more efficient, deficit finance,
whether explicit or implicit, devolves to zero-sum generational and international games.
    We proceed, in section 2, with a brief literature review. Section 3 presents the closed-
economy model and motivates our EAU measure. Section 4 presents our closed-economy results
and explains how we decomposes EAU changes into its risk neutral and risk-sharing components.
Section 5 adds a second economy ­ initially identical to the first economy, but then treats the
first economy as the U.S. and second economy as the rest of the world. Section 6 acknowledges
that deficit finance may be justified in Keynesian and other settings even if isn't justified in
Blanchard (2019)'s. Section 7 summarizes and concludes.


2    Literature Review
Blanchard (2019) alights from a venerable literature, including Solow (1956), Samuelson (1958),
Phelps (1961), Diamond (1965), and Tirole (1985), examining dynamic inefficiency in deter-
ministic settings. His paper also connects to classic studies by Abel et al. (1989) and Zilcha
(1990), which show that stochastic OLG economies that perpetually accumulate excess capital
are dynamically inefficient ­ that is, with appropriate policy, all current and future agents can
consume more in every state. After consulting the historical record, Abel et al. (1989) find no
evidence that the U.S. or, indeed, any major OECD country, saves simply for the sake of saving.
Yet, a stochastic OLG economy's dynamic efficiency doesn't ensure its Pareto efficiency ­ the
inability to raise at least one current or future generation's ex-ante utility without lowering
that of any other.
    Unfortunately, assessing Pareto efficiency is more challenging than evaluating dynamic ef-
ficiency. As Merton (1983), Ball and Mankiw (2007), Barbie et al. (2007), Bohn (1999), and
others emphasize, stochastic OLG models are inherently Pareto inefficient. Current genera-
tions can't share risk with future generations. Consequently, any government policy, including
deficit finance, may generate a Pareto improvement merely because of its direct or indirect risk
pooling. Merton (1983) provides an elegant demonstration of fiscal policy's intergenerational
risk-sharing capacity. He shows that a combination of consumption taxes, wage taxes, and old-
age state pensions can fully share productivity, demographic, and factor-share shocks across
generations. In a similar vein, Bohn (1999) demonstrates that investing social security's trust
fund in equities can better insure payment of future generations' promised benefits.
    Scheinkman and Weiss (1986) is an early paper showing how the introduction of a funda-
mentally worthless asset can improve risk-sharing in a model of infinitely lived agents. Whether


                                               4
one calls this asset fiat money, government debt, or a state-contingent tax-transfer system, is
immaterial. The key point, from our study's perspective, is the longstanding recognition of
the government's ability to use fiscal arrangements as pseudo financial instruments that can
Pareto improve. Also, as Samuelson (1958) and Tirole (1985)'s papers implicitly make clear,
whether these policies are viewed (labeled) as government policy or as privately-initiated fi-
nancial bubbles, makes no difference. Recent contributions focusing on the bubble component
of government debt, with a particular focus on the low rates environment, include Jiang et al.
(2019), Miao and Su (2021), Brunnermeier et al. (2020), and Reis (2021) ­ the later two em-
phasizing that growth rates in excess of safe rates can expand fiscal capacity, but only to a
limited extend. Our admonition is that deficit finance's economic justification rests on Pareto
efficiency, not fiscal sustainability.
                                       
    Hubbard and Judd (1987) and Imrohoroglu       et al. (1995) examine the state's ability to share
micro, not macro risk, particularly idiosyncratic longevity risk. They demonstrate that the
risk-sharing of state pensions can raise long-run welfare despite the policy's crowding out of
capital. Their implicit message, which we reprise here, is that risk-sharing policy is distinct
from and can be run independent of intergenerational redistribution policies. Krueger and
Kubler (2006) explicitly distinguish social security's roles in sharing risk and reducing capital
formation. In their case, the risk arises from macro shocks that can drive wages and capital
                                                                         
returns in different directions. Unlike Hubbard and Judd (1987) and Imrohoroglu       et al. (1995),
they find that the long-run, average net welfare impact of pay-go social security is negative.
Bovenberg and Uhlig (2008) also clarifies how the design of state pensions ­ precisely how
deficit finance is structured ­ can impact intergenerational risk-sharing.
    Hasanhodzic and Kotlikoff (2013) reach similar conclusions to Krueger and Kubler (2006),
but do so in a larger scale (80-period) life-cycle model. Their study suggests that intergen-
erational risk, caused by macro shocks, is far smaller than suggested by models with fewer
periods.4 Harenberg and Ludwig (2019) reach a different conclusion by combining correlated
micro and macro shocks. The interaction of these shocks substantially exacerbates aggregate
risk, making, in their model, risk mitigation more important than crowding out in determining
the long-term gains from pay-go social security.
    Ball and Mankiw (2007) and Barbie et al. (2007) provide general conditions for ex-ante
and ex-interim (at a cohort's time of birth) Pareto-efficient intergenerational risk-sharing. Ex-
ante efficiency is, to repeat, our focus. Ex-interim efficiency, considered in Krueger and Kubler
(2002), is a more stringent criterion for achieving Pareto improvements than that adopted here.
It treats agents born in particular states as distinct and requires that all their policy-induced
welfare changes be non-negative.
    Blanchard (2019) ties the question of government debt and intergenerational transfers to the
current low interest-rate environment. He, like Sergeyev and Mehrotra (2020) and Summers and
Rachel (2019), argue that an increase of government debt may engender no fiscal costs. Sims
(2019) critically examines this argument from a monetary perspective. Barro (2020) argues
   4
     If, as claimed here, risk-sharing is the sine qua non for Pareto-improving deficit finance, a surfeit of risk to
share in realistically-timed models raises further doubt about the efficiency of intergenerational redistribution.


                                                         5
that understanding the consequences of low risk-free rates requires modeling the high equity
premium, which he traces to rare disaster risk. Hellwig (2020) provides supporting theoretical
arguments for the possibility that modern economies are dynamically inefficient. In particular,
he shows that the presence of a long-lived productive asset is not inconsistent with dynamic
inefficiency in the presence of transaction costs.
   Blanchard et al. (2020) explore some implications of these arguments for EU fiscal rules. In
an issue of the AEA papers and proceedings, Brumm et al. (2020), Evans (2020) and Hasan-
hodzic (2020) critically discuss some of the assumptions underlying Blanchard (2019). None of
these papers consider either the importance of risk-sharing or beggar-thy-neighbor policy for
assessing deficit policies. Nor do Ball and Mankiw (2021) who view low safe rates as reflecting
market power and find that deficit finance may reduce welfare even with very low safe rates.
Since risk and market power are arguably the major drivers of the wedge between safe rates
and risky rates, their findings complement ours in providing a word of caution about taking
low interest rates as a reason to raise public debt.


3     Blanchard's Closed Economy Revisited
Here we revisit Blanchard (2019)'s closed economy and its calibration. But we replace Blan-
chard's welfare measure with one that fully accords with Blanchard's assumed Epstein and
Zin (1989) (EZ) preferences. Doing so expands the set of parameter values for which deficit
finance is Pareto improving. Even so, this set is quite narrow, comprising very low risk-free
rates and/or risk-premia, as we show in Section 4.


3.1    OLG Economy With Intergenerational Transfers
Blanchard (2019)'s OLG model is bare bones. Agents live for two periods, consuming cy,t when
young and co,t when old. Their utility is EZ (homothetic Kreps-Porteus), with an intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (IES) of 1, a risk-aversion parameter denoted  , and a discount rate
of ~ = /(1 -  ). Blanchard (2019) specifies these preferences with the utility function

                                                               -
                             (1 -  ) log cy,t +      log Et c1
                                                             o,t+1 .                        (1)
                                                  1-

By a monotone transformation via the exponential function we get:
                                                             
                                       (1- )          -
                                      cy,t     E t c1
                                                    o,t+1
                                                            1-
                                                                 .                          (2)

This is in line with Epstein and Zin (1989)'s original formulation. It also has the advantage
of being homogeneous of degree one so that variations in utility corresponds to variations in
consumption, i.e., a given percentage increase in consumption in all states produces the same
percentage increase in utility.
    Output is Cobb-Douglas with total factor productivity, At , fluctuating randomly around a


                                                   6
fixed mean. When young, agents work, earn the wage Wt , receive a safe endowment E , and
pay a net tax Tt . When old, agents receive a net transfer Tt+1 . Note, in each period, transfers
to the old equal taxes on the young. There are two assets ­ capital, whose return is risky and
whose principal depreciates fully each period, and a risk-free bond in zero aggregate supply.
                                                                               f
Denote the return on capital by Rt and the risk-free return on the bond by Rt    . The generation
born at t solves
                                                                            
                                                      (1- )          -
                                  max                cy,t     E t c1
                                                                   o,t+1
                                                                           1-

                          cy,t ,co,t+1 ,kt+1 ,bt+1

                                           s.t. cy,t = Wt + E - kt+1 - bt+1 - Tt                              (3)
                                                                                f
                                                     co,t+1 = kt+1 Rt+1 + bt+1 Rt +1 + Tt+1 .


At , Rt , and Wt , satisfy
                                         log At = t ,            t   i.i.d. N 0,  2 .                         (4)
                                                                     -1
                                                            Rt = At kt  .                                     (5)
                                                                     
                                                      Wt = (1 - )At kt .                                      (6)

The supply of capital is determined by the investment choices of the young. The net supply of
bonds is (in the absence of government debt) zero. The risk-free rate is determined via market
clearing.
    Below, we contrast the laissez-faire economy, Tt = 0, with a tax-transfer policy that is
constant over time, Tt = T > 0. We call this policy defined-benefit (DB) pay-go. While we
follow Blanchard (2019) in focusing on this transfer scheme, we also consider other schemes ­
defined contribution, constant debt, and two-way transfers (see Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 5.2).


3.2     Calibration
Following Blanchard (2019)'s, we set capital's share, , at 0.33, the standard deviation of the
productivity shock,  , at = 0.2, and the fixed endowment, E , at one half average wages in the
no-policy stochastic steady state.5 Also, following Blanchard (2019), we consider, except in
Section 4.5, only cases of T  E , which ensures feasibility.6
    To calibrate preference parameters, we first fix a pair of targets for the unconditional mean
                                  f                                             f
of the risk-free rate (RFR), E0 Rt  , and the risk premium (RP), E0 Rt - Rt       . We then choose
                                        7
pairs of  and  that meet the targets. We focus on two cases. Baseline 1 has an annualized
risk-free rate of -1 percent and an annualized risk premium of 3 percent. To hit these targets
in the closed economy, we set  to 19.0 and annualized  to 0.933. Baseline 2 features an even
   5
     In our two baseline cases, E represents about 40 percent of average total output, the later being production
plus the endowment. The endowment assumption thus effectively reduces capital share of total output to 20
percent.
   6
     For T  E , there will be cases of game over ­ realizations of At in which the young have too little resources
to cover their pay-go contributions. This "game over" limit, examined by Evans et al. (2012), plays a key role
in Tirole (1985) and other studies of bubbles of finite value.
   7
     When there are two countries, both are assumed to have the same preferences.



                                                                     7
lower risk-free rate of -2 percent and a risk premium of 3. Here  is set at 19.2 and  at 0.944.
The values of  and  needed to hit these two targets are quite sensitive to TFP risk ­  ,
which Blanchard sets at 0.2. Fortunately, as shown in Appendix B, our main results aren't
particularly sensitive to changes in  and the associated changes in  and .
    Blanchard's calibration abstracts from both population and TFP growth. The average
postwar U.S. population growth rate was roughly 1 percent and the average growth rate of
TFP was around 1.5 percent. Hence, a -2 percent differential between the average safe rate
and the average growth rate corresponds to an annual safe rate of about 0.5 percent in a model
where population growth and TFP growth are matched to historical averages.8 The historical
average real return on the 1-year U.S. Treasury bill rate is 0.6 percent. Hence, calibrating, as
we do, a real risk-free rate/growth rate differential of -2 percent and -1 percent (net of growth)
in our two baselines appears to capture the range of empirically plausible parameters.
    What about the risk premium? The historical average risk premium on equity has been
well above 4 percent. On the other hand, returns to physical capital as measured from national
product accounts seem to lie slightly below 4 percent. Of course, physical capital is just a
portion of U.S. national wealth, whose real return has averaged 6.5 percent in the postwar
era. It averaged 9.5 percent between 2010 and 2019.9 In sum, our baseline assumption of a
3 percentage point (pp) risk premium seems at the low end of what's empirically reasonable.
Nonetheless, we adopt this value to give deficit finance the benefit of the doubt. For, as we and
Blanchard (2019) show, adopting a higher and, to us, more plausible risk premium rules out
Pareto-improving deficit (DB pay-go) policy.
    These crucial calibration targets complete our description of the closed-economy's calibra-
tion. For the open-economy cases, most of the calibration details carry over. Remaining details
are described in section 5 and the Appendix C.


3.3     Computation
We first describe our computational approach for the closed economy model and then turn to
the two-country case. The state of the closed economy at time t is characterized by capital,
kt , accumulated in the previous period and TFP, At , determined exogenously. These variables
jointly determine factor prices and consumption of the old,

                                                      -1
                                             Rt = At kt  .
                                                           
                                            Wt = (1 - )At kt .                                             (7)
                                            co,t = kt Rt + Tt .
   8
     This said, U.S. population growth is far from stationary and is projected to decline to zero in the second
half of this century. See Aksoy et al. (2019)). For its part, TFP growth has slowed in this Century. Whether
this reflects mis-measurement, a temporary decline, or a new normal (see, e.g., Crafts (2018)) remains to be
seen.
   9
     Authors calculations based on NIPA data and the Federal Reserve's Financial Accounts.




                                                      8
                                                                                                      f
Given the state and prices in t, current choices of the young and the risk-free rate, (cy,t , kt+1 , Rt +1 ),
satisfy the following system of equilibrium conditions ­ two Euler equations of the young, and
their budget constraint:

                                     1-      Et Rt+1 c-  
                                                       o,t+1
                                           =          -      ,
                                      cy,t     E t c1
                                                    o,t+1
                                              f         -
                                     1-      Rt +1 Et co,t+1                                                  (8)
                                           =          -      ,
                                      cy,t     E t c1o,t+1

                                        cy,t = Wt + E - kt+1 - Tt ,

where the risky return, Rt+1 , and consumption when old, co,t+1 , depend, as in equation (7), on
capital saved for next period, kt+1 , and on next period's realization of TFP, At+1 :

                                  log At+1 = t ,      t   i.i.d. N 0,  2 .                                    (9)

    We solve our closed- and open-economy models on a period-by-period basis for 1000 periods,
drawing shocks along the path. When the economy is closed, the solution devolves to solving,
for each period, three equations in three unknowns ­ the risk free rate, the consumption of the
young, and the saving of the young. In the open economy, there are seven equations in seven
unknowns ­ the risk free rate, the consumption and saving of the young in each economy, home-
country holdings of foreign capital, and foreign-country holdings of domestic capital. We find
exact solutions to the relevant equations using a non-linear solver and determining expected
values via Gauss-Hermite quadrature of order 20.


3.4     Ex-Ante Utility
Pay-go policies redistribute to the initial elderly. Hence, the crucial question is how such policies
affect future generations. We assess their welfare using the following ex-ante expected utility
function, which is homogeneous of degree one in consumption. This specification incorporates
our monotone transformation, given in (2), of Blanchard's utility function, given in (1).
                                                                                1
                                                                        1-     1-
                                           (1- )          -
                            t
                           U0 =    E0     cy,t     E t c1
                                                        o,t+1
                                                                (1- )
                                                                                      ,                      (10)


where 0 is the time of assessment, i.e., when a policy choice is made, and t > 0 is the time
of birth. This measure evaluates uncertainty about the state in which an agent is born with
the same degree of risk aversion with which the agent evaluates the uncertainty of old-age
consumption. Blanchard (2019), in contrast, appears to evaluate long-run EAU via

  ~ t = E0 (1 -  ) log cy,t +                  -                             (1- )         -
                                                                                                   
  U0                                 log Et c1
                                             o,t+1           = E0 log cy,t           Et c1
                                                                                         o,t+1
                                                                                                 (1- )
                                                                                                         ,   (11)
                                  1-




                                                      9
which effectively assumes risk aversion of 1 with respect to the state in which an agent is born.
That's much lower than the risk aversion re old-age consumption needed to match the risk
premium in the considered calibrations. Because of this difference, our measure (10) is more
favorable to finding welfare improvements from deficit finance than is (11), as we illustrate in
Appendix A.10 In what follows, we motivate the use of EAU as defined in (10) in two ways ­ a
simple example and a derivation from basic assumptions.

Simple Example

Consider the problem of evaluating, at time 0, the expected utility of an agent born at time 1
who lives for two periods and has Epstein-Zinn preferences as specified in (2). Suppose there are
two equally likely states at time 1, A and B. Evaluated at time 1, the agent's utility, conditional
on state A, is
                                                          
                                           (1- )       - 1-
                                      A
                                     U1 = c1     EA c1
                                                     2       ,                                 (12)

and similarly for state B. Given this measure, how should we evaluate the agent's welfare at
period 0 when the agent is not yet born and the state in period 1, A or B, is still uncertain?
One option is to simply take the expected value of time-1 utility, namely

                                           ^0 = .5U1
                                           U       A      B
                                                     + .5U1 .                                            (13)

We call this measure expected ex-interim utility. Now suppose cA       A                  A
                                                                  1 = c2 = 1 (implying U1 = 1)
and cB     B                  B
      1 = c2 = 3 (implying U1 = 3) and consider a policy that, if introduced at time zero, will
deliver c1 = c2 = 2 (implying U1 = 2) for sure. The welfare measure (13) implies indifference
with respect to that policy. But why should uncertainty with respect to an agent's state at birth
be evaluated risk-neutrally? In principle, any arbitrary degree of risk aversion with respect of
the state of being born can be assumed. Blanchard's approach, which entails evaluating this
risk based on a risk aversion coefficient of 1, simply amounts to11

                                                  A          B
                                        U0 = log(U1 ) + log(U1 ).                                        (14)

Our alternative is to evaluate the uncertainty about the state in which an agent is born with
the same degree of risk aversion with which the agent evaluates the uncertainty of old-age
consumption. This leads to our ex-ante welfare measure
                                                                     1
                                           A 1-     B 1-            1-
                                    U0 = (U1 )  + (U1 )                  ,                               (15)

which accords with EZ preferences as we now show.
  10
     But, to repeat, the choice between (10) and (11) has no impact on the calibration, as both specifications
reflect the same preferences at the ex-interim stage when agents are alive and making choices.
  11
     Or in homogeneous form
                                                        A          B
                                         U0 = exp(log(U1  ) + log(U1 )).




                                                     10
Derivation of Ex-Ante Utility

We define Epstein-Zin utility recursively in a way that makes it homogeneous of degree one:

              Ut                 ~ u-1 E u U t
                 = v -1 v (c ) + v                                                      t
                                                                      for t   < T, and UT = cT ,
                                             +1


with u capturing the attitude towards risk and v representing the attitude towards inter-
temporal substitution. We take u(x) = x1- /(1 -  ) and v (x) = log (x). To determine ex-ante
welfare of a generation born at  < t we assume that agents born at  neither derive utility
from consumption nor discount the future before birth ­ the same assumptions we would make
in the time-separable case.12 Consequently, the utility of a generation born at t, evaluated at,
say,  = t - 2 becomes

                    Utt-2 = v -1  v  u-1       Et-2    u  v -1  v  u-1         Et-1 u(Utt )
                         = u-1 Et-2 Et-1 u(Utt )             = u-1 Et-2 u(Utt )     .

By iteration, the utility of a generation born at t evaluated  = 0 is

                                            t
                                           U0 = u-1 E0 u(Utt )             ,

which amounts to (10) when using our specific utility function.


4        Closed-Economy Findings
This section presents four sets of closed-economy results arising from defined-benefit pay-go and
related policies. Each exercise demonstrates the crucial importance of risk-sharing to long-run
ex-ante utility and, thus, to the prospects for an EAU Pareto improvement. First, we explore
the potential for long-run EAU increases under what we view as highly favorable calibrations.
We focus in detail on two baseline calibrations. For each, we decompose the EAU impact of DB
pay-go showing that risk-sharing is the source of long-run EAU gains when they arise. It is also
a mitigating factor when long-run EAU falls. Second, we show that running what, on average,
is the same size deficit, but doing so in ways that entail different risk-sharing can materially
change the EAU impact of deficit finance. Third, we show that a policy of two-way transfers,
entailing no intergenerational redistribution, produces larger EAU gains than does DB pay-go.
Fourth, we show that Blanchard's assumed endowment, with its risk-sharing capacity, is key to
a Pareto improvement when it arises.
  12
       Time-separable utility evaluated at time zero would be
                                                       t+T
                                              t
                                             U0 = E0         ~ -t u(c ),
                                                             
                                                        =t

where a per-period utility function u captures both the attitude towards risk and intertemporal substitution.




                                                        11
                        RP \RFR          0.0%          -1.0%         -2.0%         -3.0%
                         2.0 %           -1.8%         -0.7%         +1.6%         +6.0%
                         3.0 %           -2.0%         -1.3%         +0.2%         +3.2%
                         4.0 %           -2.1%         -1.7%         -0.7%         +1.3%

Table 1: The impact of defined-benefit pay-go policy on long-run ex-ante utility for different
calibration targets for the risk-free rate and the risk-premium.



4.1       Role of the Risk-Free Rate, Risk-Premium, and Policy Scale
We now consider the EAU impact of introducing DB pay-go policy. Following Blanchard
(2019), each young cohort pays the old a fixed amount, set at 20 percent of average capital
in the no-policy, stochastic steady state. Unless otherwise stated, all results presented below
reflect policies of this size. Since both the current young and current old clearly gain from an
introduction of these transfers, increases in EAU for generations born in the long run, which
we call long-run EAU, indicates, as one would expect and we confirmed, a Pareto improvement
­ thus, if long-run EAU increases, EAU for all generations rises. Obviously, if long-run EAU
falls, the policy is not Pareto efficient. Hence, an increase in long-run EAU indicates a Pareto
improvement, whereas a decline signals assisting some generations, while hurting others.
    Table 1 reports, for different risk-free-rate (RFR) and risk-premium (RP) calibrations, the
percentage impact on long-run EAU. Of the five cases with gains, only one, featuring a RP of
3 percent and a RFR of -2 percent, is, in our view, remotely plausible. We next examine two
cases, denoted Baseline 1 (B1) and Baseline 2 (B2), in more detail. Both feature a relatively
low RP of 3 percent. B1 calibrates preferences to a -1 percent RFR, while B2 calibrates
preferences to a -2 percent RFR. For B1, expected utility of those born in the long-run falls
by 1.3 percent. For B2, it rises by 0.2 percent.
    Policy scale plays an important role in determining long-run EAU impacts. As the left-
hand-side (LHS) of figure 1 shows, the percentage change in long-run EAU is negative under
B1. But for B2, it starts positive and goes negative at a policy scale equal to roughly 25
percent of the long-run, no-policy, average capital stock. That's not much larger than the
20 percent value considered by Blanchard (2019). But this policy transferring 20 percent of
capital corresponds to only a 3 (or 4) percent tax on the young's income in B1 (or B2).13
That's far below the combined explicit and implicit average wage-tax rate used to finance U.S.
intergenerational redistribution. Figure 1 shows major expected utility losses under both B1
and B2 as the economy moves from running DB pay-go based on a fixed transfer that ranges
in magnitude from zero to 25 percent of the young's income ­ the no-policy, long-run average
of their wages plus endowment, to be precise.
    Figure 2 shows EAU effects of the transfer scheme on both current and prospective gener-
ations. Clearly, the initial old gain, as they simply receive a transfer with no strings attached.
Their EAU, which we omit from figure 2, increases by 1.8 percent and 2.9 percent in B1 and B2,
 13
      Recall that the period length is 25 years. So the yearly transfer is less than 1 percent of aggregate capital.



                                                         12
.
Figure 1: Long-run EAU impact of DB pay-go, measured as a fraction of aggregate capital
(LHS) and young's total income (RHS).




.

Figure 2: Generation-specific EAU impact along the transition path; initial conditions equal
long-run averages.


respectively. The current young also gain substantially, because crowding out takes effect only
after they are old. Hence, their wages when young are unchanged, but the returns they earn
when old on their savings are higher due to the smaller amount of capital they, as a generation,
bring into old age.


                                              13
4.2      Role of Risk-Sharing
To clarify how deficit policy works, we now decompose changes in EAU into non risk-sharing
and risk-sharing effects.14 We begin with the risk-neutral effect (RNE) referenced above. It
captures the change in EAU that would arise for risk-neutral agents with an IES of 1. Their
utility function is defined as follows.

                                         ¯0           -               
                                         U t
                                             = E0 c 1
                                                    y,t · Et {co,t+1 } .                                         (16)

The RNE, the ratio between the agent's utility before and after the introduction of a transfer,
picks up the DB pay-go policy's crowding out of capital, which in all of our calibrations leads, on
average, to lower long-run levels of consumption both when young and old.15 In addition, DB
pay-go policy tilts the life-cycle age-consumption profile towards old-age consumption, which
is also captured by the risk-neutral effect as it incorporates the agent's IES.
    We argue that risk-sharing comes in two distinct forms, one relating to the riskiness of old-
age consumption given the date-event of birth, the other to the state into which generations
are born. Recall, the former is called the life-cycle-risk effect (LRE) and the latter the the
cohort-risk effect (CRE). We define LRE as a change in U        ¯ t , where the expected ex-interim
                                                           ^ t /U
                                                             0   0
utility of a generation is given by

                                                                         
                                       ^0        (1- )     -
                                       U t
                                           = E0 cy,t Et c1
                                                         o,t+1
                                                                        1-
                                                                              .                                  (17)


As our simple example above clarifies, (17) doesn't capture uncertainty over the state into
                                                                             t ^t
which one is born. This brings us to CRE, which is defined as the change in U0 /U0 . To sum
up, we write ex-ante utility (EAU) as the product of three terms,

                                                          ^t     t
                                                 t
                                                U0  ¯ t · U0 · U0 ,
                                                   =U                                                            (18)
                                                     0    ¯0
                                                          U t  ^0
                                                               U t


so that percentage changes in EAU equal, to a first order, the sum of percentage changes in
the three terms ­ RNE, LRE, and CRE.
                                           t
                                        U0
                                         t
                                              RN E + LRE + CRE.                                                  (19)
                                        U0
  14
     For his part, Blanchard (2019) decomposes welfare changes from DB pay-go as arising from 1) providing
agents with a higher safe return than is paid by the safe asset and 2) the crowding out of capital. Blanchard's
equation 3 captures this first effect. His discussion suggests this effect is positive if the safe rate is less than 1.
That's true for the first generation making the transfer. But one needs to average this term over future states
of the economy to understand its contribution to the EAU of future generations. Doing so indicates that the
expected value of this term equals the sum of a) the product of the average value of X (the difference between 1
and the risk-free rate) and Y (the average value of the marginal utility of second-period consumption) and b) the
covariance of X and Y . Both terms depend on risk-sharing arrangements. Hence, Blanchard's decomposition
confounds the impact of DB pay-go policy on risk-sharing with changes in average consumption values.
  15
     Barbie et al. (2007) provide conditions on prices that ensure that a reduction in investment increases
aggregate consumption ­ conditions that don't hold in our model.




                                                          14
.
      Figure 3: Decomposing the impact of DB pay-go policy on long-run ex-ante utility.


    Figure 3 decomposes our DB pay-go policy's long-run EAU changes into their RNE, LRE,
and CRE components. The RNE effect is, thanks to the model's crowding out, negative ­
increasingly so with policy scale. The two risk-sharing effects, RNE and LRE, are, on the other
hand, both positive, the LRE effect being stronger. RNE, LRE, and CRE sum to the overall
impact ­ the solid blue curve. The reason that curve is not lower, in B1, and positive, for a
range, in B2 is thus clearly due to risk-sharing. In both cases the risk-sharing effects and, as
a consequence, the overall effect is concave, which is why in B2 the welfare impact exhibits an
interior maximum, around 10 percent, and eventually turns negative, around 25 percent.


4.3    Role of Deficit-Policy Type
All deficit policies aren't created equal. Blanchard's DB pay-go policy improves risk-sharing
by maintaining transfers to the elderly regardless of the economy's state. This transfers risk
to those who can best bear it ­ the young, thanks to their fixed endowment. We consider two
alternatives. First, a defined-contribution (DC) pay-go policy: Tt = wt , for a fixed . Second,
a policy that Blanchard (2019) considers as maintaining a constant level of debt, D. This policy
                  f
entails Tt = DRt    and will be called constant debt (CD) in what follows. Both alternatives are
calibrated such that the long-run average transfer from the young to the old equals that under
DB.
    As table 2 shows, DC pay-go generates a long-run EAU loss under both B1 and B2, which
can be decomposed as follows: DC produces smaller RNE losses and larger CRE gains compared
to DB. But the LRE gains are zero under DC, whereas they are large under DB as the sure
transfer in DB reduces the risk of old-age consumption. On balance, these factors make DC

                                              15
                                  Long-Run         EAU Impact and        Decomposition (all in %)
     Calibration            Overall Effect               RNE                  LRE              CRE
  Case RFR RP              DB DC CD                 DB DC CD              DB DC CD DB DC CD
   B1 -1.0% 3%             -1.3 -1.6 -0.9           -3.2 -2.3 -3.3        1.6 0.0 1.6 0.4 0.8 0.8
   B2 -2.0% 3%              0.3 -1.0 0.9            -2.7 -1.9 -2.7        2.6 0.0 2.6 0.4 0.9 1.2

Table 2: Long-run EAU impacts from defined-benefit (DB), defined-contribution (DC), and
constant-debt (CD) policies. Decomposition into risk-neutral effect (RNE), lifecycle-risk effect
(LRE), and cohort-risk effect (CRE).

policy substantially worse than DB policy. As for constant debt policy, table 2 shows that
it slightly dominates the DB policy in terms of its long-run EAU impact. This is, as table
2 reveals, entirely due to the improved CRE. CD improves risk-sharing between cohorts as
it offers generations born with a bad shock a larger transfer when old than generations born
with a good shock. This is because the constant debt scheme's transfer to the old in t + 1 is
                                   f
proportional to the interest rate Rt +1 (accruing from t to t + 1), which is higher when there
                         16
is a bad TFP shock in t. To summarize, the risk-sharing properties of deficit finance clearly
matters to its EAU impact.


4.4     Risk-Sharing Through Two-Way Transfers
Given the crucial role of risk allocation, we now construct a risk-sharing scheme that does a
far better job allocating risk. Our revised policy transfers from the young to the old if there
are two below-median TFP shocks in a row. The old alive after two such shocks are hit with a
lifetime double whammy ­ a particularly low wage when young and a particularly low return to
capital when old. In alternative cases, when there are two above-median TFP shocks in a row,
the revised policy transfers from the old to the young. In all other states, there is no transfer.
Note that this implies that the average net transfer across generations is zero. We refer to this
as the Two-Way Transfer (TT) scheme.
    Under TT, the risk-free rate averages, on an annualized basis, -0.40 percent (-1.28 percent)
in B1 (B2). In comparison, the mean of the RFR is 0.57 percent (-0.15 percent) in periods when
transfers from the young to the old are positive and -1.32 percent (-2.33 percent) when they
are negative. This substantial difference reflects three factors. First, low saving and investment
in the prior period when the TFP shock was bad. Second, low saving and investment in the
current period when the TFP shock is bad. These effects are both present even without policy,
yet there is now a third mechanism that reinforces the resulting counter-cyclicality of interest
rates ­ the reduced demand for the safe asset by the young who know they will receive a transfer
when old if another bad TFP shock is to come. Thus, loose fiscal policy should coincide with
high RFRs and tight fiscal policy should coincide with low RFRs. Stated differently, a high, not
a low RFR is the time to run deficits and a low, not a high RFR is the time to run surpluses.
  16
    The fact that low TFP coincides with high expected TFP growth and thus, all else equal, high interest
rates is, in turn, a direct consequences of assuming i.i.d. realizations of the level of TFP. Therefore, the finding
that CD dominates DB has to be taken with a grain of salt.



                                                        16
                                    Long-Run EAU Impact (in %)
           Case        RFR           RP         DB             TT                    TT+DB
            B1         -1.0%        3.0%        -1.3           0.8                     0.3
            B2         -2.0%        3.0%         0.3           2.3                     2.1
                          Decomposition of Long-Run EAU Impact             (in %)
                              RNE                  LRE                              CRE
            Case       DB TT TT+DB DB TT TT+DB                             DB     TT TT+DB
             B1        -3.2 -0.9    -1.6     1.6 1.7    2.0                0.4    0.0   -0.1
             B2        -2.7 -0.8    -1.4     2.6 2.7    3.3                0.4    0.4    0.3

Table 3: Comparing and decomposing long-run EAU impacts from defined-benefit (DB), two-
way transfers (TT), and two-way transfers plus 5% defined-benefit (TT+DB) policies.



    Tables 3 compares and decomposes long-run EAU impacts of DB pay-go, TT, and a combi-
nation of the two (TT+DB): the TT scheme plus a DB pay-go plan whose transfer is fixed at
5 percent of the no-policy, long-run average capital stock. TT produces a Pareto improvement
for both B1 and B2. Indeed, the long-run EAU impacts of TT policy are substantially larger
than under DB pay-go. Moreover, adding even a small DB pay-go policy on top of the TT
policy reduces the values of both B1 and B2 long-run EAUs. In other words, implementing DB
pay-go in the context of TT policy makes early generations better off and future generations
worse off.
    Figure 4 compares DB, TT, and TT+DB and shows their impacts on EAU of current and
future generations along the transition.17 Clearly, a transfer scheme designed to share risk is
far more efficient than Blanchard's DB deficit finance, which requires just the right parameters
and just the right scale to share risk.
    Figure 5 varies the size of the risk-sharing scheme and decomposes the resulting long-run
EAU impacts into our three effects. Compared to the DB pay-go scheme, the negative risk-
neutral effect is much smaller in size. This is as expected given that two-way transfers entail
no systematic redistribution from the young to the old and, therefore, no systematic crowding
out. As for the life-cycle-risk effect, it slightly improves relative to the DB pay-go case. The
cohort-risk effect is smaller or similar depending on the calibration. Thus, this policy achieves
a similar level of risk-sharing between cohorts with much less crowding out, resulting in much
larger increases in EAU overall.
    Our two-way transfers scheme is certainly sub optimal. The optimal scheme would surely
depend non-linearly on the economy's state vector ­ its TFP and stock of capital. But the above
analysis demonstrates the ample room for Pareto-improving policy that doesn't systematically
redistribute. Moreover, as figure 4 shows, when even our crude bilateral risk-sharing scheme is
in place, adding DB pay-go policy scaled at 5 percent reduces the EAU of future generations.
  17
     We assume, as with the DB scheme above, that the scheme is introduced in a period with a median
realization of the TFP shock which implies that there is no immediate transfer. In the subsequent period a
below-median or above-median shock triggers half the usual transfer. The current old are thus unaffected.
But the young gain because they are, in effect, given an asset for free that hedges against their own old-age
consumption risk.


                                                     17
Figure 4: Generation-specific EAU impact of different policies along the transition path; initial
conditions equal long-run averages.




    Figure 5: Decomposing the impact of two-way transfer (TT) policy on long-run EAU.


Indeed, only the initial old benefit from the addition of Blanchard's policy. This result, again,
indicates that deficits are desirable only insofar as they help share risk across generations. If
risk is already well shared, intergenerational redistribution, whether run under the heading
deficit finance, structural tax change, pay-go social security, or something else, will benefit

                                               18
        RP \RFR             0.0%          -1.0%                   -2.0%              -3.0%
         2.0 %         -3.7% (-1.8%) -2.8% (-0.7%)           -0.6% (+1.6%)       +3.7% (+6.0% )
         3.0 %         -4.2% (-2.0% ) -3.9% (-1.3%)          -2.7% (+0.2%)       +1.8% (+3.2%)
         4.0 %         -4.3% (-2.1%) -4.3% (-1.7%)            -3.7% (-0.7%)      -2.1% (+1.3%)

Table 4: Impact of DB pay-go policy on long-run EAU in a model without the fixed endowment
of the young (results from the model with the endowment are in brackets).



early generations at a cost to future generations.


4.5     Role of the Endowment
While wages and capital income are perfectly correlated via the TFP shock, the fixed endow-
ment, in the context of 100 percent depreciation of capital in each period, makes the resources
of the young (the endowment plus their wages) less risky than that of the old (their capital
income). Unfortunately, the young can't, in their infancy, make risk-sharing deals with their
parent's generation. This creates a missing market, which the government can implicitly supply
via policy.
    To quantify the endowment's importance, we simulate DB pay-go in the closed economy
but without the endowment.18 Table 4 shows the long-run EAU impact from implementing
DB in the no-endowment economy for different calibration targets. Cell-specific results for the
economy with the endowment are in brackets. The long-run EAU impact is positive in only
two cases ­ with a zero or negative risky return. Otherwise, there are welfare losses that are
often significant. Compared to the model with the endowment, the long-run EAU impact is
roughly two percentage points worse for most calibrations.
    To illustrate the very different message that the economy without the fixed endowment
sends, figure 6 plots the long-run EAU impact as a function of the calibration target for the risk-
free rate. It does so in three ways. We first reconsider the economy with the fixed endowment
and lower risk-free rates (going from right to left), while keeping the risk premium calibration
target fixed. This curve, despite being mostly in negative territory, sends the message that
transfers are more desirable the lower the risk-free rate. This message changes however, when,
instead of the risk premium, the risky rate is held fixed (which is achieved by increasing the
risk-premium via an increase in the risk-aversion parameter). In this case the curve becomes
substantially flatter and does not reach positive territory even for a risk-free rate of minus
three percent. Finally, we move to the economy without a fixed endowment. Now reducing the
risk-free rate no longer improves long-run EAU whatsoever. In short, a low risk-free rate does
not, per se, represent a general invitation to run deficits.
  18
    In so doing, we truncate the TFP-shock to avoid potential transfer-scheme collapse. Truncating at nine
standard deviations suffices for this purpose. Second, we adjust capital's share in the production function to
ensure that the new model's capital share matches Blanchard's effective capital share. This adjustment doesn't
materially affect our results.




                                                     19
Figure 6: Long-Run EAU impacts of DB in models with and without the endowment for
different calibration targets for RFR and RP. The top curve changes the RFR target while
keeping RP fixed. The middle curve changes the RFR target while keeping the risky return
fixed. The bottom curve changes the RFR target while keeping the risky return fixed, but in
the economy without the endowment.


5       Open-Economy Findings
As is clear, the reason deficit finance makes future generations worse off, under reasonable
calibrations, is its crowding out of capital. But in an open-economy, domestic saving reductions
are spread globally. This limits domestic crowding out, leaving deficit finance more leeway
to Pareto-improve ex-ante utility of domestic residents ­ current and future ­ via enhanced
risk-sharing. However, domestic Pareto gains come at a price to foreigners as they have less
capital with which to work and, thus, earn lower wages. In this case, putative domestic Pareto
improvements partly reflect beggar-thy-neighbor policy. To assess this issue we add a foreign
country to our model. TFP-shocks in the two countries are still assumed to have no auto-
correlation. The cross-correlation is assumed to be positive, yet substantially below one. We
first consider the case of two symmetric countries. We then model the U.S. as the home country
and the rest of the world as the foreign country.


5.1       Two Symmetric Countries
As in the closed economy, we assume that country-specific TFP-shocks have a standard devia-
tion of 20 percent. The cross-correlation of the two shocks is assumed to be 0.25.19 Throughout
 19
      This is close to the value of 0.22 calibrated in section 5.2.




                                                          20
                   Overall Effect                                 Decomposition
                EAU change (in %)      RNE (in %)                   LRE (in %)              CRE     (in %)
         Case   Closed     Open     Closed   Open                 Closed   Open           Closed      Open
                  H       H      F    H     H     F                 H     H    F            H         H    F
         B1      -1.3   -0.3 -0.3    -3.2  -1.5 -1.7               1.6   0.9 0.9           0.4       0.3 0.6
         B2      0.3     1.4    0.2  -2.7  -0.6 -1.9               2.6   1.5 1.5           0.4       0.5 0.7

Table 5: Comparing long-run EAU impacts and their decomposition from defined-benefit pay-
go policy in closed and open economies




.
Figure 7: Domestic and foreign long-run EAU impacts from domestic DB pay-go policy in the
symmetric-countries case.


this section, we retain our two baseline calibration targets.20 Table 5 shows what we expect: a
smaller decrease (or larger increase in case of B2) in home-country, long-run EAU compared to
the closed-economy case. This reflects the beggar-thy-neighbor effect. As the decomposition in
table 5 indicates, the closed-open economy differences primarily reflect differences in the size of
RNE. RNE is a smaller negative number in the open economy case under both baselines. But
the improvement for the home country in RNE is particularly pronounced under B2. As for
risk-sharing, both countries experience the same LRE effects and the foreign country benefits
even more from the CRE effect than the home country. These reductions of life-cycle and
cohort risk in the foreign country are driven by the bond market. In the no-policy case there is
a zero cross-country bond position (due to symmetry), yet an introduction of the DB policy in
the home country increases the world interest rate by 0.7pp (or 0.9pp in B2) and induces the
    20
    Since an equally weighted portfolio of home and foreign stock is less risky than before, we need to re-calibrate
preferences to hit the targets. For B1,  = 0.93 and  = 30.28, for B2,  = 0.94,  = 30.58.


                                                        21
 .
Figure  8: Decomposing domestic and foreign long-run EAU impacts of domestic DB pay-go
policy in the symmetric two-country model for calibrations B1 and B2.


foreign country to build up a sizable bond position ­ roughly 30 percent of its GDP. In this
way the bond market allows the two countries to share the risk-mitigation benefits of the home
country's DB policy. This is similar to the capital market's spreading the burden of crowding
out across the two countries.
    To take a closer look at the mechanisms involved, we now vary policy scale. Figure 7
considers the long-run EAU impacts of domestic DB pay-go schemes of different sizes. As the
left-hand panel shows, for B1, agents in the home country are now better off if the policy is
small in scale. But the gain to domestic agents comes at a loss to foreign agents. Clearly, the
home country benefits from the positive effect of the transfers while the negative crowing out
effects are shared, roughly equally, by both countries. Since the two countries are of equal size,
domestic crowding out remains significant. For DB pay-go policy larger than 12 percent, this

                                               22
crowding out dominates positive risk-sharing effects, reducing domestic long-run EAU. Under
B2, in contrast, enhanced international risk-sharing arising from domestic DB pay-go leaves
both countries better off.
    The importance of international risk-sharing becomes clearer when we decompose long-run
EAU effects. The upper two panels in figure 10 decompose the long-run EAU effects in the
home and foreign countries for B1. While the long-run EAU effect for the foreign country is
negative, due to crowding out, both risk-sharing effects are actually significantly positive. This
is confirmed in the lower panel of the figure that considers B2. Here, both countries gain,
with the welfare improvement clearly driven by risk-sharing. Since the home government is
not redistributing among foreign generations the only source of the improved risk-sharing is
international risk-sharing through the bond market.
    To summarize, there are two effects at play in a two-country setting. First, the capital
crowding-out induced by government transfers in the home country is shared with the foreign
country. This limits the capital reduction in the home country while decreasing the capital
stock in the foreign, permitting domestic EAU gains that come at welfare costs to the foreign
country. But there is also enhanced international risk-sharing. The reduction in domestic saving
reduces the domestic demand for safe bonds, lowering their price and raising their return. This
permits foreign agents to achieve a safer portfolio at a lower cost. Still, achieving a global
Pareto improvement requires invoking, in the case of B2, a rather low risk-free rate and an
unrealistically low value for the risk-premium.
    So far we have only considered DB pay-go policies in the home country, assuming there are
no polices in place in the foreign country. Yet what happens if both countries run DB pay-go
policies? If the two countries cooperate to jointly maximize their long-run EAUs, they will
realize that the best policy is no policy (in the case of B1) or a moderate DB policy of 15% (in
the case of B2). In a non-cooperative solution, however, national self-interest would lead both
countries to use deficit finance to free ride on each other, resulting in symmetric DB policies of
4% and 18% in B1 and B2, respectively. The result is lower global capital and long-run EAU.
Indeed, if both countries seek to maximize their long-run EAU's taking the other country's DB
pay-go policy as given, the resulting Nash equilibrium entails roughly a 5 bp decline in EAU
(under B1 and B2) relative to the cooperative solution. While this number is small, it would
certainly be much bigger in a setting with more countries and thus more room for free-riding.
    Finally, suppose the current young could choose the size of the transfers, which they pay
when young and receive when old. The levels that maximize their utility, starting from an
average state, are much higher than the levels that maximize long-run EAU. Interestingly, it is
the cooperative solution among the home and foreign young (40% and 51% in B1 and B2) now
delivers even higher levels of DB policy than the Nash equilibrium (25% and 37% in B1 and
B2). In other words, if the current young act in concert, not to speak of the current old, who
would certainly be on board, they can raise their welfare at the expense of future generations
who are left with the burden of an ongoing, large pay-go system and the associated lower levels
of capital and wages.


                                               23
        RP \RFR             0.0%          -1.0%         -2.0%         -3.0%
                         U.S. / RoW    U.S. / RoW    U.S. / RoW    U.S. / RoW
           2.0 %        -0.6% / -0.1% +0.4% / -0.0% +2.4% / +0.2% +6.3% / +0.6%
           3.0 %        -0.7% / -0.1% +0.0% / -0.1% +1.5% / +0.1% +4.3% / +0.4%
           4.0 %        -0.7% / -0.2% -0.2% / -0.1% +0.8% / -0.0% +2.9% / +0.2%

Table 6: Long-run EAU impact of domestic DB pay-go policy for different calibration targets.



5.2     The U.S. and the Rest of the World
We now consider a more realistic calibration that treats the U.S. as the domestic country and
the rest of the world (RoW) as the foreign country. We re-calibrate the model to match the
relative sizes of the two economies, the volatility and correlation of their productivity shocks,
and the sizes of international portfolio positions. Appendix C provides calibration details. The
basic targets are as follows. Based on data from the Penn World Tables, RoW GDP is 6 times
U.S. GDP and 1.25 times more risky. The correlation of the TFP shocks of the two countries
is 0.22 and their auto-correlation is assumed to be zero.
    As above, we choose identical preferences parameters for the two regions ­ parameters that
match the risk-free rate and the equity premium in the home country, i.e. the U.S. The 2019
data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis reports RoW-held U.S. capital worth 80 percent of
U.S. GDP, U.S.-held RoW capital worth 85 percent of U.S. GDP, and net U.S. bond holdings
worth 40 percent of U.S. GDP.21 To fit these data, we introduce country-specific compensated
investment costs that reduce the returns on cross-country investments. The terms H , G , and
F B reference the cost to domestic agents of investing in foreign capital, the cost to foreigners
of investing in home capital, and the cost to foreigners of investing in the bond. Our calibration
uses these three parameters to match the three cross-country asset positions, (kH,F , kF,H , bH ).22
    In B1 the annualized cost parameters needed to match the targets are: a 0.9 percent cost
for the U.S. to invest in RoW capital, a 2.9 percent cost of RoW to invest in U.S. capital, and
a 1.1 percent cost of RoW to invest in the international bond. With these costs, the associated
risk-aversion coefficient needed to match the risk premium is 21.4.23
    Given this calibration, we now consider the long-run EAU consequences of a DB pay-go
policy introduced in the home country, which turns out to be only slightly more favorable than
in the closed economy case. As table 6 shows, realistic values of the risk-free rate and the
risk-premium produce long-run EAU losses. The introduction of a transfer scheme in the U.S.
  21
      Capital in the model corresponds to equity and foreign direct investment from the data, and bond holdings
in the model correspond to net debt securities ­ debt securities held minus debt liabilities.
   22
      Given our assumed identical preferences in both regions, including unitary intertemporal elasticities of
substitution, we have two preference parameters and three cost parameters to match the risk-free rate, risk
premium in the home country, and the asset positions of the two countries in the context of global bond-market
clearing, i.e., we have five parameters to match five moments.
   23
      Under B2, the calibrated cost parameters are slightly higher and the risk-aversion coefficient is slightly
lower. While the calibrated cost parameters appear rather large ­ in particular, RoW investments in the U.S.
cost almost 3 percent annually, there are certainly institutional features that make it difficult for most foreigners
to directly invest in U.S. capital.



                                                         24
.
Figure 9: Long-run EAU impacts of domestic DB pay-go policy in the asymmetric two-country
model under calibrations B1 and B2.


has negative long-run EAU effects for the rest of the world for realistic values of the return
to capital. At the same time this slightly alleviates the negative effect in the home country.
There are now several cases (e.g. a risk free rate of -1 percent with a risk premium of either 2
or 3 percent) where the home country enjoys (modest) long-run EAU gains whereas the foreign
country experiences losses. In this case, the beggar-thy-neighbor effect is strong enough to
imply long-run EAU gains in the home country that would not materialize in a closed economy.
Finally, enhanced international risk-sharing can actually lead to situations where both home
and foreign country gain, albeit for highly unrealistic values of the return to capital.
    To illustrate this in more detail, we now consider the two baseline calibrations from our
closed-economy analysis. The left-hand panel of figure 9 confirms the intuition. While in a
closed economy, long-run EAU gains were impossible under B1, the home country now expe-
riences small gains, and yet the rest of the world experiences losses. The right-hand panel of
figure 9 illustrates that in B2, domestic long-run EAU improves significantly for a large range
of transfer payments, while the rest of the world now also gains.
    This result is not too surprising given the observations from the case of two symmetric
countries. The crowding out of capital in the home country is further mitigated by the fact
that the RoW is modeled as so much larger. Figure 10 confirms this. The figure's upper half
decomposes the long-run EAU effects for the B1 case. The risk-neutral effect is still negative
for the home country, but it is dominated by the two positive risk-sharing effects for a large
range of payments. Through enhanced international risk-sharing, the foreign country's risk-
sharing effects are also both positive. However, they are dominated by the risk-neutral effect
and the overall effect is, therefore, negative. Under B2, as indicated in the lower half of figure

                                               25
10, the beggar-thy-neighbor effect even implies a positive risk-neutral transfer effect for the
home country. The negative risk-neutral effect for the foreign country is overcompensated by
enhanced risk-sharing. Consequently, the foreign country also gains, albeit very little.




.

Figure 10: Decomposing long-run EAU impacts of domestic DB pay-go policy in the asymmetric
two-country model for calibrations B1 and B2.

    To sum up, depending on calibration targets we observe three cases. For realistic returns to
capital, domestic and foreign long-run EAU both decline. For very low returns to capital, both
countries gain from deficit finance in the home country. For cases in the middle, including one
of our baseline cases, the beggar-thy-neighbor effect implies home-country gains at the price of
foreign-country losses.
    As in the closed-economy calibration, we also consider the effects of alternative transfer
schemes. Table 7 shows the long-run EAU effects for the two asymmetric countries of defined-

                                              26
                       Overall Effect                      Decomposition
    Policy          EAU change (in %)       RNE (in %)       LRE (in %)         CRE (in %)

             Case
                    Closed      Open      Cl.     Open     Cl.    Open        Cl.    Open
                      H       H       F    H    H     F     H   H     F        H   H     F
    DB B1            -1.3   0.04 -0.03    -3.2 -0.4 -0.5   1.6 0.2 0.3        0.4 0.2   0.2
    DC B1            -1.6  -0.90 0.08     -2.4 -1.7 -0.2   0.0 0.0 0.2        0.8 0.8   0.1
    CD B1            -0.9   0.01 0.01     -3.2 -0.4 -0.5   1.6 0.2 0.3        0.8 0.2   0.2
    TT B1            0.8    1.45 0.04     -0.9 0.4 -0.2    1.7 0.8 0.1        0.0 0.2   0.1
    DB B2            0.3    1.53 0.14     -2.7 0.8 -0.6    2.6 0.4 0.5        0.4 0.4   0.2
    DC B2            -1.0  -0.44 0.26     -2.0 -1.4 -0.1   0.0 -0.1 0.3       1.0 1.1   0.1
    CD B2            0.9    1.66 0.22     -2.7 0.8 -0.6    2.5 0.4 0.6        1.2 0.4   0.3
    TT B2            2.3    3.12 0.14     -0.8 0.9 -0.3    2.7 1.4 0.2        0.4 0.8   0.2

Table 7: Comparing long-run EAU impacts and their decomposition from different policies and
calibrations in an asymmetric two-coutnry calibration (U.S. as the home country and the RoW
as the foreign country). Closed-economy results reported for comparison.



benefit, defined-contribution, constant debt, and two-way transfer policies. Compared to the
closed-economy numbers (which are also provided in table 7), the results for all schemes are
more favorable. This is due to the risk-neutral effect as the decomposition in table 7 reveals ­
and as was expected due to the dampening of crowding out due to openness.
    Comparing different deficit-finance schemes, we find that long-run EAU gains for the home
country are much harder to achieve for a defined contribution scheme. This mirrors our re-
sults for the closed economy. However, the rest of the world now experiences long-run EAU
gains under DC. The key to understanding this is that under DC the transfers are perfectly
correlated with home-capital returns, making home-capital less attractive for home investors;
consequently, the crowding out effects are much stronger for the home country than for the
foreign country as can be seen from the RNE values in table 7. With crowding out being mod-
est in the foreign country, risk-sharing effects dominate and the overall impact on foreigners is
positive. When it comes to public debt, we observe that its home country impact now com-
pares less favorably to the defined benefit scheme than in the closed economy. For the foreign
country, however, CD is substantially better than DB.
    Finally, in order to underscore the point that long-run EAU gains in this model are about
enhanced risk-sharing, we consider the two-way transfer scheme from above (Appendix D pro-
vides the decomposition as a function of policy size). For both calibrations, all three effects
are positive for the home country. The life-cycle-risk effect is the most important. The foreign
country also gains under both baselines. While the risk-neutral transfer effect is negative for the
rest of the world, this is compensated by enhanced risk-sharing. As in several of the examples
provided above, the beggar-thy-neighbor effect is present, but if the transfers are designed to
enhance risk-sharing, they also provide better risk-sharing for the rest-of-the world, which, in
this case, overcompensates.




                                                 27
6    Limitations of the Model
Following Blanchard (2019), we've examined a major policy question in the simplest of settings.
There is no heterogeneity within cohorts, no borrowing constraints, no initial policy, no existing
distortions, no externalities, no public goods problems, a limited ability, due to period length,
for overlapping cohorts to share risk, no existing policy, and no monetary policy, let alone
monetary policy in the context of a zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate.
    Some of these factors connect directly to the issues discussed here. Of perhaps most im-
portance is borrowing constraints, as stressed by Brumm et al. (2020), close to 90 percent of
Americans are in debt and their safe rates ­ rates they can earn by pre-paying their mortgages,
credit-card balances, student debt, etc. ­ are much higher than the U.S. average growth rate.
This calls into question the basic premise that pay-go can pay for itself.
    Moreover, America's pay-go policy largely entails taxing workers' earnings to subsidize the
elderly. But as Altig et al. (2020) show, the scope for higher marginal taxation is limited.
Consequently, pay-go, which, in practice, necessitates higher (lower) taxes on workers in bad
(good) times will entail potentially far larger distortions since excess burdens rise with the
square of tax wedges.
    Heterogeneity and the interaction of micro and macro shocks can make economic life far
riskier and raise the value of government-organized risk mitigation. Indeed, Harenberg and
Ludwig (2019) suggests a greater role for DB pay-go risk-sharing in such a context. That said,
if the problem lies with incomplete risk-sharing, as their paper argues, it should be addressed
directly.
    A model comprising a realistic number of periods, e.g., Hasanhodzic and Kotlikoff (2013),
would provide scope for intergenerational risk sharing among generations that overlap and,
therefore, less scope for deficit finance to Pareto improve.
    Existing policy also matters. As we've shown, the impact on long-run EAU either steadily
declines or rises and then declines in policy scale. Hence, calibrating and running Blanchard's
model assuming, as he does, that the U.S. has no initial policy in place appears to give DB
pay-go an unwarranted efficiency advantage. Our demonstration that the DB pay-go policy,
when introduced in the presence of existing risk-sharing, can no longer Pareto improve is telling
in this regard.
    Another caveat, which almost goes without saying, is that our focus, like Blanchard's,
is purely on government redistribution. We're not considering deficit finance used to fund
infrastructure or correct externalities, like global warming. Nor do we consider the value of
deficits as counter-cyclical policy. Finally, Blanchard (2019)'s endowment assumption ensures
that, once begun, intergenerational redistribution remains feasible through the end of time.
But, to quote Dylan, tomorrow is a long time. Developed countries, with enough runway, can
morph into underdevelopment. Argentina's century-long transition from first- to third-world
status is a case in point.




                                               28
7    Conclusion
The decades-old deterministic literature on the potential over-accumulation of capital raises a
green flag when the marginal product of capital, m, falls below the growth rate, g . The flag
signals the ability to perpetually take from the young and give to the old, making all generations
better off. Although measurements differ, there is, unfortunately, no doubt that m > g .
    With uncertainty, the return to safe assets ­ the safe rate ­ allegedly comes into play. The
U.S. safe rate routinely runs below the U.S. growth rate. This has led many economists to
treat the average difference between the two as an arbitrage opportunity ­ one that can also
be exploited via ongoing pay-go policy. But growth isn't for sure. Again, Argentina's century-
long transition from developed to developing country is an abject lesson in very bad things
happening to very good countries for a very long time.
    Of course, economics teaches us how to weigh the likely good against the unlikely bad
and decide whether a given policy would, on balance, benefit some or all generations without
harming others. Blanchard (2019)'s provocative paper suggests that conditions may be right,
in the U.S. and other low-interest-rate countries, to run fiscal deficits at no cost. No cost
means helping current old generations at no cost to their progeny. We examine the "deficits
are free" proposition using Blanchard's self same model, but with an important correction to
his formula for ex-ante utility, which leaves even more room to find Pareto improvements from
deficit finance.
    Blanchard's framework does, indeed, admit cases for which deficit finance can Pareto im-
prove from an ex-ante perspective. But the calibrations required for such an outcome stretch
reality. Even then, deficit finance needs to be conducted in just the right way to deliver what
turns out, at best, to be modest efficiency gains. Under close inspection, it's clear why low safe
rates aren't a clear invitation to run deficits. Low safe rates signal a strong demand for safety.
This need is directly addressed via systematic risk-sharing, not intergenerational redistribution.
    Blanchard (2019)'s model is a two-period, OLG model with aggregate risk. In such models,
Pareto-improving, government-organized, intergenerational risk-sharing policy is ripe for the
picking given the inability of the living to trade with the unborn. Our decomposition of policy
impacts on ex-ante utility into risk-neutral and risk-sharing factors identifies the Pareto gains
from risk-sharing. It also shows that intergenerational redistribution per se ­ the focus of
Blanchard's study ­ actually undermines the potential to Pareto improve. In contrast, even
crude, government-organized intergenerational risk-sharing ­ transfers running from the young
to the old and vice versa depending on the economy's current and prior states ­ can materially
improve current and future generations' ex-ante utility. As for deficits, when they Pareto
improve, they do so serendipitously ­ not because they are designed to solve the problem at
hand, namely addressing missing private financial markets, but because they too can share risk
under very special conditions. But, as we show, once proper risk-sharing policy is in place,
deficit finance provides no further scope for sharing risk.
    We also explore deficit finance in an international context. In such settings, the crowding
out of domestic saving translates less than one for one into reduced domestic investment. This

                                               29
limits the reduction in domestic wages, albeit at the price of lower foreign wages. On the other
hand, moving to an open economy raises the prospect of mutually beneficial international risk
sharing. Yet, here again, bilateral risk-sharing, in this case, both between generations and
between countries, not systematic redistribution from the young to the old or from foreign to
domestic residents, may be best suited for achieving a Pareto improvement. In sum, our paper's
message is clear. When interest rates go low, government risk-sharing, not deficit finance, may
provide the path to economic efficiency.




                                              30
                                     APPENDIX

A     Comparison of EAU Measures
Figure 11 compares long-run EAU effects under both our and Blanchard's EAU measures for
our two baseline calibrations in the closed economy. While the effects are qualitatively similar
under both measures, it is clear that with our measure, EAU effects are more favorable.




.
Figure 11: Comparing our EAU measure with Blanchard's measure. Impact of DB pay-go
policy in the closed economy for both baseline.




B     Robustness and Sensitivity
We follow Blanchard (2019) and assume a high standard deviation of TFP and search for a
risk-aversion parameter that matches the desired risk-premium. Table 8 provides sensitivity
analysis with respect to this calibration method. The table's first three rows consider higher
and lower values of  , which implies lower and higher values of  . Neither the B1 or B2 EAU
results are much affected. The table's fourth row considers a calibration with a disaster shock,
specifically a minus five standard deviation drop in TFP, which occurs each period with a 1
percent probability. All other TFP realizations are slightly increased to keep average TFP
constant. The long-run EAU results are slightly worse for this calibration. Interestingly, as
Barro (2020)'s work and intuition suggest, the model now calibrates with much lower values of
 the model ­ 6.6 and 6.7 in B1 and B2, respectively.



                                              31
                             TFP shocks      Baseline 1          Baseline 2
                               = 0.15         -1.31%              0.25%
                            = 0.2 (baseline)  -1.31%              0.24%
                                = 0.3         -1.33%              0.17%
                            = 0.2 + disaster  -1.40%              -0.01%

Table 8: Sensitivity of long-run EAU Changes from a 20% DB pay-go policy in the closed
economy for changes in the distribution of TFP-Shocks



C     Calibrating the Asymmetric 2-Country Case
According to Penn World Tables data, the U.S. share of world GDP totaled 16.4% in 2017
­ hence our assumption that the RoW is roughly six times larger than the U.S. We use the
standard deviation of the growth rate of real GDP of the U.S. and RoW to approximate TFP
risk. The standard deviation of the log difference in U.S. GDP growth is 1.95 log-percent,
whereas that of the RoW is 2.50 log-percent. Therefore, we calibrate TFP of the RoW to be
1.25 times as risky as that of the U.S.. The same data produce our assumed cross-country TFP
correlation of 0.22.
    Finally, we introduce cross-country investment costs to match the 2019 cross-country asset
positions reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We adjust the model as follows.
The net cross-country investment return for home investors, R       ^ F,t+1 , and the cross-country
investment return for foreign investors, R^ H,t+1 , are now given by

                         ^ F,t+1 = RF,t+1 - F ,
                         R                           ^ H,t+1 = RH,t+1 - H ,
                                                     R

where F and H reference the costs to domestic and foreign residents of investing in capital
abroad. We also introduce a bond investment cost, F B , which foreigners face when investing
in domestic bonds. R ^t
                      f       f
                        +1 = Rt+1 - F B . Domestic investors faces no cost when investing in
domestic bonds and there is, by assumption, no separate foreign bond market. The budget
constraints of the home and foreign old are

               co,H,t+1 = kH,H,t RH,t+1 + kH,F,t R^ F,t+1 + bH,t Rt
                                                                  f
                                                                    +1 + Tt+1 + T ACtH ,
                                                                                              (20)
                                          ^ H,t+1 + kF,F,t RF,t+1 + bF,t R
                        co,F,t+1 = kF,H,t R                              ^tf
                                                                            +1 + T ACtF ,


where co,H,t+1 is the time-t + 1 consumption of the old in the home country, kH,H,t and kH,F,t
are domestic and foreign capital investments made by the young at time t, bH,t is the time-t
purchase of bonds by the young, Tt+1 is the government transfer received by the domestic old
at time t + 1, and T ACtH are the transaction costs, which we assume are lump-sum rebatted.
In equilibrium we have T ACtH = F kH,F,t . Analogous formulations hold for foreign households.




                                                  32
D     Two-Way Transfers in Asymmetric Case
Figure 12 compares and decomposes the long-run EAU impacts of home DB pay-go policy on
the home and foreign country for varying policy size.




.

Figure 12: Comparing and decomposing long-run EAU impacts on home and foreign country
of DB pay-go policy.




                                         33
References
Abel, A. B., Mankiw, N. G., Summers, L. H., and Zeckhauser, R. J. (1989). Assessing dynamic
 efficiency: Theory and evidence. The Review of Economic Studies, 56(1):1­19.

Aksoy, Y., Basso, H. S., Smith, R. P., and Grasl, T. (2019). Demographic structure and
 macroeconomic trends. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(1):193­222.

Altig, D., Auerbach, A. J., Kotlikoff, L. J., Ilin, E., and Ye, V. (2020). Marginal net taxation
  of Americans' labor supply. Working Paper 27164, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ball, L. and Mankiw, N. G. (2007). Intergenerational risk sharing in the spirit of Arrow,
  Debreu, and Rawls, with applications to social security design. Journal of Political Economy,
  115(4):523­547.

Ball, L. M. and Mankiw, N. G. (2021). Market power in neoclassical growth models. Working
  Paper 28538, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barbie, M., Hagedorn, M., and Kaul, A. (2007). On the interaction between risk sharing and
  capital accumulation in a stochastic OLG model with production. Journal of Economic
  Theory, 137(1):568­579.

Barro, R. J. (2020). r minus g. Working Paper 28002, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blanchard, O. (2019).    Public debt and low interest rates.      American Economic Review,
  109(4):1197­1229.

Blanchard, O., Leandro, A., and Zettelmeyer, J. (2020). Revisiting the EU fiscal rules in an
  era of low interest rates. In Rethinking the European Fiscal Framework Conference.

Bohn, H. (1999). Should the social security trust fund hold equities? An intergenerational
  welfare analysis. Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(3):666­697.

Bovenberg, L. and Uhlig, H. (2008). Pension systems and the allocation of macroeconomic risk.
  In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2006, pages 241­344. National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Brumm, J., Kotlikoff, L., and Kubler, F. (2020). Leveraging posterity's prosperity?       AEA
  Papers and Proceedings, 110:152­56.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Merkel, S. A., and Sannikov, Y. (2020). Debt as safe asset: Mining the
  bubble. Princeton University work in progress.

Crafts, N. (2018). The productivity slowdown: Is it the `new normal' ?        Oxford Review of
  Economic Policy, 34(3):443­460.

Diamond, P. A. (1965). National debt in a neoclassical growth model. The American Economic
  Review, 55(5):1126­1150.

                                              34
Epstein, L. G. and Zin, S. E. (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
  consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica, 57(4):937­969.

Evans, R. W. (2020). Public debt, interest rates, and negative shocks. AEA Papers and
  Proceedings, 110:137­40.

Evans, R. W., Kotlikoff, L. J., and Phillips, K. L. (2012). Game over: Simulating unsustainable
  fiscal policy. Working Paper 17917, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harenberg, D. and Ludwig, A. (2019). Idiosyncratic risk, aggregate risk, and the welfare effects
  of social security. International Economic Review, 60(2):661­692.

Hasanhodzic, J. (2020). Simulating the Blanchard conjecture in a multiperiod life cycle model.
  AEA Papers and Proceedings, 110:149­51.

Hasanhodzic, J. and Kotlikoff, L. J. (2013). Generational risk-is it a big deal?: Simulating
  an 80-period OLG model with aggregate shocks. Working Paper 19179, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Hellwig, M. F. (2020). Dynamic inefficiency and fiscal interventions in an economy with land
  and transaction costs. MPI Collective Goods Discussion Paper, 2020(7).

Hubbard, R. G. and Judd, K. L. (1987). Social security and individual welfare: Precaution-
 ary saving, borrowing constraints, and the payroll tax. The American Economic Review,
 77(4):630­646.

Imrohoroglu,  A., Imrohoroglu, S., and Joines, D. H. (1995). A life cycle analysis of social
  security. Economic theory, 6(1):83­114.

Jiang, Z., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and Xiaolan, M. Z. (2019). The US public debt
  valuation puzzle. Working Paper 26583, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krueger, D. and Kubler, F. (2002). Intergenerational risk-sharing via social security when
  financial markets are incomplete. American Economic Review, 92(2):407­410.

Krueger, D. and Kubler, F. (2006). Pareto-improving social security reform when financial
  markets are incomplete!? American Economic Review, 96(3):737­755.

Merton, R. C. (1983). On the role of social security as a means for efficient risk sharing in
 an economy where human capital is not tradable. In Financial aspects of the United States
 pension system, pages 325­358. University of Chicago Press.

Miao, J. and Su, D. (2021). Fiscal and monetary policy interactions in a model with low interest
 rates. Working Paper, Boston University.

Phelps, E. (1961). The golden rule of accumulation: A fable for growthmen. The American
  Economic Review, (4):638­643.

                                              35
Reis, R. (2021). The constraint on public debt when r < g but g < m. Working paper, London
  School of Economics.

Samuelson, P. A. (1958). An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without the
  social contrivance of money. Journal of Political Economy, 66(6):467­482.

Scheinkman, J. A. and Weiss, L. (1986). Borrowing constraints and aggregate economic activity.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 54(1):23­45.

Sergeyev, D. and Mehrotra, N. (2020). Debt sustainability in a low interest rate world. Dis-
  cussion paper, Bocconi university.

Sims, C. A. (2019). Optimal fiscal and monetary policy with distorting taxes. Working Paper,
  Princeton University.

Solow, R. M. (1956). A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 70(1):65­94.

Summers, L. H. and Rachel, L. (2019). On falling neutral real rates, fiscal policy and the risk
  of secular stagnation. In Brookings Papers on Economic Activity BPEA Conference Drafts.

Tirole, J. (1985). Asset bubbles and overlapping generations. Econometrica: Journal of the
  Econometric Society, 53(6):1499­1528.

Zilcha, I. (1990). Dynamic efficiency in overlapping generations models with stochastic produc-
  tion. Journal of Economic Theory, 52(2):364­379.




                                              36
