                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          IMPACTS OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT ON THE POWER SECTOR FROM
                  1938-1994: ANTICIPATION AND ADAPTATION

                                         Karen Clay
                                         Akshaya Jha
                                       Joshua A. Lewis
                                      Edson R. Severnini

                                      Working Paper 28962
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28962


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2021, Revised July 2021

We are grateful for invaluable comments and suggestions from Becka Brolinson, Don Fullerton,
Geoff Heal, Maggie Jones, Matt Kotchen, Arik Levinson, Chiara Lo Prete, Erin Mansur, Nick
Muller, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins. We also appreciate feedback from seminars
participants at Carnegie Mellon University, PERC, University of California { Berkeley,
University of Illinois { Urbana-Champaign, University of Maryland, Université de Montréal,
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Finally, we thank conference
participants at the ASSA Annual Meetings, Occasional Workshop in Environmental and
Resource Economics (University of California { Santa Barbara), Northeast Workshop on Energy
Policy and Environmental Economics (Columbia University), Midwest Energyfest
(Northwestern University), Annual Workshop on Empirical Methods in Energy Economics
(EMEE), CEPR-EBRD-EoT-LSE Symposium on Environmental Economics and the Green
Transition, the Annual Research Roundtable on Energy Regulation, Technology, and
Transaction Costs, the 2021 Canadian Economic Association Meetings (CNEH), and the
Berkeley-Harvard-Yale Environmental Economics Seminar. The authors also gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Center for Electricity Industry Studies, Heinz College,
the Berkman fund at Carnegie Mellon University, National Science Foundation Grant
SES-1627432, and the Université de Montréal. June 16, 2021. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Karen Clay, Akshaya Jha, Joshua A. Lewis, and Edson R. Severnini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impacts of the Clean Air Act on the Power Sector from 1938-1994: Anticipation and Adaptation
Karen Clay, Akshaya Jha, Joshua A. Lewis, and Edson R. Severnini
NBER Working Paper No. 28962
June 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. K32,N52,N72,Q41,Q48,Q52,Q58

                                           ABSTRACT

The passage of landmark government regulation is often the culmination of evolving social
pressure and incremental policy change. During this process, firms may preemptively adjust
behavior in anticipation of impending regulation, making it difficult to quantify the overall
economic impact of the legislation. This study leverages newly digitized data on the operation of
virtually every fossil-fuel power plant in the United States from 1938-1994 to examine the
impacts of the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) on the power sector. This unique long panel provides
an extended pre-regulation benchmark, allowing us to account for both anticipatory behavior by
electric utilities in the years leading up to the Act's passage and reallocative effects of the CAA
across plant vintages. We find that the CAA led to large and persistent decreases in output and
productivity, but only for plants that opened before 1963. This timing aligns with the passage of
the original 1963 CAA, which provided the federal government with limited authority to
"control" air pollution, but signaled impending federal regulation. We provide historical evidence
of anticipatory responses by utilities in the design and siting of plants that opened after 1963. We
also find that the aggregate productivity losses of the CAA borne by the power sector were
substantially mitigated by the reallocation of output from older less efficient power plants to
newer plants.

Karen Clay                                       Joshua A. Lewis
Heinz College                                    University of Montreal
Carnegie Mellon University                       Département de sciences économiques
5000 Forbes Avenue                               3150 rue Jean-Brillant
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                             Montréal, QC, H3T 1N8
and NBER                                         joshua.lewis@umontreal.ca
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu
                                                 Edson R. Severnini
Akshaya Jha                                      H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University                       Carnegie Mellon University
Hamburg Hall Office 2218                         4800 Forbes Ave #2114B
4800 Forbes Avenue                               Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Pittsburgh, PA 15232                             and NBER
Website: http://www.akshayajha.com               ersevernini@gmail.com
akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu



An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28962
1         Introduction

Government regulation permeates all aspects of the modern economy. It affects a range
of outcomes from worker safety to air quality to the provision of housing and medical
care. Landmark policies such as the Housing Act of 1949, Medicare and Medicaid in
1965, and the Clean Air Act of 1970 have fundamentally altered major sectors of the
economy. Although transformative, these policies are often the culmination of evolving
social pressure and incremental policy change.1 During this lengthy process, economic
agents may update their expectations over the likelihood of future regulation and take
anticipatory actions to facilitate the transition to a post-regulatory regime.

        Anticipatory behavior makes it difficult to estimate the full effects of landmark reg-
ulations, since outcomes in the years leading up to enactment may not provide a valid
benchmark against which post-regulation outcomes can be compared. Moreover, dif-
ferences in producers' abilities to preemptively adapt to impending regulation can have
important distributional consequences, with potentially first-order effects on aggregate
outcomes.

        This paper studies the impacts of the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) on the power sector.
The CAA is the centerpiece of local air pollution regulation in the United States and
a model for environmental policy around the world. It constitutes a prime example of
landmark regulation that emerged after an extended period of incremental policy change.
Since regulation was largely foreseeable in the years leading up to the Act's passage,
polluting electric utilities may have preemptively adjusted behavior in anticipation of
the CAA.

        We leverage newly digitized data on the operation of virtually every fossil-fuel power
plant in the United States from 1938-1994 to examine the impacts of the 1970 CAA on
electricity producers. This unique data-set provides us with an exceptional opportunity
to account for both anticipatory behavior by electric utilities in the years preceding the
Act's passage, and reallocative effects of the CAA across older and newer plants. The
long time horizon allows us to establish a pre-regulatory benchmark, and estimate the
effects of the CAA for plant vintages that were more or less able to anticipate and
    1
    The Housing Act of 1949 was passed 15 years after the creation of the Federal Housing Administra-
tion, Medicare and Medicaid were signed into law 20 years after being proposed by President Truman,
and the 1970 Clean Air Act was passed 22 years after the deadly Donora Smog of 1948.



                                                 1
preemptively respond to regulation. Moreover, because power plants are immobile and
have extended lifespans, there is little concern that plant relocation or exit will affect the
estimates, as can often be the case in long-run analyses.2 Finally, detailed data on plant
operations allow us to estimate annual plant-level "pollution-unadjusted" total factor
productivity (PU-TFP).3 We use this measure of PU-TFP to estimate the direct effects
of the CAA on plant productivity and to assess the indirect productivity effects driven
by the reallocation of output from older plants to newer plants.4

       Our empirical approach relies on geographic and temporal variation in environmental
regulation. The CAA established the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS),
which set national standards for five criteria pollutants: carbon monoxide, particulate
matter, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, and sulfur dioxide. In each year, each county is desig-
nated to be either in attainment or nonattainment depending on whether pollution levels
are below or above the relevant standard. Power plants located in attainment counties
are subject to limited regulation while plants in nonattainment counties are forced by
state and local regulators to take potentially costly actions to reduce pollution levels.
Power plants can reduce their pollution emissions by decreasing output, switching to
"cleaner" fuels, or installing pollution abatement technology.

       We adopt a difference-in-differences strategy that compares the operations of plants
located in attainment versus nonattainment counties. Event study graphs support the
parallel trends assumption. This is consistent with historical evidence that electric utili-
ties anticipated some form of impending regulation, but were unable to predict the exact
timing or details of the 1970 CAA.5
   2
      During the sample period, the typical lifespan of a fossil-fuel power plant was 40 years. Rate-
of-return regulation in the industry ensured that monopoly electric utilities faced virtually no risk of
bankruptcy and were thus very unlikely to relocate or exit.
    3
      Our measure of productivity focuses on how inputs translate to output electricity, without incorpo-
rating the external costs of pollution borne by society at large. We estimate PU-TFP using the method
specified by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015). Our estimation is based on output and input quanti-
ties rather than revenue and costs from balance sheet data, so will not be biased by changes in market
power in output or input markets (Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009;
De Loecker, 2011).
    4
      When markets are efficient, reallocative effects will not impact aggregate productivity (Solow, 1957).
However, there were large productivity differences across power plants of different vintages, consistent
with electric utilities operating as local monopolies during our sample period. As a result, the distribu-
tional impacts of regulation can have first-order effects on aggregate outcomes.
    5
      Evolving pressure for environmental regulation culminated with a remarkable shift in public senti-
ment in favor of environmental protection at the end of the 1960s. In May 1969, only one percent of the
population included "pollution/ecology" as one of the most important domestic problems in the United
States. Two years later, that number had jumped to 25 percent (ACIR, 1981, p.19). In part, the 1970


                                                     2
    We find that nonattainment led to reductions in output and productivity, but only for
plants built before 1963. The productivity losses incurred by these older vintage plants
are large and persistent, suggesting an inability to adapt to environmental regulation
even in the long run. In contrast, the effects of nonattainment on plants that opened
between 1963 and 1971 are small and statistically insignificant.

    The heterogeneity in treatment effects across vintages aligns with the passage of the
original 1963 CAA. This legislation provided the federal government with limited author-
ity to "control" air pollution, but served as a strong signal of impending federal regulation
to combat air pollution. Both historical and empirical evidence suggest that electric util-
ities took anticipatory actions following the 1963 CAA to mitigate the expected costs of
future regulation. Historical sources document preemptive design changes among plants
that opened after 1963, including increased stack height and installation of pollution
abatement technology. We document a sharp increase in patenting related to power sys-
tems between 1963-1971. We also find that electric utilities were less likely to site plants
in counties with pollution monitors after 1963. Taken together, this evidence points to
anticipation having played a key role in reducing the productivity losses for newer vintage
plants.

    We find that the distributional impacts of the CAA substantially mitigated the ag-
gregate productivity losses from the regulation. The declines in output from plants built
before 1963 were largely offset by increased output from new fossil-fuel plants that opened
after 1972. We estimate that roughly one third of the aggregate plant-level productivity
losses from nonattainment were offset by the productivity gains implied by the reallo-
cation of output from older plants to newer plants. A simple calculation that accounts
for this regulatory-induced reallocation of output across plants implies that aggregate
average productivity fell by 6% due to the CAA, resulting in annual total productivity
losses of $4.0 billion (2020 USD).

    Lastly, we show that, without data spanning well before the passage of the CAA,
one would substantially underestimate the effects of nonattainment on plant output and
productivity. We find that the magnitude of the main estimates diminish as the pre-
regulatory sample period is artificially shortened, and are not statistically significant for
samples beginning in the mid-1960s. We also find that the main coefficient estimates
CAA emerged from an effort by Nixon to outflank two pro-environment lawmakers ­ Senators Muskie
and Jackson ­ who were widely considered his strongest political opponents in the 1972 presidential race.


                                                   3
are driven by the initial attainment designations in 1972 and that post-1972 variation
in attainment status has small and statistically insignificant effects on plant output and
PU-TFP.6 Notably, these patterns also point to anticipatory behavior, since post-1972
changes in attainment status were largely determined based on known trends in county-
level pollution.

       This paper makes three main contributions to the literature. First, it provides the first
causal estimates of the impacts of the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) that account for antici-
patory behavior. Our analysis demonstrates that anticipatory behavior can substantially
affect the costs of regulatory compliance and meaningfully alter policy impact estimates.
In related work, Keiser and Shapiro (2019a,b) document that water pollution started
declining years before the passage of the landmark 1972 Clean Water Act. Anticipatory
behavior may have played a role in that setting as well given that federal legislation per-
taining to water pollution control was enacted well before 1972.7 Our findings are also
consistent with Malani and Reif (2015), who investigate the role of anticipatory behavior
in the response to physician tort reform.

       Second, our findings show that the distributional impacts of regulation can meaning-
fully alter the first-order effects on aggregate outcomes through reallocative responses
(e.g., Kline and Moretti, 2014; Hornbeck and Rotemberg, 2019). In the context of the
CAA, the productivity losses borne by older plants were substantially offset by the pro-
ductivity gains associated with regulatory-induced reductions in output from older plants.
This reallocative response also counteracted the air pollution costs associated with the
CAA's grandfathering provisions, which imposed less stringent regulations on existing
plants (e.g., List, Millimet and McHone, 2004; Stavins, 2006).

       The third contribution relates to the critical importance of a long time horizon to as-
sess the effects of transformative regulations, especially in settings with large irreversible
investments (e.g., Bleakley and Lin, 2012; Hornbeck, 2012; Hornbeck and Keniston, 2017).
   6
     Decompositions based on the Goodman-Bacon (2018) technique show that identification of the main
estimates is based primarily on the comparison of plants that never versus ever faced nonttainment rather
than switches in attainment status after 1972.
   7
     Indeed, a 1981 report from the U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (ACIR)
states that "[t]he history of federal water pollution control initiatives from 1948 to 1966 is a vivid example
of government action through incremental changes. (...) [F]ederal spending (...) increased from a small
loan program funded at about $1 million per year to a grant-in-aid outlay of $3.55 billion over five years.
In the same period, Congress moved from a posture of denying federal authorities any enforcement
powers to requiring the enactment of national water quality standards" (ACIR, 1981, p.12).



                                                      4
There is an extensive literature documenting the impacts of the CAA on firm behavior
(see reviews by Currie and Walker, 2019; Aldy et al., Forthcoming).8 However, most prior
studies have relied on post-1972 variation in attainment status, and none have included
data from before 1963. We show that an extended pre-regulatory period is essential for
estimating the full economic impact of the CAA.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents background
information on the evolution of environmental policy in the United States. Section 3
outlines our conceptual framework for how plants choose inputs and output with versus
without the Clean Air Act. Section 4 describes the data sources, presents summary
statistics, and introduces our difference-in-differences approach to estimating the effect of
nonattainment with the NAAQS on plant operations. Section 5 reports the main findings,
along with robustness checks and further heterogeneity analyses. Section 6 presents a
back-of-the-envelope calculation of the aggregate effect of the 1970 CAA on PU-TFP in
the power sector. Lastly, Section 7 concludes by discussing the policy implications of our
findings.



2         Background

This section describes three phases of air pollution regulation in the United States. The
first phase was up to 1962, when most of the federal efforts were directed towards data
collection. The second phase was 1963-1971, when the passing of the Clean Air Act
(CAA) of 1963 provided a credible signal that comprehensive regulation was coming.
The third phase was from 1972 onward when the 1970 CAA legislation took effect.


2.1        Up to 1962

The modern clean-air movement arose in the postwar period following a number of high
profile incidents of extreme air pollution, notably the 1948 Donora smog and the 1952
London smog (Clay, 2018). These events received international publicity, raised public
    8
    For impacts on manufacturing, see, for example, Henderson (1996); Becker and Henderson (2000);
Greenstone (2002); Gray and Shadbegian (2003); Greenstone, List and Syverson (2012); Ryan (2012);
Kahn and Mansur (2013); Curtis (2018). For impacts on the power sector, see, for example, Gollop and
Roberts (1983, 1985); Nelson, Tietenberg and Donihue (1993); Carlson et al. (2000); Ferris, Shadbegian
and Wolverton (2014); Sheriff, Ferris and Shadbegian (2019).


                                                  5
awareness of the relationship between air quality and health, and created the impetus
for federal action.9

       Federal legislation under the 1955 Air Pollution Control Act provided funding for
research and technical assistance related to air pollution control. One outcome of this
legislation was the creation of the air pollution monitoring network. Although initially
small, the network included 270 monitors in 205 counties by 1962. The 1955 Act autho-
rized a modest research budget and left the responsibility of prevention and control of air
pollution to the states. A report by the U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental
Relations offers an assessment of the impact of the 1955 Air Pollution Control Act: "It
legislated little and, correspondingly, accomplished little." (ACIR, 1981, p.12)


2.2       1963-1971

The Clean Air Act of 1963 (1963 CAA) signalled an important shift in the role of the
federal government in combating air pollution. The 1963 CAA was the first federal legis-
lation to give the federal government the authority to "control" air pollution.10 Despite
this transformation in the federal government's role in combating air pollution, the effec-
tive authority was limited. A total of just 11 "abatement conferences" were held through
1971, even as the 1967 Air Quality Act strengthened federal enforcement powers.11,12

       Contemporary historical accounts document a change in the behavior of electric util-
ities following the 1963 legislation that is consistent with anticipation. For example, the
1966 "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses" report
dedicates, for the first time, a section on "environmental influences on plant design, con-
struction, and operation." It points out that, among other factors, air pollution was
"emerging as a major social-economic issue affecting the electric power industry" (FPC,
1967, p.ix).13 The 1968 reports adds that "[u]tilities are giving increasing attention to
   9
     Around the same time, severe ongoing smog problems in Los Angeles led California's state officials
to begin lobbying for federal legislation.
  10
     Namely, the 1963 CAA included a conference procedure in section 115.
  11
     Interestingly, these procedures were not new. Similar procedures were included in the 1956 Federal
Water Pollution Control Act and had been used beginning in 1957 (EPA, 1973).
  12
     Between 1960 and 1966, ten states set their own air quality standards (Stern, 1982). Our primary
specifications account for these state-level standards through the inclusion of state-year fixed effects. We
also explore the impact of state-level standards in sensitivity analyses.
  13
     The report also states that "[t]echnology for the removal of particulate matter has been available
for some time; however, the demand for very high efficiency (99 percent+) electrostatic precipitators is



                                                     6
the location and design of new plants and to lessening the impact of these facilities on the
environment. (...) Most new coal and oil fired plants include high efficiency electrostatic
precipitators to remove particulate matter from stack discharges. (...) High stacks are
frequently used to obtain greater dispersion and reduce ground level concentration of
oxides of sulfur, and greater attention is being given the selection of coal and oil fuels of
lower sulfur content" (FPC, 1969, p.ix). The 1970 reports state that "[e]nvironmental
factors are now a major, and often dominant, consideration in the siting and design of
new steam-electric generating facilities. (...) All coal-fired units will employ electrostatic
precipitators, wet scrubbers, or other efficient methods for controlling particulate emis-
sions and many will be designed for later application of stack systems for removal of
sulfur oxides which are now under development" (FPC, 1972, p.x).

    Changes in the design of power plants that opened after 1963 are consistent with
anticipatory behavior by electric utilities. Appendix Figure A.1 shows an increase in
average smokestack height in the late 1960s that does not align with the more gradual
increase in generator size. Appendix Figure A.2 shows that installation of flue gas par-
ticulate (FGP) collectors was already common before 1970. Finally, Appendix Figure
A.3 shows a sharp increase in the number of patents granted for power systems begin-
ning in the mid-1960, potentially reflecting the increased incentive for regulatory-induced
innovation.14

    Changes in the siting of plants that opened after 1963 are also consistent with antic-
ipatory behavior (Appendix Table A.1). In comparison to pre-1963 plants, plants built
between 1963 and 1971 were systematically less likely to be sited in counties with an air
pollution monitor. Interestingly, there are no cross-vintage differences in the likelihood
that plants were sited in future nonattainment counties, suggesting that electric utilities
were unable to predict which counties would ultimately be targeted under the CAA.

    Preemptive changes by electric utilities may partly account for the increase in con-
struction costs of coal plants beginning in the mid-1960s (see Appendix Figure A.4).15
growing rapidly. Commercial devices for the removal of oxides of sulfur from the flue gases are not yet
available (...) In the meantime, (...) higher boiler stacks are being installed to attain greater dispersion"
(FPC, 1967, pp. ix-x).
   14
      The data do not permit a more disaggregate decomposition of the sources of the new patents.
   15
      Joskow and Rose (1985) comment that this trend in construction costs surprised them: they "ex-
pected to see the major increases appear later as a result of new plants' coming on line with state-of-
the-art environmental control equipment in response to regulations introduced in the 1970s; but costs
clearly begin to increase by the late 1960s" (p. 21).


                                                     7
Since electric utilities were subject to rate-of-return regulation, the costs of installing and
operating environmental control equipment were largely passed on to consumers through
rate increases approved in public utility commission hearings (Fowlie, 2010).


2.3       1972 onward

The 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) marked the first federal effort to regulate air quality
on a large scale. It emerged after an extended period of mounting public pressure for
federal action on air pollution. Nevertheless, the timing and scope of the regulation
came as somewhat of a surprise. A confluence of high profile events ­ the 1969 Cuyahoga
River Fire, a massive oil spill off the coast of Santa Barbara in 1969, and the first Earth
Day in spring 1970 ­ triggered a groundswell of public sentiment favoring environmental
action. Despite his anti-regulatory tendencies, President Nixon supported the 1970 CAA
to outflank Senators Muskie and Jackson, two pro-environment legislators who were
widely considered his strongest rivals for the 1972 presidency (ACIR, 1981).

       The 1970 CAA established the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for
five criteria air pollutants: particulate matter, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
dioxide, and ozone.16 Beginning in 1972, each county received an annual designation
of nonattainment or attainment for each criteria pollutant, depending on whether air
pollution concentrations exceeded the federally mandated standard.17

       Each state was required to submit a state implementation plan (SIP) outlining how
any nonattainment regions would be brought into compliance with the NAAQS. Typ-
ically, states totaled up estimated emissions from all stationary sources of pollution in
each nonattainment area, and divided this amount by an estimate of the maximum level
of emissions that would ensure compliance with the NAAQS. Each plant was ordered to
reduce emissions by this ratio (Roberts and Farrell, 1978). All states, territories, and the
District of Columbia submitted SIPs by the end of 1972 (EPA, 1973).18
  16
      Lead was later added as a criteria pollutant.
  17
      The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) started to publish a list of nonattainment counties only
in 1978. Following Greenstone (2002), we classify a county as nonattainment for a pollutant over the
period 1972-1977 if it had a pollution monitor reading that exceeded the relevant federal standard in
1972.
   18
      The documentary record on SIPs is complicated by the fact that the SIPs were frequently being
modified or litigated. Still, in 1974 the EPA noted that "[w]ith a few notable exceptions (e.g. sulfur
oxide emission limitations in the State of Ohio) all States now have fully enforceable emission limits
affecting stationary sources" (EPA, 1975, p.12).


                                                  8
       Power plants in nonattainment counties faced greater constraints on emissions than
plants in attainment counties. One way for plants to meet regulatory requirements is to
decrease output. Indeed, Appendix Figure C.5 shows a large drop in output among pre-
1963 plants located in nonattainment counties after the passage of the CAA. This decline
in output seems to be driven by utilities scaling back production at older vintage plants
rather than shuttering capacity, which remained stable in the post-1972 period. Reduc-
tions in output from pre-1963 plants were offset primarily by increases in production
from new plants built after 1972.19

       To reduce emissions, existing plants in nonattainment counties could also burn more
expensive, lower sulfur coal or install pollution abatement technology ­ either flue gas
desulfurization (FGD) systems or flue gas particulate collectors (FGP). However, in-
stalling a FGD system was costly and risked subjecting the plant to the New Source
Performance Standards (NSPS), a set of strict standards that applied to the plant re-
gardless of attainment status.20 Despite these concerns, both FGP and FGD installation
rates increased after 1970 (see Appendix Figures A.2 and A.5).

       The 1970 CAA led to a sharp drop in emissions from power plants. By 1975, the
EPA reported that 261 of the 394 coal-fired power plants in the United States were in
compliance with SIP emission limitations or abatement schedules.21 During the first
three years of the CAA, total suspended particle (TSP) emissions fell from 4.2 million
tons in 1970 to 2.9 million tons in 1974, and sulfur oxide (SOx ) emissions fell from 15.4
million tons to 13.6 million tons (EPA, 1976b). These reductions in pollution emissions
accelerated a downtrend trend in monitored TSP concentration levels that pre-dated the
Act's passage (Appendix Figure A.6).
  19
     Similar descriptive plots broken down by vintage group and the number of years that the plant
faced nonattainment are displayed in Appendix Figure C.6. The corresponding plots for PU-TFP are
displayed in Appendix Figures C.7 and C.8.
  20
     In nonattainment counties, abatement technologies had to meet the "lowest achievable emissions
rate" regardless of costs. In contrast, plants in attainment counties were required to install the "best
available control technology", which allowed for the consideration of costs. The 1977 amendments
required the use of scrubbers for coal-fired plants built after 1978.
  21
     Of the 133 plants not in compliance, 47 were located in Ohio, 29 were located in Indiana, and 26
were located in Illinois. In these states, there had been significant delay and litigation around SOx
control plans (EPA, 1976a). Of remaining 31 plants not in compliance, ten were part of the Tennessee
Valley Authority and were the subject of a consent decree (see Appendix Table A.2); SIP revisions were
underway for 7 plants; and the remaining plants were in litigation or otherwise subject to EPA action.




                                                   9
3        Conceptual Framework

This section provides a conceptual framework for understanding the different responses
to the CAA for plants built prior to 1963, between 1963-1971, and after 1972. The
mathematical formulation is presented in Appendix Section B, with the details on the
procedure used to estimate productivity in Appendix Section C.2.

       Each plant i produces electricity output Oit in each year t using the following three
inputs: electricity generating capacity Kit , labor Lit , and input heat energy Eit . Capacity
takes a longer time to adjust than either labor or energy while labor takes a longer time
to adjust than energy. We follow Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007) in assuming a
Leontief production function, where energy is a perfect complement to the other inputs:
holding input energy fixed, output cannot be increased solely through increases in labor
or capital.

       Pollution Pit is emitted as a byproduct of fossil fuel combustion to produce output
Oit . Plants can reduce emissions by decreasing output, burning cleaner fuel, or installing
pollution abatement technology.22 These actions are costly. For example, a plant that
reduces output may be unable to fully adjust inputs, resulting in a decline in pollution-
unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP).23 Of course, the benefits to society of
lower emissions and thus reduced exposure to pollution are substantial. However, absent
regulation, plants do not internalize these benefits in their decision-making.

       The response to nonattainment may vary across plant vintages due to information
asymmetries at the time of plant opening. Prior to 1963, electric utilities were less able to
anticipate future federal environmental regulation. Plants that opened before 1963 were
thus less likely to be designed with environmental compliance in mind. Instead, these
plants could respond to nonattainment through retroactive adjustments in operations ­
decreasing output or switching to cleaner fuels ­ or retrofit installations of abatement
technology.24
  22
     Appendix Table A.2 documents the compliance strategies utilized by plants owned by the Tennessee
Valley Authority.
  23
     Our PU-TFP measure does not account for the environmental benefits associated with reduced
emissions that accrue to society at large. See Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus (2011); Muller (2014,
2019) for measurements of GDP that adjust for pollution damages. As stated by Currie and Walker
(2019), "if a regulation induces firms to use less pollution (that is, fewer unmeasured inputs), then it
may look like total factor productivity declines when in fact the `true' regulation-induced productivity
change remains elusive" (p.15).
  24
     There was a risk that retrofit installations of pollution abatement technology would be considered a


                                                   10
    Following the passage of the 1963 CAA, plants were better able to anticipate future
environmental regulation. As a result, electric utilities were better able to incorporate
future regulatory compliance into plant design decisions. The subsequent impacts of
nonattainment on output and PU-TFP for plants built between 1963-1971 may have
been mitigated by these anticipatory responses.25

    Finally, a nonattainment designation should have limited impact on the operations of
plants that opened after 1972 because: (1) all of these plants are already subject to the
stricter NSPS policy and (2) these plants were sited and designed with full knowledge
that the NAAQS were in place.



4     Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1     Data Description

The analysis uses annual plant-level data for the vast majority of fossil fuel fired power
plants in the United States for the period 1938-1994.26 The Federal Power Commission
(FPC), later renamed Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), began publishing
detailed plant-level information in 1948.27 The initial volume included retrospective data
beginning in 1938. We digitized the data for 1938-1981, and use similar data collected
by FERC for 1982-1994.28 Further details on the data construction process are provided
in Appendix Section C.

    There are 931 fossil-fuel-fired plants in the data, located in approximately 700 U.S.
counties (see Appendix Figure C.2). Our main sample includes 687 "existing" plants
"major modification", which would subject the plant to stricter environmental regulation under the New
Source Performance Standards (NSPS). Despite considerable uncertainty regarding what constituted a
"major modification", it was only in the late 1990s that the EPA announced sweeping enforcement action
against 46 power plants for violations (see Keohane, Mansur and Voynov (2009)).
   25
      Electric utilities may also have responded by siting plants to avoid future regulatory requirements.
However, Appendix Table A.1 suggests that utilities were unable to anticipate which counties would face
nonattainment status.
   26
      Our sample ends in 1994 because the market-based components of the Clean Air Act of 1990 were
implemented in 1995. Moreover, some U.S. states decided to shift the provision of electricity generation
from output price regulation to electricity market mechanisms beginning in 1998. Market-based plants
face both a different set of incentives and a different set of reporting requirements than price-regulated
plants.
   27
      Appendix Figure C.1 displays a page of the 1957 report as an example.
   28
      Part of the digitization for 1938-1981 was done with resources from the NSF grant SES 1627432.
We thank Ron Shadbegian and other researchers at the USEPA for providing the data for 1982-1994.


                                                   11
that opened before 1972. The remaining 244 "new" plants were built after 1972 and
were thus subject to more stringent regulatory standards under the NSPS.

       We assign each county an annual nonattainment status based on whether the county
was in noncompliance with the standards associated with any of the five regulated cri-
teria pollutants. These designations are obtained from published lists from the Code of
Federal Regulation (CFR) for the period 1978-1994. For the period 1972-1977, we follow
Greenstone (2002) and classify a county as nonattainment if it had a monitor reading
in the year that exceeded the federal standard. Appendix Table C.1 presents the num-
ber of existing and new plants in our data that never versus ever faced nonattainment
between 1972-1994. The share of plants that never faced nonattainment between 1972-
1994 is 0.35 for plants built before 1963 and 0.36 for plants built between 1963-1971.29
This suggests that were no cross-vintage differences in the siting of existing plants across
always-attainment versus ever-nonattainment counties. In contrast, "new" plants were
systematically more likely to be built in always-attainment counties.

       Attainment status is persistent. Conditional on being in attainment (nonattainment)
in year t - 1, the empirical probability of being in attainment (nonattainment) in year t
is over 0.9 (Appendix Table C.2). Thus, the vast majority of the variation in nonattain-
ment status stems from the initial designations set forth in 1972 rather than post-1972
changes.30

       Our annual plant-level data provide detailed information on a range of outcomes,
including electricity output, electricity generating capacity, number of employees, input
fuel use, and fuel prices. We model the plant production process as in Fabrizio, Rose
and Wolfram (2007), combining data on inputs and output to estimate annual plant-level
productivity. See Appendix Sections B and C.2 for the details on how we estimate pro-
ductivity.31 Appendix Table C.3 provides summary statistics for all of the key variables
utilized in the analysis.
  29
     Appendix Figure C.3 plots the annual proportion of fossil fuel fired electricity generation produced
in nonattainment counties, separately for existing versus new plants. The top panel considers nonat-
tainment with any pollutant while the bottom panels plots nonattainment by pollutant.
  30
     The distribution of the number of years that a county faced nonattainment between 1972-1994 is
displayed in Appendix Figure C.9.
  31
     The production function parameters are reported in Appendix Table C.4.




                                                   12
4.2       Empirical Strategy

We use the following difference-in-differences specification to study the effects of nonat-
tainment on power plant operations:

                        Yit = i + f t + vt + st + N onattainct +         it                    (1)

where i indexes a plant located in county c in state s, and t indexes year. Equation (1)
includes plant fixed effects, i , to control for time-invariant plant characteristics. The
term f t denotes a vector of fuel-type-by-year fixed effects that account for input price
shocks that might differentially impact plants that burn different types of fuel (i.e. coal,
oil, or gas). The term vt represents a vector of vintage-group-by-year fixed effects that
allow for differential evolution in operations across different cohorts of plants. Finally, we
include state-by-year fixed effects, st , to account for any state-level energy or pollution
control policies that may have emerged either before or after the introduction of the
CAA.

       The independent variable of interest is N onattainct , an indicator that takes on the
value one if the county is out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in year t.
We also estimate a generalized version of Equation (1) that allows the effects of nonattain-
ment to differ by plant vintage (i.e.: plants built before 1963 versus between 1963-1971).
Unless otherwise noted, our estimated coefficients are accompanied by standard errors
that are two-way clustered by county and year (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011).



5        Impacts of the CAA on Power Plant Operations

5.1       Impacts on Output, Inputs, and Productivity, and Evidence
          of Anticipatory Effects

To motivate the regression analysis and assess the validity of the common trends assump-
tion, we begin by presenting event study graphs. These graphs are based on a version
of Equation (1) that treats the first year in nonattainment as year zero in event time,
and allows the coefficients to vary from   {-7, +10} in event time.32 The figures plot
  32
    We estimate the model including an indicator for observations with  < -7 and an indicator for
observations with  > 10, but follow convention in not reporting the coefficient estimates for these


                                                13
these coefficients and their 95 percent confidence intervals. We present event studies for
two outcomes ­ output and productivity ­ and for three plant vintage groups ­ all plants
built before 1972, plants built before 1963, and plants built between 1963-1971.

    Figure 1 highlights three key points. First, in all panels there is no evidence of
differential trends in the years preceding the first year in nonattainment. Second, output
and PU-TFP decline for plants built before 1972 in the years following the plant first
facing nonattainment. Third, the declines appear to be driven by plants built before
1963. The coefficients for both output and PU-TFP for plants built between 1963-1971
are small in magnitude and not statistically different from zero.

    The absence of pre-trends may seem to be inconsistent with pre-emptive adjustments
by electric utilities in anticipation of environmental regulation. Indeed, differential pre-
trends can be a manifestation of anticipatory behavior (Malani and Reif, 2015). In our
context, however, there is little evidence that producers could anticipate which jurisdic-
tions would ultimately be subject to greater enforcement under the CAA (see Appendix
Table A.1). Moreover, to the extent that anticipated regulation was incorporated into
the initial design of post-1963 plants, these adjustments will be captured by the plant
fixed effects. Thus, even if electric utilities made pre-emptive adjustments for plants that
opened after 1963, we would not expect to see differential trends across attainment and
nonattainment counties prior to the Act's passage.

    Table 1 presents estimates of the impact of nonattainment on various annual plant-
level outcomes from Equation (1). Panel A reports the average effects. Panel B reports
heterogeneity in effects across plants built before 1963 versus those built between 1963-
1971.

    Power plants located in nonattainment counties experienced decreases in output and
PU-TFP relative to plants located in attainment counties (Panel A, cols. 1, 2). The
coefficient estimates are statistically significant and large in magnitude. We also find that
plants in nonattainment counties reduced their inputs relative to plants in attainment
counties (cols. 3-5). We estimate significant negative effects of nonattainment on fuel and
generating capacity. The effect on employment is also negative, but small in magnitude
and not statistically significant.

    The negative effect of nonattainment on PU-TFP is due to the fact that declines in
"endpoint restrictions" (see Kline (2012)).


                                              14
plant output were not fully offset by adjustments to inputs. This finding is consistent
with large adjustment costs for plant inputs. Plant generating capacity is essentially
irreversible in the short-run.33 Similarly, the number of employees required for plant
operations is largely independent of output levels.34 Finally, plant output reductions
may have increased input fuel use per MWh of generation because the new production
levels were technically sub-optimal or because plants shifted from base load generation
to more intermittent production.

    The negative effects of nonattainment on output and PU-TFP are driven entirely by
power plants built before 1963 (Table 1, Panel B). The heterogeneity in these effects is
striking. For plants built before 1963, the estimated reductions in output and produc-
tivity are large and statistically significant. For plants built between 1963 and 1971, the
estimates are small in magnitude and not statistically significant. Among older vintage
plants, we estimate similarly large negative effects for plants built before 1955 and those
built between 1955 and 1962 (Appendix Table D.1). Together, these findings suggest that
the differential estimates across plants built before and after 1963 were not the result of
gradual cross-cohort evolution in nonattainment impacts or changes in behavior among
plants that opened after the passage of the 1955 Air Pollution Control Act.

    The cross-vintage heterogeneity aligns with the timing of the 1963 CAA. This leg-
islation sent a strong signal of future regulation, and electric utilities appear to have
incorporated the likelihood of new regulatory requirements into the design and siting of
plants built after 1963 (see Section 2.2). Our findings suggest that anticipatory behavior
significantly mitigated the subsequent impacts of nonattainment on plant outcomes.

    The uneven distributional impacts also point to potential first-order reallocative ef-
fects. In particular, reductions in output due to nonattainment are concentrated among
older vintage plants that operated at lower average productivity levels (Appendix Fig-
ure C.7). As a result, the aggregate productivity losses borne by older vintage plants
may have been partially offset by a reallocation of output away from these older plants.
Section 6 explores the quantitative implications of this shift in production.

Robustness Checks and Heterogeneity Analysis
  33
     The negative effect of nonattainment on capacity reflects a decrease in the rate of growth of installed
capacity for plants located in nonattainment counties relative to plants located in attainment counties.
  34
     In nonattainment counties, plants may actually have required additional workers whose roles were
geared towards environmental compliance (Sheriff, Ferris and Shadbegian, 2019).


                                                    15
       In Appendix Table D.2, we assess the robustness of the main findings to alternative
specifications and samples. The estimated impacts of nonattainment on output and
PU-TFP are similar if we: (i) exclude smaller power plants, (ii) restrict the sample to
coal plants, (iii) replace the state-by-year fixed effects with utility-by-state-by-year fixed
effects, and (iv) exclude states that had implemented air quality standards before 1967.35

       The main effects cannot be attributed to differential plant exit across attainment
and nonattainment counties after 1972. Instead, we find that plant lifespan is positively
correlated with nonattainment status (Appendix Table A.3), consistent with the grand-
fathering provisions in the CAA that subjected older plants to less stringent regulations
than plants built after 1972 (Stavins, 2006; Revesz and Lienke, 2016).

       In Appendix Table D.4, we assess the sensitivity of the estimated effect of nonat-
tainment on PU-TFP to alternate specifications for the production function used to
estimate PU-TFP. We estimate different measures of PU-TFP based on Translog and
Cobb-Douglas production functions, and for models that do and do not include plant
materials as production inputs. The estimated impacts are similar across the various
specifications.

       In Appendix Table D.5, we explore how the nonattainment effects vary by the primary
type of fuel burned by the plant: coal, oil, and gas. The estimates for output and PU-TFP
are negative for all three fuel types. The reductions in output, inputs and PU-TFP due
to nonattainment are largest for coal plants, and all of these reductions are statistically
significant. This is consistent with the fact that coal generation was far more polluting
than oil or gas generation.

       Appendix Table D.6 reports estimates of the impacts of nonattainment on outcomes
separately for different pollutant standards. The effects are driven primarily by noncom-
pliance with ambient ozone, nitrogen dioxide, and carbon monoxide standards. The share
of counties in noncompliance with the ozone and nitrogen dioxide standards in particular
remained large through the sample period (see Appendix Figure C.3).
  35
    Prior to 1960, there were no state air quality or deposited matter standards. By 1966, ten states ­
California, Colorado, Delaware, Missouri, Montana, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
and Texas ­ had adopted ambient air quality standards for a total of 14 substances, and for deposited
matter (Stern, 1982).




                                                  16
5.2    Evidence of Adaptation to the CAA Among Existing Plants

Did innovation and adaptation at existing plants mitigate the costs of environmental
regulation over time? The insignificant estimates for post-1963 plants suggest that pre-
emptive responses may have mitigated the impacts among newer vintage plants. In
this subsection, we explore whether changes in operations at existing plants, including
those that were less able to anticipate future federal regulation, mitigated the longer-run
impacts of nonattainment. We exploit the extended lifespan of power plants to estimate
the evolving impacts of nonattainment on plant-level outcomes.

   The event study estimates show no evidence of plant-level adaptation to environmen-
tal regulation (Figure 1 a, d). Estimated decreases in output and PU-TFP increase in
magnitude throughout the first six years following the initial nonattainment designation.
After six years, the effect sizes remain large, negative, and fairly stable over time. The
estimates for pre-1963 plants follow a similar pattern (b, e). In contrast, we find no
significant effects of first nonattainment on post-1963 plants in the short-, medium-, or
long-run (c, f).

   Table 2 reports the coefficient estimates from a generalized version of Equation (1)
that allows the effects of current nonattainment status to vary with the cumulative num-
ber of past years that the plant faced nonattainment. Among plants built before 1963,
the estimated reductions in output and productivity are large and persistent (Panel A).
For plants that were out of attainment for more than 10 years, the estimated reductions
in output and PU-TFP from nonattainment are 40 percent and 32 percent, substantially
larger than the short-run impacts. These older plants in nonattainment did gradually re-
duce fuel use and capacity relative to their counterparts in attainment counties. However,
these input adjustments did not fully offset the decreases in output, which explains the
persistent negative effects on productivity. In contrast, we find no impacts of nonattain-
ment on output or productivity for plants built between 1963-1971 in either the short-,
medium-, or long-run (Panel B).

   What explains the persistent negative effects of nonattainment on plants built be-
fore 1963? These findings contrast with prior research suggesting that innovation and
adapative responses by polluting producers helped mitigate the economic costs of the
CAA over time (e.g., Popp, 2003, 2006). Unlike producers in many other sectors, how-



                                            17
ever, existing power plants were severely constrained in their ability to adjust operations.
Given the long lifespan of equipment such as boilers and turbines, power plants were dif-
ficult to modify after being built, even over the span of decades (Aminov, Shkret and
Garievskii, 2016). In addition, retrofit installations of pollution abatement technology
were especially costly for existing plants, and "major modifications" risked subjecting
them to stricter environmental regulation under the NSPS (Stavins, 2006; Revesz and
Lienke, 2016). Instead, our findings suggest that adaptation occurred primarily among
new plants that opened in the aftermath of the 1963 CAA.


5.3    The Importance of an Extended Pre-1972 Time Horizon

Our main policy estimates are based on plant-level data from 1938-1994 that span decades
before and after the passage of the CAA. We have argued that the extended pre-regulatory
sample period is crucial given the evidence of anticipation by electric utilities in the years
leading up to the Act's passage. In this section, we directly test the sensitivity of the
main estimates to differing pre-regulatory time horizons.

   To begin, we compare the baseline results to estimates based solely on post-1972 data.
The vast majority of research on the economic impacts of the CAA has relied on data
that begin after its enactment in 1972. Identification in these studies is based on annual
changes in county nonattainment status after 1972. Much of this variation stems from
largely predictable trends in county-level air quality. Consequently, the results may be
influenced by preemptive adjustments made by local polluters.

   In Table 3, we compare estimates using the full 1938-1994 sample period to results
based solely on post-1972 data. For reference, column 1 reports the baseline estimates.
In column 2, we report the results based on data from 1938 to 1994 but restricted to
plants that operated after 1972 (i.e., the same set of plants as used in column 3). In
column 3, we report results from our primary specification, re-estimated using only data
from the post-CAA period: 1972-1994. The estimated impacts of nonattainment on
output and productivity based on the post-1972 time period are small and statistically
insignificant. These findings contrast sharply with the large and statistically significant
estimates reported in columns 1 and 2. Notably, the results in column 3 are based solely
on post-1972 variation in county attainment status, which was arguably more predictable



                                             18
than the initial county designations in 1972. The striking difference between columns 2
and 3 highlight the importance of pre-1972 data for estimation.36

       To further explore the importance of pre-1972 data, Appendix Table D.3 decom-
poses the overall difference-in-differences estimates into the three components proposed
by Goodman-Bacon (2018): (i) the effect of first-nonattainment on outcomes using plants
that never faced nonattainment as the control group, (ii) the effect for plants first facing
nonattainment earlier in the sample using plants first facing nonattainment later in the
sample as the control group, and (iii) the effect for plants first facing nonattainment later
in the sample using plants first facing nonattainment earlier in the sample as the control
group.37 The results show that roughly 60 percent of the estimated impacts stem from
comparisons across plants that ever versus never faced nonattainment as opposed to tem-
poral variation in attainment status. These findings are consistent with the persistence
of county attainment status documented in Appendix Figure C.9 and Appendix Table
C.1. This variation across plants that never versus ever faced nonattainment could not
be identified without data from before 1972.38

       Having established the importance of pre-1972 data for identification, we next explore
the extent to which the length of the pre-regulatory period in the data affects the policy
estimates. Figure 2 plots the nonattainment estimates for different pre-regulatory sample
horizons. Each point on the x-axis denotes the initial sample year; the estimated effect
for 1938, for example, coincides with the full sample. Moving rightwards along the x-axis
shows how the effects change as we shorten the pre-regulatory period. The results for
output and PU-TFP are negative for samples starting as late as the mid-1950s. The
effects diminish slightly for samples beginning in the late 1950s and converge rapidly
towards zero for samples after 1963.39

       The patterns in Figure 2 demonstrate the importance of an extended pre-regulatory
benchmark period for capturing the full impact of the CAA. One would substantially
  36
     We find similarly insignificant effects of nonattainment for plants built after 1972 (col. 4), consistent
with the fact that all new plants were subject to NSPS regardless of attainment status.
  37
     To conform to the specification considered in Goodman-Bacon (2018), we consider a plant as treated
for all years after the plant first faced nonattainment ("first-nonattainment") rather than using annual
county-level attainment status, and reports results based on a strongly balanced panel.
  38
     Similarly, Table D.7 shows that the nonattainment impacts are driven by plants that first faced
nonattainment between 1972-1977.
  39
     Appendix Figure D.1 breaks these results down by plant vintage groups. Not surprisingly, the
changes in the estimated effects of nonattainment by first year of the sample occur primarily for the
plants built before 1963.


                                                     19
underestimate the negative impacts of nonattainment on plant outcomes without data
that begin at least a decade before the Act's passage. These findings are notable since
all of the prior research on the CAA has relied on data that begins after 1963.


5.4     Alternate Margins of Adjustment to the CAA

5.4.1   No Evidence of Production Spillovers from Existing Plants in Nonat-
        tainment Counties to Existing Plants in Attainment Counties

Electric utilities may have responded to the CAA by shifting generation from existing
plants in nonattainment counties to existing plants in attainment counties. The presence
of this type of cross-county spillover could lead us to overestimate the effects of nonat-
tainment on output, since the effects may partly reflect a relative rise in output among
existing plants in attainment counties.

   In this section, we assess whether output from existing plants in attainment counties is
affected by nonattainment status in nearby counties. We estimate the following equation
for plants built before 1972 located in counties that were always in attainment between
1972-1994:
                   log (Yit ) = i + f t + vt + P ropN onAttainit +    it ,              (2)

where Yit is the output from plant i in year t. The equation includes plant fixed effects
i , fuel-type-by-year fixed effects f t , and vintage-group-by-year fixed effects vt . We
construct several alternative measures for plant i's "exposure" to nonattainment plants,
P ropN onAttainit : (1) the proportion of fossil-fuel capacity in nonattainment counties
within the same state as plant i in year t, (2) the proportion of fossil-fuel capacity in
nonattainment counties in the same state and owned by the same utility as plant i in year
t, and (3) the proportion of fossil-fuel capacity in nonattainment counties that bordered
plant i's county in year t.

   Table 4 reports the results. We find no evidence of shifts in production from fossil-fuel
plants in nonattainment counties to existing plants in attainment counties. If anything,
the point estimates, while noisy, are consistently negative across the various measures
of exposure to nonattainment. Thus, it does not appear that the reductions in output
from existing plants in nonattainment counties were offset by increased production from


                                            20
existing plants in attainment counties.

       We find some evidence that the decreased output from existing plants facing nonat-
tainment was met by increased production from new plants that opened after 1972 (Ap-
pendix Figures C.4 and C.5). Appendix Table D.8 provides suggestive evidence that
fossil fuel and nuclear generating capacity was more likely to be built in states where a
larger share of the population lived in nonattainment counties. Together, the results are
consistent with previous work suggesting that the CAA induced cross-border shifts in
industrial activity (Henderson, 1996; Becker and Henderson, 2000; Gibson, 2019). In the
electricity sector, the shift was primarily from existing plants in nonattainment counties
to new plants that opened after 1972. Importantly, this type of spillover does not compro-
mise our difference-in-differences estimation strategy, which relies solely on comparisons
across existing plants.


5.4.2      Other Margins of Adjustment: Fuel Switching and Scrubbers

Plants can also respond to environmental regulations by switching to "cleaner" fuels.
Plants can switch from burning lower-cost bituminous coal with higher sulfur and heat
contents to higher-cost sub-bituminous coal with lower sulfur and heat contents.40 We
assess the importance of this margin of adjustment by estimating the effect of first nonat-
tainment on the log of the annual average coal price paid by power plants.

       Table 5 shows that first nonattainment led to increases in the price paid per mmBTU
of coal. The effects are negative and statistically significant for plants built both before
and after 1963 (col. 2). The magnitude of the effects do not diminish with cumulative
number of years the plant faced nonattainment (col. 3), consistent with the evidence in
Section 5.2 showing a lack of adaptation even in the long-run.

       Plants may also respond to nonattainment by installing pollution abatement tech-
nology ­ flue gas particulate (FGP) collectors or flue gas desulfurization (FGD) units.
We explore differences across vintages in the adoption of pollution abatement technology
and assess how installation varied with nonattainment status.41
  40
     The primary source of sub-bituminous coal in the United States is the Powder River Basin (PRB)
in Montana and Wyoming. The delivered price per mmBTU of PRB coal is higher than Appalachian
bituminous coal, both because transportation costs are typically higher from PRB to the plant and
because PRB coal contains less heat energy per ton of coal.
  41
     This analysis includes both existing plants and new plants that opened after 1972. We focus only



                                                 21
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 present cross-vintage differences in the adoption of FGP
and FGD systems.42 Plants built before 1963 were significantly less likely to install FGP
systems than plants that opened between 1963 and 1971. Retrofit installation of an
FGP collector on an existing plant is far costlier than installing an FGP collector as
part of the construction of a new plant. Our findings are consistent with electric utilities
preemptively installing FGP systems on new plants after the 1963 CAA.

    Plants that opened after 1972 had substantially higher rates of adoption of FGD
systems. This is largely because all new plants were subject to the stricter New Source
Performance Standards (NSPS) regardless of attainment status. Plants built between
1963-1971 are no more likely to install a FGD than those built before 1963, consistent
with the fact that this technology was not widely available before 1970.

    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6 report the effects of first facing nonattainment on FGP and
FGD adoption for plants of different vintages. We find no evidence that plants responded
to first nonattainment by installing abatement technology.43 The coefficient estimates are
mainly negative and generally not statistically significant. Given the high cost of retrofit
installation of scrubbers in particular, it is not surprising that electric utilities preferred
other methods to comply with environmental regulations for their existing plants.44

    We close by performing a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the costs associated with
a policy under NSPS that required plants that opened after 1978 to install a scrubber.
We do so by comparing the average cost of installing and operating a scrubber to the
estimated cost from switching to cleaner fuels due to first nonattainment. We estimate
that first nonattainment led to a 6.6% increase in coal prices (Table 5, col. 1), corre-
sponding to an increase in annual fuel costs of 1.9 million dollars (2020 USD). This is
much smaller than the annualized cost of installing and operating a scrubber incurred by
on coal plants because burning coal emits far more local air pollution than burning either oil or natural
gas (Jaramillo and Muller, 2016).
  42
     The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if plant i had installed the relevant technology
by year t. The two coefficient estimates ­ 1[Built Between 1963-1971] and 1[Built After 1972] ­ capture
adoption rates for each vintage group relative to pre-1963 plants.
  43
     The findings should be interpreted with caution. These regressions identify within-plant variation in
the installation of abatement technology. However, the majority of abatement technology was installed
when the plant was built.
  44
     The significant negative estimate for pre-1963 plants may reflect that state and local regulators did
not perceive the installation of certain types of FGP systems as an effective means to significantly reduce
pollution. Our evidence suggests that pre-1963 plants in nonattainment counties were forced to take
potentially costlier actions such as drastically reducing their output levels or buying lower-sulfur coal.




                                                    22
the average plant built between 1978-1994 (which is 8.6 million dollars (2020 USD)).45
Given this disparity in costs, it seems likely that many plants would have continued to
be built without FGD systems in the absence of the 1978 NSPS requirements.



6        Aggregate Effects of the 1970 CAA on PU-TFP

In Section 5.1, we found significant negative effects of nonattainment on productivity
and output, but only for plants built before 1963. Given the large differences in average
productivity across plant vintages, the aggregate effects may differ from these plant-
level estimates. In particular, the aggregate productivity losses from the CAA may be
mitigated by the reallocation of output from older less productive plants to newer more
productive plants.

       In this section, we calculate the aggregate productivity cost of nonattainment, ac-
counting for both plant-level productivity losses and cross-plant reallocation of output.
We apply the cross-vintage nonattainment estimates from Section 5.1 to construct the
counterfactual annual plant-level output and PU-TFP that would have prevailed in the
absence of the NAAQS. The results of this back-of-the-envelope calculation show that the
NAAQS led to an annual average productivity decline for fossil-fuel plants of 3.3 percent
over the period 1972-1994. This corresponds to an annual aggregate productivity loss of
$4.0 billion (2020 USD).46 Although sizeable, this economic cost is substantially smaller
than the health benefits from improved air quality attributable to the CAA (Currie and
Walker, 2019; Aldy et al., Forthcoming).

       We calculate annual plant-level counterfactual PU-TFP and output for two plant
vintage groups: plants built before 1963 and plants built between 1963 and 1971. For pre-
1963 plants in nonattainment, the counterfactual values are obtained by multiplying the
observed value by the relevant estimate from the top panel of Table 2.47 For plants built
between 1963-1971 in nonattainment, we assume that counterfactual output and PU-
  45
     For simplicity, we assume that scrubbers have a 40 year lifespan.
  46
     We obtain this annual aggregate loss by multiplying the annual average reduction in productivity
due to nonattainment by the total revenue earned by steam electric utilities in 1970 (Federal Power
Commission, 1971).
  47
     For example, consider a plant built before 1963 that we observe producing output Outputi,t with
productivity PU-TFPi,t in year t. If this plant faced nonattainment in year t and had faced more than 10
years of nonattainment up to that year, its counterfactual output in a world without the NAAQS would be
  C
Oi,t = (1+0.404)×Oi,t and its counterfactual productivity would be PU-TFPC    i,t = (1+0.318)×PUTFPi,t .



                                                  23
TFP are equal to their observed values, given the insignificant effects of nonattainment
for these plants. Similarly, we assume no spillover effects of nonattainment onto existing
plants in attainment counties, consistent with the evidence in Section 5.4.1. Finally, we
assume that the reductions in output from pre-1963 plants in nonattainment counties
was reallocated proportionally to plants that opened after 1972 within the same census
division, based on the suggestive evidence in Appendix Table D.8.

   The impact of the NAAQS on aggregate productivity operates through two chan-
nels: (1) decreases in within-plant productivity concentrated among pre-1963 plants in
nonattainment counties, and (2) the reallocation of output from pre-1963 plants in nonat-
tainment counties to post-1972 plants. The change in annual output-weighted average
productivity is calculated as follows:

                                 Outputi,t                Outputi,t
        PU-TFPt =            [               · PU-TFPit +             · PU-TFPit ]         (3)
                         i       i Outputi,t              i Outputi,t
                                   Within-Plant Efficiency    Across-Plant Reallocation


where PU-TFPit  PU-TFPit - PU-TFPC                                 C
                                 it and Outputit  Outputit - Outputit are

the changes in PU-TFP and output with the NAAQS versus without the NAAQS. The
first term in Equation (3) is the within-plant efficiency effect: existing plants in nonattain-
ment counties may have lower productivity due to increased regulatory requirements. The
second term is the across-plant reallocation effect, which arises from regulatory-induced
shifts in output from older plants facing nonattainment to newer plants.

   Figure 3 plots annual output-weighted average changes in productivity due to changes
in within-plant efficiency and across-plant reallocation. The dashed red line shows the
negative within-plant efficiency effect over the period 1972-1994. This effect is smaller
than the estimates reported in Table 2 because it averages the plant-level losses incurred
by pre-1963 plants in nonattainment counties across all plants. The within-plant pro-
ductivity losses increase through the 1970s. This trend reflects both an increase in the
number of nonattainment counties and the evolving effects of nonattainment on pro-
ductivity documented in Table 2. After 1982, the within-plant losses are fairly stable,
decreasing slightly as the contribution of older vintage plants to total output declines.

   The dotted blue line shows the positive across-plant reallocation effect from 1972-
1994. Pre-1963 plants in nonattainment counties reduced their output. The shortfall



                                                   24
in demand due to this nonattainment-induced decline in output was met by increases
in output from plants that opened after 1972. Since newer plants were typically more
efficient (see Appendix Figures A.7 and C.8), this reallocation contributed to an increase
in average national PU-TFP in the power sector. This effect increases over time as
pre-1963 plants in nonattainment further reduce output.

       The solid black line depicts the aggregate impact of nonattainment on PU-TFP: the
sum of the within-plant efficiency effect and the across-plant reallocation effect. The
aggregate effects are negative throughout the sample period, but diminish considerably
over time. By the end of the sample period, roughly one-third of the within-plant losses
were offset by the reallocation of output.

       Together, these findings highlight how reallocation across producers can substantially
mitigate the aggregate economic costs of environmental regulation. To the extent that
pollution is concentrated among older and less efficient entrenched incumbents, environ-
mental regulation may accelerate the process of reallocation towards higher productivity
entrants. Although our analysis focuses on the power sector, this intuition is likely to
carry over to a wide array of industries.



7        Conclusion

This paper leverages newly digitized data on power plant operations from 1938 to 1994
to examine the impacts of the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA) on the U.S. power sector. The
long panel includes an extended benchmark period without regulation, allowing us to
account for anticipatory responses by electric utilities. We find that nonattainment with
the NAAQS led to relatively large reductions in output and productivity. These effects
are concentrated among plants that opened before 1963, when there was little scope
to anticipate future regulatory requirements. In contrast, we find no negative effects on
plants that opened between 1963 and 1971. Our results suggest that firms may be able to
acquire information during the process leading up to the passage of landmark legislation,
and preemptively take actions to reduce the costs of regulatory compliance.48
  48
    Other efforts to reduce the impacts of government oversight include industry self-regulation (De-
Marzo, Fishman and Hagerty, 2005; Charoenwong, Kwan and Umar, 2019), lobbying for less stringent
regulation for existing firms (Stavins, 2006; Kang, 2016), as well as strategic and tactical actions that
impact the effectiveness of the regulation (Lim and Yurukoglu, 2018; Abito, 2019).



                                                   25
       The historical experience in the United States may offer guidance to policymakers in
developing countries on the political economy challenges associated with implementing
environmental regulation.49 Our findings suggest that older plants were unable to adapt
operations in response to new environmental regulation even in the long-run. Instead, the
economic costs of regulation were mitigated primarily through the reallocation of output
across plants. As emphasized by Stigler (1971), regulation often generates winners and
losers. To the extent that entrenched incumbent producers bear the economic costs
of regulatory compliance and have disproportionate political influence, environmental
policy may be enacted slowly and carve out exemptions for existing emitters (Stavins,
2006; Revesz and Lienke, 2016).




  49
    For example, He, Wang and Zhang (2020) finds that water quality regulation in China causes large
declines in productivity, which emerge only after improvements in water quality were linked to political
promotion.


                                                  26
References
Abito, Jose Miguel. 2019. "Measuring the Welfare Gains from Optimal Incentive Reg-
 ulation." Review of Economic Studies, 87(5): 2019­2048.

ACIR, U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 1981. "The
 Federal Role in the Federal System: The Dynamics of Growth." Protecting the En-
 vironment: Politics, Pollution, and Federal Policy: Washington, DC: U.S. Advisory
 Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.

Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2015. "Identification
 Properties of Recent Production Function Estimators." Econometrica, 83(6): 2411­
 2451.

Aldy, Joseph E., Maximilian Auffhammer, Maureen L. Cropper, Arthur G.
 Fraas, and Richard Morgenstern. Forthcoming. "Looking Back at Fifty Years of
 the Clean Air Act." Journal of Economic Literature.

Aminov, RZ, AF Shkret, and MV Garievskii. 2016. "Estimation of lifespan and
 economy parameters of steam-turbine power units in thermal power plants using vary-
 ing regimes." Thermal Engineering, 63(8): 551­557.

Atkinson, Scott E., and Robert Halvorsen. 1976. "Interfuel Substitution in Steam
 Electric Power Generation." Journal of Political Economy, 84(5): 959­978.

Barzel, Yoram. 1963. "Productivity in the Electric Power Industry, 1929­1955." Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 45(4): 395­408.

Becker, Randy, and Vernon Henderson. 2000. "Effects of Air Quality Regulations
 on Polluting Industries." Journal of Political Economy, 108(2): 379­421.

Bellas, Allen, and Ian Lange. 2008. "Impacts of market-based environmental and
 generation policy on scrubber electricity usage." The Energy Journal, 29(2).

Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. " Portage and Path Dependence ." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 127(2): 587­644.

Boisvert, Richard N. 1982. "The Translog Production Function: Its Properties, Its
 Several Interpretations and Estimation Problems." Mimeo.

Busse, Meghan R, and Nathaniel O Keohane. 2007. "Market effects of environ-
 mental regulation: coal, railroads, and the 1990 Clean Air Act." The RAND Journal
 of Economics, 38(4): 1159­1179.

Cameron, Colin A., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. "Ro-
 bust inference with multiway clustering." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
 29(2): 238­249.

Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen L. Palmer.
 2000. "Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?"
 Journal of Political Economy, 108(6): 1292­1326.

                                         27
Charoenwong, Ben, Alan Kwan, and Tarik Umar. 2019. "Does Regulatory Ju-
 risdiction Affect the Quality of Investment-Adviser Regulation?" American Economic
 Review, 109(10): 3681­3712.

Christensen, Laurits R., and William H. Greene. 1976. "Economies of Scale in
 U.S. Electric Power Generation." Journal of Political Economy, 84(4, Part 1): 655­676.

Clay, Karen. 2018. "The Environment in American Economic History." The Oxford
  Handbook of American Economic History, vol. 2, 349.

Currie, Janet, and W. Reed Walker. 2019. "What Do Economists Have to Say about
 the Clean Air Act 50 Years after the Establishment of the Environmental Protection
 Agency?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(4): 3­26.

Curtis, E. Mark. 2018. "Who Loses under Cap-and-Trade Programs? The Labor Mar-
 ket Effects of the NOx Budget Trading Program." Review of Economics and Statistics,
 100(1): 151­166.

De Loecker, Jan. 2011. "Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating
 the Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity." Econometrica, 79(5): 1407­1451.

DeMarzo, Peter M., Michael J. Fishman, and Kathleen M. Hagerty. 2005. "Self-
 Regulation and Government Oversight." Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 687­706.

EIA, Energy Information Administration. 1992. "Electric Plant Cost and Power
  Production Expenses 1990." Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.

EIA, Energy Information Administration. 2021. "Monthly Energy Review ­ Febru-
  ary 2021." Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy.

EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1973. "Progress in the Prevention
 and Control of Air Pollution in 1972: Annual Report of the Administrator of the
 Environmental Protection Agency to the Congress of the United States." Washington,
 DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1975. "EPA Enforcement: Two
 Years of Progress, December 1972 to November 1974 ­ Air, Water, and Pesticides."
 Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1976a. "EPA Enforcement: A
 Progress Report, December 1974 to December 1975 ­ Air, Noise, Pesticides, and Wa-
 ter." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1976b. "Summary of Particulate and
 Sulfur Oxide Emission Reductions Achieved Nationwide for Selected Industrial Cate-
 gories, 1970-1974." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
 General Enforcement.




                                          28
EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1976c. "Tall Stacks and the Atmo-
 spheric Environment." Research Triangle Park, NC: U.S. Environmental Protection
 Agency, Office of Air and Waste Management ­ Office of Air Quality Planning and
 Standards (EPA-450/3-76-007).
EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1984. "Project Summary Utility
 FGD Survey: October 1983 - September 1984." Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental
 Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards (EPA-340/1-85-014).
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. "Do Mar-
  kets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric
  Generation Efficiency." American Economic Review, 97(4): 1250­1277.
Ferris, Ann E., Ronald J. Shadbegian, and Ann Wolverton. 2014. "The Effect
  of Environmental Regulation on Power Sector Employment: Phase I of the Title IV
  SO2 Trading Program." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
  Economists, 1(4): 521­553.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm
  Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?" American Eco-
  nomic Review, 98(1): 394­425.
Fowlie, Meredith. 2010. "Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment
  in Pollution Abatement." American Economic Review, 100(3): 837­869.
FPC, Federal Power Commission. 1966. "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost
 and Annual Production Expenses: 1965." Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
 Office.
FPC, Federal Power Commission. 1967. "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost
 and Annual Production Expenses: 1966." Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
 Office.
FPC, Federal Power Commission. 1969. "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost
 and Annual Production Expenses: 1968." Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
 Office.
FPC, Federal Power Commission. 1972. "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost
 and Annual Production Expenses: 1970." Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
 Office.
GAO, U.S. Government Accountability Office. 1980. "TVA's Clean Air Settlement
 with EPA (EMD-80-49)." Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office,
 Energy and Minerals Division.
Gibson, Matthew. 2019. "Regulation-Induced Pollution Substitution." Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 101(5): 827­840.
Gollop, Frank M., and Mark J. Roberts. 1983. "Environmental regulations and
 productivity growth: The case of fossil-fueled electric power generation." Journal of
 Political Economy, 91(4): 654­674.

                                         29
Gollop, Frank M., and Mark J. Roberts. 1985. "Cost-Minimizing Regulation of Sul-
 fur Emissions: Regional Gains in Electric Power." Review of Economics and Statistics,
 67(1): 81­90.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. "Difference-in-differences with variation in treat-
 ment timing." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gray, Wayne B, and Ronald J Shadbegian. 2003. "Plant vintage, technology, and
 environmental regulation." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
 46(3): 384­402.

Greenstone, Michael. 2002. "The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial
 Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census
 of Manufacturers." Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1175­1219.

Greenstone, Michael, John A. List, and Chad Syverson. 2012. "The Effects
 of Environmental Regulation on the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing." NBER
 Working Paper No. 18392.

He, Guojun, Shaoda Wang, and Bing Zhang. 2020. "Watering Down Environmen-
 tal Regulation in China." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(4): 2135­2185.

Henderson, J. Vernon. 1996. "Effects of Air Quality Regulation." American Economic
 Review, 86(4): 789­813.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-
 and Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." American Economic Re-
 view, 102(4): 1477­1507.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Daniel Keniston. 2017. "Creative Destruction: Barriers
 to Urban Growth and the Great Boston Fire of 1872." American Economic Review,
 107(6): 1365­98.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Martin Rotemberg. 2019. "Railroads, Reallocation, and
 the Rise of American Manufacturing." NBER Working Paper #26594.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing
 TFP in China and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403­1448.

Jaramillo, Paulina, and Nicholas Z Muller. 2016. "Air pollution emissions and
  damages from energy production in the US: 2002­2011." Energy Policy, 90: 202­211.

Joskow, Paul L., and Nancy L. Rose. 1985. "The Effects of Technological Change,
  Experience, and Environmental Regulation on the Construction Cost of Coal-Burning
  Generating Units." RAND Journal of Economics, 16(1): 1­27.

Kahn, Matthew E., and Erin T. Mansur. 2013. "Do Local Energy Prices and
 Regulation Affect the Geographic Concentration of Employment?" Journal of Public
 Economics, 101: 105­114.



                                         30
Kang, Karam. 2016. "Policy Influence and Private Returns from Lobbying in the En-
 ergy Sector." Review of Economic Studies, 83(1): 269­305.

Keiser, David A., and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2019a. "Consequences of the Clean Water
 Act and the Demand for Water Quality." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1): 349­
 396.

Keiser, David A., and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2019b. "US Water Pollution Regulation
 over the Past Half Century: Burning Waters to Crystal Springs?" Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 33(4): 51­75.

Keohane, Nathaniel O., Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov. 2009. "Averting
 Regulatory Enforcement: Evidence from New Source Review." Journal of Economics
 & Management Strategy, 18(1): 75­104.

Kline, Patrick. 2012. "The impact of juvenile curfew laws on arrests of youth and
 adults." American Law and Economics Review, 14(1): 44­67.

Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. "Local Economic Development, Agglom-
 eration Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
 Authority." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 275­331.

Lim, Claire S. H., and Ali Yurukoglu. 2018. "Dynamic Natural Monopoly Regu-
  lation: Time Inconsistency, Moral Hazard, and Political Environments." Journal of
  Political Economy, 126(1): 263­312.

List, John A., Daniel L. Millimet, and Warren McHone. 2004. "The Unintended
  Disincentive in the Clean Air Act." Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(2): Ar-
  ticle 2.

Malani, Anup, and Julian Reif. 2015. "Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation: Im-
 pact on estimated treatment effects from tort reform." Journal of Public Economics,
 124: 1­17.

Muller, Nicholas Z. 2014. "Boosting GDP Growth by Accounting for the Environ-
 ment." Science, 345(6199): 873­874.

Muller, Nicholas Z. 2019. "Long-Run Environmental Accounting in the US Economy."
 Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy, Volume 1, 158­191. University of
 Chicago Press.

Muller, Nicholas Z., Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus. 2011. "En-
 vironmental Accounting for Pollution in the United States Economy." American Eco-
 nomic Review, 101(5): 1649­75.

Nelson, Randy A., and Mark E. Wohar. 1983. "Regulation, Scale Economies,
 and Productivity in Steam-Electric Generation." International Economic Review,
 24(1): 57­79.




                                          31
Nelson, Randy A., Tom Tietenberg, and Michael R. Donihue. 1993. "Differ-
 ential Environmental Regulation: Effects on Electric Utility Capital Turnover and
 Emissions." Review of Economics and Statistics, 75(2): 368­373.

Nerlove, Marc. 1963. "Returns to Scale in Electricity Supply." In Measurement in
 Economics ­ Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics in Memory of
 Yehuda Grunfeld, ed. Carl F. Christ. Stanford, CA:Stanford University Press.

Popp, David. 2003. "Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990."
 Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(4): 641­660.

Popp, David. 2006. "International innovation and diffusion of air pollution control
 technologies: the effects of NOX and SO2 regulation in the US, Japan, and Germany."
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 51(1): 46­71.

Revesz, Richard L., and Jack Lienke. 2016. Struggling for Air: Power Plants and
 the "War on Coal". New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Roberts, Marc J, and Susan O Farrell. 1978. "The political economy of imple-
 mentation: The Clean Air Act and stationary sources." Approaches to controlling air
 pollution, 152: 156­60.

Ryan, Stephen P. 2012. "The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated
 Industry." Econometrica, 80(3): 1019­1061.

Sheriff, Glenn, Ann E. Ferris, and Ronald J. Shadbegian. 2019. "How Did Air
  Quality Standards Affect Employment at US Power Plants? The Importance of Tim-
  ing, Geography, and Stringency." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
  Resource Economists, 6(1): 111­149.

Solow, Robert M. 1957. "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function."
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3): 312­320.

Stavins, Robert N. 2006. "Vintage-Differentiated Environmental Regulation." Stan-
  ford Environmental Law Journal, 25(1): 29­63.

Stern, Arthur C. 1982. "History of Air Pollution Legislation in the United States."
  Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association, 32(1): 44­61.

Stigler, George J. 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation." The Bell Journal of
  Economics and Management Science, 2(1): 3­21.




                                        32
Figures and Tables




                     33
                                                             Figure 1: Event Study Analysis of the Impacts of First Year in Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes
                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
      Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment




                                                                                                                         Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                        -.1




                                                                                                                                           -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                -.3




                                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.3
         -.5




                                                                                                                            -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.5
                          -.7




                                                                                                                                             -.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.7
                                                   -8   -6     -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10                                                -8   -6   -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10                                                -8   -6   -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10
                                                                    Year - First Year Out of Attainment                                                                              Year - First Year Out of Attainment                                                                              Year - First Year Out of Attainment

                                                                      Estimated Effect               95% C.I.                                                                          Estimated Effect               95% C.I.                                                                          Estimated Effect               95% C.I.



      (a) Log Output, Plants Built Before 1972                                                                                                                        (b) Log Output, Built Before 1963                                   (c) Log Output, Built Between 1963-1971
                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
      Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment




                                                                                                                         Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Estimated Effect of First Nonattainment
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
34




                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                        -.1




                                                                                                                                           -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                -.3




                                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.3
         -.5




                                                                                                                            -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.5
                          -.7




                                                                                                                                             -.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.7
                                                   -8   -6     -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10                                                -8   -6   -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10                                                -8   -6   -4      -2         0      2         4      6     8   10
                                                                    Year - First Year Out of Attainment                                                                              Year - First Year Out of Attainment                                                                              Year - First Year Out of Attainment

                                                                      Estimated Effect               95% C.I.                                                                          Estimated Effect               95% C.I.                                                                          Estimated Effect               95% C.I.



     (d) Log PU-TFP, Plants Built Before 1972                                                                                                                         (e) Log PU-TFP, Built Before 1963                                   (f) Log PU-TFP, Built Between 1963-1971
     Notes: This event study figure plots the estimated effect of first nonattainment on log output and the log of pollution-unadjusted total factor
     productivity (PU-TFP) separately for each event year. The period of analysis is 1938-1994. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-year
     fixed effects, fuel-type-by-year fixed effects, and vintage-group-by-year fixed effects; plants built before 1963 are in vintage group 1 while plants built
     between 1963-1971 are in vintage group 2. The 95% confidence intervals reported in these figures are based on standard errors that are two-way
     clustered by county and year. The two leftmost panels are estimated using plants built before 1972, the middle two panels consider plants built before
     1963, and the rightmost two panels focus on plants built between 1963-1971.
Figure 2: Impacts of Nonattainment on Plant Operations by Initial Sample Year



                .1




                                                                                                                .1
Estimated Effect of Nonattainment




                                                                                                Estimated Effect of Nonattainment
                             0




                                                                                                                             0
                    -.1




                                                                                                                    -.1
          -.2




                                                                                                          -.2
  -.3




                                                                                                  -.3
                -.4




                                                                                                                -.4
                                    1940    1950                  1960              1970                                            1940    1950                  1960              1970
                                              First Year in the Data                                                                          First Year in the Data

                                           Estimated Effect              95% C.I.                                                          Estimated Effect              95% C.I.



                              (a) Estimated Effects on Log Output                                                   (b) Estimated Effects on Log PU-TFP
Notes: This figure displays the estimated impacts of nonattainment on log output and the log of
pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP) by initial sample year. Namely, for initial
year X on the x-axis, we artificially restrict the sample period used to estimate the relevant effect
to X-1994 (ex: the effect for initial year 1950 is estimated using data from 1950-1994). We estimate
these effects using only data from plants built before 1972. The short-dashed green vertical line
represents the passage of the Clean Air Act of 1963 and the dashed green vertical lines represent
the Clean Air Act of 1970 and its amendments in 1977. All specifications include plant fixed effects,
state-by-year fixed effects, fuel-type-by-year fixed effects, and vintage-group-by-year fixed effects;
plants built before 1963 are in vintage group 1 while plants built between 1963-1971 are in vintage
group 2. The 95% confidence intervals reported in these figures are based on standard errors that
are two-way clustered by county and year.




                                                                                           35
            Figure 3: Nationwide Effects of the 1970 CAA on Power Plant Productivity

                        .05

 Change in Log PU-TFP


                          0




                        -.05




                         -.1
                               1970   1974     1978          1982      1986        1990    1994

                                             Within-Plant Impact on PU-TFP
                                             Effect on PU-TFP of Reallocation of Output
                                             Sum of Within-Plant and Realloction Effects

Notes: This figure depicts the estimated nationwide effects of the NAAQS on power plant produc-
tivity calculated using the methodology described in Section 6. The impact of the NAAQS on the
annual output-weighted average of the log of pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-
TFP), represented by the solid black line, is the sum of two offsetting effects. The long-dashed red
line shows the negative within-plant efficiency effect over 1972-1994, which reflects the fact that
nonattainment reduces the productivity of plants built before 1963 (see Table 2, Panel A, column
2). The short-dashed blue line shows the positive across-plant reallocative effect, which arises from
shifts in output from pre-1963 plants facing nonattainment to plants built after 1972 (see Appendix
Table D.8).




                                                        36
  Table 1: Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Operations from 1938-1994

                                       (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)
Dep. Var. (in Logs):                  Output     PU-TFP      Fuel Use   No. Employees      Capacity

Panel A. Average Effects

Nonattainment                        -0.219      -0.155      -0.124           -0.029       -0.109
                                      (0.063)     (0.045)     (0.060)        (0.031)        (0.040)

R2                                     0.817       0.604      0.746          0.860           0.912

Panel B. Effects by Plant Vintage

NA × 1[Built Before 1963]            -0.247      -0.187      -0.146           -0.026       -0.119
                                      (0.071)     (0.052)     (0.067)        (0.035)        (0.045)

NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]        -0.060      0.020       -0.008         -0.043         -0.054
                                      (0.091)     (0.074)     (0.087)        (0.056)        (0.048)

R2                                     0.818       0.605      0.747          0.860           0.912
Plant FE                                 Y          Y            Y             Y              Y
State By Year FE                         Y          Y            Y             Y              Y
Fuel Type By Year FE                     Y          Y            Y             Y              Y
Vintage Group By Year FE                 Y          Y            Y             Y              Y
Mean Dep. Var.                         6.730      -0.562       9.155         4.489          5.462
Number of Obs.                        21,767      21,767      21,767         21,767         21,767
Number of Plants                        687        687          687           687            687

 Notes : This table reports the impacts of nonattainment on power plant operations over the period
 1938-1994. The unit of observation for the regressions in this table is plant-year, and the estimation
 considers all plants that were built before 1972. Panel A estimates how annual plant-level outcomes
 change with the attainment status of the county where the plant is located. Panel B estimates the
 impact of nonattainment on outcomes separately for plants built before 1963 versus plants built
 between 1963-1971. For all specifications, "nonattainment" is defined as the county being out of
 attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in the year. All specifications include plant fixed
 effects, state-by-year fixed effects, fuel type by year fixed effects and vintage group by year fixed
 effects; plants built before 1963 are in vintage group 1 while plants built between 1963-1971 are
 in vintage group 2. PU-TFP stands for pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity, and NA for
 nonattainment. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. ***
 denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                37
  Table 2: Impacts of Nonattainment by Vintage and Years in Nonattainment

                                   (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
 Dep. Var. (in Logs):             Output      PU-TFP      Fuel Use    No. Employees      Capacity

 Panel A. Effects for Plants Built Before 1963

 Years in NA  5                     -0.099    -0.156        0.022         0.086            -0.018
                                   (0.083)     (0.054)     (0.083)        (0.045)         (0.055)

 Years in NA  [6, 10]             -0.266      -0.261        -0.013         0.040          -0.118
                                   (0.115)     (0.079)     (0.114)        (0.059)         (0.065)

 Years in NA > 10                -0.404       -0.318        -0.218         0.023         -0.245
                                  (0.136)      (0.094)     (0.132)        (0.074)         (0.084)

 R2                                0.798       0.603       0.720           0.853          0.901
 Mean of Dep. Var.                  6.604      -0.602       9.042           4.484          5.348
 Number of Obs.                    18,864      18,864      18,864          18,864         18,864
 Number of Plants                    560        560          560             560            560

 Panel B. Effects for Plants Built Between 1963-1971

 Years in NA  5                     -0.134      0.055       -0.146        -0.186         -0.145
                                   (0.118)     (0.097)     (0.099)         (0.079)        (0.061)

 Years in NA  [6, 10]               -0.124      0.083       -0.060        -0.155          -0.144
                                   (0.133)     (0.096)     (0.128)        (0.090)         (0.081)

 Years in NA > 10                   -0.187      0.067       -0.137        -0.226           -0.143
                                   (0.179)     (0.150)     (0.163)        (0.118)         (0.096)

 R2                                0.904       0.669        0.891          0.930           0.961
 Mean of Dep. Var.                 7.592       -0.309       9.940          4.573           6.238
 Number of Obs.                    2,903       2,903        2,903          2,903           2,903
 Number of Plants                   127         127          127            127             127
 Plant FE                            Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
 State By Year FE                    Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
 Fuel Type By Year FE                Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
 Vintage Group By Year FE            Y           Y            Y              Y               Y

Notes : This table reports estimates of the impact of nonattaiment on power plant operations sep-
arately for bins defined by the cumulative number of years that a plant has faced nonattainment.
The unit of observation for the regressions in this table is plant-year. For both panels, we interact
the indicator for nonattainment with three bins defined by whether the plant has cumulatively faced
nonattainment in five or fewer years, six to ten years, or more than ten years as of the year-of-sample.
We focus on plants built before 1963 in the top panel while the bottom panel considers plants built
between 1963-1971. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, fuel type
by year fixed effects and vintage group by year fixed effects; plants built before 1963 are in vintage
group 1 while plants built between 1963-1971 are in vintage group 2. PU-TFP stands for pollution-
unadjusted total factor productivity, and NA for nonattainment. Standard errors in parentheses are
two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the
5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                38
          Table 3: Comparison of Estimates for Existing and New Plants
                Using Sample Periods 1938-1994 versus 1972-1994

                                  (1)        (2)                          (3)            (4)
  Panel A. Effects of Nonattainment on Log Output

  Nonattainment                         -0.219          -0.224           0.015          -0.008
                                         (0.063)         (0.064)        (0.041)        (0.105)

  R2                                      0.817           0.790          0.891          0.954
  Mean of Dep. Var.                       6.730           6.868          7.042          7.471

  Panel B. Effects of Nonattainment on Log PU-TFP

  Nonattainment                         -0.155          -0.158           -0.035         0.023
                                         (0.045)         (0.045)        (0.037)        (0.077)

  R2                                      0.604           0.600          0.716          0.833
  Mean of Dep. Var.                      -0.562          -0.544         -0.687         -0.521
  Number of Obs.                         21,767          20,328         10,367         2,406
  Number of Plants                         687             579            579            215
  Plant FE                                  Y               Y              Y              Y
  State By Year FE                          Y               Y              Y              Y
  Fuel Type By Year FE                      Y               Y              Y              Y
  Vintage Group By Year FE                  Y               Y              Y              Y
  Type of Plant                         Existing        Existing       Existing         New
  Sample Period                        1938-1994       1938-1994      1972-1994      1972-1994
Notes : This table reports the estimated impacts of nonattainment on the outcomes of existing and
new plants over alternative periods of analysis. Panel A reports the impact of nonattainment on
the log of output while Panel B reports the impact on the log of pollution-unadjusted total factor
productivity (PU-TFP). The unit of observation for the regressions in this table is plant-year. For all
specifications, "nonattainment" is defined as the county being out of attainment with the NAAQS
for any pollutant in the year. Column 1 of both panels is estimated for the sample period 1938-1994
considering all "existing" plants built before 1972. Column 2 of both panels is estimated for the
sample period 1938-1994 considering all "existing" plants that operated in at least one year between
1972-1994. Column 3 of both panels is estimated for the sample period 1972-1994 focusing on all
"existing" plants. Column 4 of both panels is estimated for the sample period 1972-1994 focusing
on all "new" plants built after 1972. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-year fixed
effects, fuel type by year fixed effects and vintage group by year fixed effects; plants built before
1963 are in vintage group 1, plants built between 1963-1971 are in vintage group 2, and plants built
after 1972 are in vintage group 3. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county
and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level.




                                                39
Table 4: Spillover Impacts of Nonattainment in Nearby Counties on Log Output

                                               (1)                   (2)             (3)
     Dep. Var.: Log Output                 Cap-Weighted         Utility-Level     Adjacency

     Spillover Nonattainment                    -0.037              -0.206           -0.201
                                               (0.276)             (0.276)          (0.192)

     R2                                          0.826              0.826             0.822
     Mean of Dep. Var.                           6.055              6.055             6.055
     Number of Obs.                              5,617              5,617             5,617
     Number of Plants                             237                237               237
     Plant FE                                      Y                  Y                 Y
     Fuel Type By Year FE                          Y                  Y                 Y
     Vintage Group By Year FE                      Y                  Y                 Y

Notes : This table tests whether the output of plants in attainment counties varies with measures of
the annual nonattainment status of nearby counties. The unit of observation for all regressions is
plant-year, considering only plants built before 1972 that never faced nonattainment between 1972-
1994. The outcome considered in all columns is the log of annual plant-level output. The independent
variable of interest in Column 1 is the proportion of fossil-fuel-fired electricity generating capacity
in nonattainment counties in the state in the year. In Column 2, we consider the annual proportion
of fossil-fuel-fired capacity in nonattainment counties across plants in the same state owned by
the same utility as the plant considered for the observation. Finally, Column 3 focuses on the
proportion of fossil-fuel-fired capacity in nonattainment counties adjacent to the county in the year.
All specifications include plant fixed effects, fuel type by year fixed effects, and vintage group by year
fixed effects; plants built before 1963 are in vintage group 1 while plants built between 1963-1971
are in vintage group 2. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year.
*** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                 40
             Table 5: Impact of First Nonattainment on Log Coal Prices

       Dep. Var.: Log Coal Price                               (1)         (2)         (3)

       First NA                                             0.066
                                                            (0.022)

       First NA × 1[Built Before 1963]                                  0.054
                                                                        (0.025)

       First NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]                            0.113
                                                                        (0.051)

       First NA × 1[Years in NA  5]                                                 0.063
                                                                                    (0.021)

       First NA × 1[Years in NA  [6,10]]                                            0.048
                                                                                    (0.028)

       First NA × 1[Years in NA >10]                                                0.116
                                                                                    (0.037)

       R2                                                   0.696        0.696       0.696
       Mean of Dep. Var.                                     0.478       0.478       0.478
       Number of Obs.                                       12,309       12,309      12,309
       Number of Plants                                       400         400         400
       Plant FE                                                Y           Y           Y
       State By Year FE                                        Y           Y           Y
       Fuel Type By Year FE                                    Y           Y           Y
       Vintage Group By Year FE                                Y           Y           Y
Notes: This table presents the estimated impact of first nonttainment on the log of coal prices. The
unit of observation for the regressions in this table are plant-year, focusing only on plants built before
1972 and considering only plants whose primary fuel is coal. All specifications include plant fixed
effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and vintage group by year fixed effects; plants built before 1963
are in vintage group 1 while plants built between 1963-1971 are in vintage group 2. In Column 2, we
interact first nonattainment with two indicators denoting whether the plant was built before 1963
versus built between 1963-1971. In Column 3, we consider first nonattainment interacted with three
indicators denoting whether the cumulative number of years that the plant has faced nonattainment
up to the year-of-sample was less than 5 years, between 6-10 years, or more than 10 years. Standard
errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. The unit of observation for these
regressions is plant-year.




                                                 41
Table 6: Impacts of Nonattainment and Vintage on the Adoption of FGP and FGD

                                                        (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
  Dep. Var.                                           1[FGP]     1[FGD]       1[FGP]      1[FGD]

  1[Built Between 1963-1971]                          0.062        0.023
                                                      (0.032)     (0.025)

  1[Built After 1972]                                 0.065      0.258
                                                      (0.029)    (0.042)

  First NA × 1[Built Before 1963]                                             -0.084       0.021
                                                                              (0.037)     (0.021)

  First NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]                                        -0.013      -0.039
                                                                              (0.061)     (0.028)

  First NA × 1[Built After 1972]                                               -0.012      -0.047
                                                                              (0.111)     (0.040)

  R2                                                   0.500       0.200       0.822        0.817
  Mean of Dep. Var.                                   0.539        0.077      0.544         0.079
  Number of Obs.                                      16,368      16,368      16,368       16,368
  Number of Plants                                      596         596         596          596
  Evernonattainment Indicator                            Y           Y
  Year FE                                                Y           Y
  Plant FE                                                                       Y           Y
  State By Year FE                                                               Y           Y
 Notes: This table presents regression results measuring whether the installation of flue gas particulate
 (FGP) collectors and flue gas desulfurization (FGD) technology is impacted by plant vintage and
 first nonattainment status. The unit of observation for these regressions is plant-year, focusing only
 on plants that primarily burn coal. The dependent variable for Columns 1 and 2 (Columns 3 and 4)
 is an indicator variable that is equal to one if the plant has at least one FGP (FGD) system installed
 by the year-of-sample. The indicator variable "First NA" is equal to one for any year on or after the
 first year that the plant faced nonattainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant. The specifications
 in Columns 1 and 2 control for year fixed effects and an indicator for whether the county ever faced
 nonattainment between 1972-1994, The specifications in Columns 3 and 4 include plant fixed effects
 and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and
 year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                 42
           Online Appendix (Not For Publication)




 "Impacts of the Clean Air Act on the Power Sector
     from 1938-1994: Anticipation and Adaptation"


                           Karen Clay, Akshaya Jha,
                  Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini 




This online appendix provides additional information supporting the description and
discussion of the setting, data, methods, and results. Appendix Section A presents addi-
tional background information. Appendix Section B more fully develops the conceptual
framework included in the paper. Appendix Section C provides further details on the data
sources and construction of the final dataset, and presents additional descriptive figures
and tables. Appendix Section D reports results from a variety of robustness checks and
sensitivity analyses.




  
    Karen Clay: Carnegie Mellon University (Heinz College) and NBER, 4800 Forbes Avenue, Pitts-
burgh, PA 15213. Email: kclay@andrew.cmu.edu. Akshaya Jha: Carnegie Mellon University
(Heinz College), 4800 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Email: akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu.
Joshua Lewis: Universit´e de Montr´
                                  eal, 3150, rue Jean-Brillant, Montr´
                                                                     eal, QC, H3T 1N8. Email:
joshua.lewis@umontreal.ca. Edson Severnini: Carnegie Mellon University (Heinz College), IZA and
NBER, 4800 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Email: edsons@andrew.cmu.edu.


                                              43
A      Additional Background Information

This appendix section provides further information supporting the description of the
historical setting in Section 2. Appendix Section A.1 presents the figures and tables
mentioned in the text while Appendix Section A.2 provides historical evidence on how
one large electric utility responded to the Clean Air Act. This appendix section includes
the figures and tables outlined below.




    · Figure A.1. Trends in Plant Capacity and Stack Height

    · Figure A.2. Histogram of First Year with FGD or FGP

    · Figure A.3. Patents Related to Power Systems and Electrical Lighting

    · Figure A.4 Real Construction Cost Index For Coal-Fired Power Plants

    · Figure A.5. Trends in Scrubber Adoption

    · Figure A.6. Trends in Total Suspended Particulates by County Attainment Status

    · Figure A.7 Trends in Power Plant Thermal Efficiency



    · Table A.1. Where Electric Utilities Site Plants Before and After the Clean Air Act

    · Table A.2. Pollution Abatement Strategies: The Case of the Tennessee
      Valley Authority

    · Table A.3. Number of Years in Operation By County Attainment Status




                                           44
A.1     Additional Background Figures and Tables

The figures and tables in this appendix subsection provide information on a variety of ac-
tions taken by electric utilities aimed at reducing pollution emissions from power plants.
Appendix Figure A.1 shows that the electricity generating capacity of the average power
plant grew beginning in 1950. Electric utilities also increasingly put taller smokestacks
on their plants to send emissions further away over time. Appendix Figure A.2 depicts
histograms of the year of adoption of flue gas particulate (FGP) collectors and flue gas
desulfurization (FGD) technology. Several plants adopted FGP collectors even before
1950, but FGD technology only became commercially available in the early 1970s. Ap-
pendix Figure A.3 provides evidence suggesting that the number of patents pertaining
to power systems increases with the passage of the Clean Air Act of 1963. Appendix
Figure A.4 depicts an index for real construction costs of fossil fuel power plants. Ap-
pendix Figure A.5 shows that power plants ramp up efforts to install FGD technology
(i.e. scrubbers) rapidly in the 1970s, after the passage of the 1970 CAA and its amend-
ments in 1977. Appendix Figure A.6 displays trends in the concentration levels of total
suspended particulates (TSP). Lastly, Appendix Figure A.7 displays the national average
thermal efficiency of fossil-fuel steam-electric plants over 1938-1994.

   The estimates in Appendix Table A.1 suggest that electric utilities chose to avoid
locations with pollution monitors when siting fossil-fuel power plants after the passing of
the 1963 CAA. Appendix Table A.3 provides descriptive evidence suggesting that electric
utilities kept older plants in operation longer to avoid building new plants that would be
subject to stricter environmental regulations regardless of attainment status.


A.2     Tennessee Valley Authority: An Example

To illustrate the variety of strategies used by electric utilities to reduce emissions, we
present the case of the ten coal-fired power plants owned by the Tennessee Valley Au-
thority (TVA). These plants were built before 1972, but only complied with the 1970
Clean Air Act (CAA) after TVA and EPA reached a settlement in 1979-80 (GAO, 1980).
Appendix Table A.2 shows that many plants ended up switching to coal with lower
sulfur content. Several plants combined that strategy with coal washing, electrostatic
precipitators, baghouses, and scrubbers. The U.S. Government Accountability Office es-


                                            45
timated that the total cost of the consent decree over the life span of the projects was
over $14 billion (2020 USD). Capital costs comprised 14% of that amount, operating and
maintenance costs 30%, and the incremental fuel costs 56%.




                                          46
              Figure A.1: Trends in Plant Capacity and Stack Height




         (a) Trends in Plant Size                  (b) Trends in Smokestack Height

Notes: This figure displays trends in plant size and smokestack height. Panel (a) documents the
average and maximum capacities (in MW) of electricity generating units in each year. Panel (b)
documents the average and maximum smokestack height (in meters) of electricity generating units
in each year. The data used to construct these figures come from Federal Power Commission Form
FPC-67. Source : Figures 3 and 4, EPA (1976c).




                                            47
                  Figure A.2: Histogram of First Year with FGP or FGD




                   8
                   6
              Percentage
                  42
                   0




                             1940   1950         1960          1970          1980     1990
                                           Year that First FGP Was Installed


                                           (a) FGP Adoption
                   15   10
              Percentage
                   5
                   0




                             1940   1950       1960          1970          1980     1990
                                           Year that First FGD Was Installed


                                           (b) FGD Adoption
Notes: This figure displays the timeline of adoption of pollution abatement technology. Panel (a)
plots the plant-level distribution of the year that the first flue gas particulate (FGP) collector was
installed on the plant. Panel (b) plots the plant-level distribution of the year that the first flue gas
desulfurization (FGD) system was installed on the plant. Data on the installation year of each FGP
and FGD come from Form EIA-767 administered by the Energy Information Administration.




                                                      48
      Figure A.3: Patents Related to Power Systems and Electrical Lighting




               1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000
               Patents issued during the year
                                         500
                                                                  38
                                                                       41
                                                                            44
                                                                                 47
                                                                                      50
                                                                                           53
                                                                                                56
                                                                                                     59
                                                                                                          62
                                                                                                               65
                                                                                                                    68
                                                                                                                         71
                                                                                                                              74
                                                                                                                                   77
                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                             83
                                                                                                                                                  86
                                                                                                                                                       89
                                                                                                                                                            92
                                                                                                                                                                 95
                                            19
                                                                   19
                                                                        19
                                                                             19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                       19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                                              19
                                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                                                             19
                                                                                            Power systems                      Electrical lighting


                                                                       (a) Trends in the Number of Patents Issued
                                                            200
               Wald statistics -- Test for a structural break
                       50           100  0      150
                                                                  38
                                                                       41
                                                                            44
                                                                                 47
                                                                                      50
                                                                                           53
                                                                                                56
                                                                                                     59
                                                                                                          62
                                                                                                               65
                                                                                                                    68
                                                                                                                         71
                                                                                                                              74
                                                                                                                                   77
                                                                                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                             83
                                                                                                                                                  86
                                                                                                                                                       89
                                                                                                                                                            92
                                                                                                                                                                 95
                                            19
                                                                   19
                                                                        19
                                                                             19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                       19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                                              19
                                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                            Power systems                      Electrical lighting


                                                                        (b) Wald Statistics for Tests of Unknown
                                                                                   Structural Break
Notes: This figure displays trends in patents for categories pertaining to electricity. Panel (a) plots
the number of patents issued during the year for two broad categories: (i) "power systems," which
includes power plants, electrical generator, and single generator systems, and (ii) "electrical lighting,"
which includes electric lamp and discharge devices, illumination, and coherent light generators. For
a complete description of these categories, visit https://historicip.com/nber/. Panel (b) plots the
Wald statistics of tests for a structural break in time-series data with an unknown break date, with an
equal left and right trimming percentage of ten percent. The break is estimated to happen in 1965 for
power systems and in 1989 for electrical light ­ the electrical lighting category appears to be a good
"control group" for power systems. The short-dashed vertical green line refers to the Air Pollution
Control Act of 1955, the dashed vertical green line refers to the Clean Air Act of 1963, and the long-
dashed vertical green line refers to the Clean Air Act of 1970. Data Source: The Historical Patent
Data Files from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, available at https://www.uspto.gov/learning-
and-resources/electronic-data-products/historical-patent-data-files.
                                                                                                               49
     Figure A.4: Real Construction Cost Index For Coal-Fired Power Plants




Notes: This figure reproduces Figure 2 from Joskow and Rose (1985). It plots an index of construc-
tion costs per kilowatt for coal-fired electricity generating units. Construction costs decline during
the early 1960s, stabilize in the mid 1960s, and then increase starting around 1966 to a level that
by 1980 is substantially higher than the level in 1960.




                                               50
                       Figure A.5: Trends in Scrubber Adoption




Notes: This figure presents the annual total amount of electricity generating capacity whose pollution
emissions are "controlled" by flue gas desulfurization technology (i.e.: a scrubber), separately for
generation units in operation, under construction, and planned. This figure spans the sample period
December 1970 through September 1984. Source : Figure 2, EPA (1984).




                                               51
Figure A.6: Trends in Total Suspended Particulates by County Attainment Status

                                         130
                                         120
     TSP (µg/m3) -- Year FE + Constant




                                         110
                                         100
                                          90
                                          80
                                          70
                                          60
                                          50
                                          40
                                          30
                                          20
                                          10
                                               57
                                                    59
                                                         61
                                                              63
                                                                   65
                                                                        67
                                                                             69
                                                                                  71
                                                                                       73
                                                                                            75
                                                                                                 77
                                                                                                      79
                                                                                                           81
                                                                                                                83
                                                                                                                     85
                                                                                                                          87
                                                                                                                               89
                                                                                                                                    91
                                                                                                                                         93
                                          19
                                                19
                                                     19
                                                          19
                                                               19
                                                                    19
                                                                         19
                                                                              19
                                                                                   19
                                                                                        19
                                                                                             19
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                                     19
                                                                                  Ever Nonattainment Counties
                                                                                  Always Attainment Counties

Notes: This figure displays trends in total suspended particulates (TSP) by county attainment status.
Specifically, it plots the estimated coefficients from a regression of TSP on year fixed effects interacted
with attainment status, controlling for pollution monitor fixed effects. A county is categorized as
"ever nonattainment" if it was in nonattainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in any year
between 1972-1994; a county is categorized as "always attainment" if it never faced nonattainment
between 1972-1994. The green vertical dashed line refers to the passage of the Clean Air Act of
1963, and the long-dashed lines to the Clean Air Act of 1970 and its amendments in 1977. Data
on TSP concentration levels, which start in 1957, were provided by the EPA under a Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) request.




                                                                                        52
                                   Figure A.7: Trends in Power Plant Thermal Efficiency
               33
               31
    Thermal Efficiency (%)
      25     2723
               21     29
                             38
                                  41
                                       44
                                            47
                                                 50
                                                      53
                                                           56
                                                                59
                                                                     62
                                                                          65
                                                                                68
                                                                                     71
                                                                                          74
                                                                                               77
                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                         83
                                                                                                              86
                                                                                                                   89
                                                                                                                        92
                                                                                                                             95
                 19
                              19
                                   19
                                        19
                                             19
                                                  19
                                                       19
                                                            19
                                                                 19
                                                                      19
                                                                               19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                         19
                                                                                              19
                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                                            19
Notes: This figure displays the national average thermal efficiency of fossil-fueled steam-electric
plants from 1938-1994. 100% thermal efficiency corresponds to 3,412 BTU of heat input energy
producing 1 kWh of electricity. The data sources for this figure are (i) for the period 1938-1955:
FPC 1965 Report (FPC, 1966), Table 9, p.xxxi; (ii) for the period 1956-1988: EIA 1990 Report
(EIA, 1992), Table 11, p.37; and (iii) for the period 1989-1994: MER February 2021 (EIA, 2021),
Table A6, p.215. The short-dashed vertical green line represents the Air Pollution Control Act
of 1955, the vertical dashed green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1963, and the long-dashed
vertical green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1970.




                                                                          53
Table A.1: Where Electric Utilities Site Plants Before and After the Clean Air Act

                                          (1)                   (2)                   (3)
Dependent Variable                  1[County has a        1[County has a        1[County Ever in
                                       Pollution             Pollution           Nonattainment
                                       Monitor               Monitor                (ENA)]
                                     Before 1963]          Before 1963]

1[Built Between 1955-1962]                -0.026                -0.044                 0.045
                                         (0.036)               (0.041)                (0.030)

1[Built Between 1963-1971]              -0.132                -0.148                   -0.057
                                         (0.046)              (0.066)                 (0.039)

1[Built Between 1972-1994]              -0.102                -0.078                  -0.064
                                         (0.036)              (0.035)                 (0.034)

State FE                                    Y                     Y                      Y
ENA Counties Only                                                 Y
R2                                        0.156                 0.166                  0.194
Mean of Dep. Var.                         0.326                 0.395                  0.811
Number of Obs.                            1,083                  878                   1,083
 Notes: This table reports estimates from linear probability models that explore whether electric
 utilities are less likely to site their fossil-fuel-fired power plants in counties that are more likely to
 face nonattainment in the future. We estimate separate effects for plants built between 1955-1962,
 1963-1971, and 1972-1994; the (omitted) reference vintage group is plants built before 1954. The
 unit of observation for these regressions is a plant. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is
 an indicator for whether the county where the plant was built had at least one pollution monitor
 measuring air pollution within its boundaries before the passage of the Clean Air Act of 1963.
 Column 2 restricts the sample to counties that were ever out of attainment with the NAAQS for any
 pollutant between 1972-1994. For reference, 353 plants that opened between 1938-1994 were built
 in counties that had at least one pollution monitor operating in at least one year during the baseline
 years 1957-1962. In column 3, the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the county where
 the plant was built was ever in nonattainment with the NAAQS between 1972-1994. Information on
 the location of the network of pollution monitoring stations was obtained through a FOIA request
 submitted to the U.S. EPA. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. *** denotes
 statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                   54
                           Table A.2: Pollution Abatement Strategies: The Case of the Tennessee Valley Authority

     Coal Plant                       County        State    Attainment in 1978                 Compliance Method                     Compliance Cost
                                                                                                                                    (millions of 2020 USD)

     Allen                            Shelby         TN               No                        Medium Sulfur Coal                            271.46

     Colbert                          Colbert        AL               No                        Medium Sulfur Coal                            531.26

     Cumberland                       Stewart        TN               Yes                         Coal Washing
                                                                                            Electrostatic Precipitators                     1,842.92

     Gallatin                         Sumner         TN               No                       Medium Sulfur Coal
                                                                                            Electrostatic Precipitators                       421.89

     Johnsonville                  Humphreys         TN               No                        Medium Sulfur Coal                          1,107.55
55




     Kingston                         Roane          TN               No                          Low Sulfur Coal                           1,007.10

     Paradise                      Muhlenberg        KY               No              Coal Washing and Partial Scrubbing
     Unit 3                                                                                Electrostatic Precipitators                      3,715.81

     Shawnee                        McCracken        KY               No                   Low Sulfur Coal, Baghouses                       2,771.06

     Watts Bar                         Rhea          TN               Yes                       Medium Sulfur Coal                       Not Available

     Widows Creek Units 1-6           Jackson        AL               No                        Low Sulfur Coal                               564.05
     Widows Creek Units 7-8           Jackson        AL               No               Scrubbing and Medium Sulfur Coal                      1,990.54
     Total                                                                                                                                  14,223.67
       Notes: This table provides the pollution abatement strategy of each of the ten coal-fired power plants owned by the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA),
       as agreed upon in the clean air settlement between TVA and EPA in 1979-80. All ten plants were built before 1972, the year that the 1970 Clean Air
       Act was implemented. The costs in the last column were estimated by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), and refer to the total cost
       of the consent decree over the life span of the projects. This table was compiled using information from GAO (1980).
     Table A.3: Number of Years in Operation By County Attainment Status

Dep. Var.: Log of the Number of Years                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
           that the Plant is Operating
Ever Nonattainment                                   0.132       0.535
                                                     (0.066)     (0.198)

ENA × 1[Built Before 1963]                           0.531       0.528
                                                     (0.045)     (0.180)

Number of Years in Nonattainment                                               0.003      0.055
                                                                              (0.003)     (0.019)

# of Years in NA × 1[Built Before 1963]                                      0.028         0.024
                                                                             (0.002)      (0.019)

Capacity (GW)                                        0.145       1.643         0.021      1.316
                                                     (0.067)     (0.398)      (0.069)     (0.401)

1[Coal Plant]                                         0.000       0.068        0.032       0.159
                                                     (0.058)     (0.138)      (0.062)     (0.143)

1[Gas Plant]                                          0.017       0.147        0.033      0.264
                                                     (0.066)     (0.152)      (0.070)     (0.155)

Constant                                             3.024       3.089       3.188        3.195
                                                     (0.077)     (0.149)     (0.069)      (0.146)

Mean of Dep. Var.                                     3.427        3.427       3.427       3.427
Number of Obs.                                         687          687         687         687
Censored Model?                                                      Y                       Y
Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between the number of years each plant is
in operation and measures of attainment status with the NAAQS for any pollutant. The unit of
observation for all of the regressions in this table is power plant, considering all plants built before
1972. The dependent variable considered for all regressions is the log of the last year the plant
is recorded as producing positive output in our dataset minus one plus the first year the plant is
recorded as producing positive output. The independent variable of interest in Columns 1 and 2 is
an indicator variable that is equal to one if the plant ever faced nonattainment between 1972-1994.
The independent variable of interest in Columns 3 and 4 is the count of the number of years that the
plant faced nonattainment between 1972-1994. We also interact the relevant independent variable
with an indicator for plants built before 1963. All specifications control for the plant's capacity in
its first year of operation and primary fuel type (the reference category is plants that primarily burn
oil). In Columns 1 and 3, we estimate the model using ordinary least squares. In Columns 2 and 4,
we estimate the model using a censored regression model that accounts for the fact that some plants
are still in operation at the end of our sample period. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level.




                                                56
B         Details on the Conceptual Framework

This appendix section describes our conceptual framework for how plants respond to the
Clean Air Act (CAA), as summarized in Section 3. Appendix Section B.1 specifies the
two-period expected cost minimization problem solved by plant managers. Appendix
Section B.2 discusses how the CAA impacts this expected cost minimization problem for
plants built before 1963, plants built between 1963-1971, and plants built after 1972.


B.1        Two-Period Cost Minimization Problem

Our conceptual framework, based on Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007), focuses on a
plant manager tasked with choosing the levels of three inputs in each of two periods
t  {1, 2}: the level of capacity of her power plant Kt , the number of employees at the
plant site Lt , and the quantity of fuel in units of heat Et .1 She faces input prices PtK ,
PtL , and PtE associated with capacity, labor, and fuel, respectively. The plant manager
can also choose to install pollution abatement technology at fixed cost cI . The indicator
variable It equals 1 if and only if the plant manager has installed this technology on or
before period t.

       The timing of the model in each period t works as follows. The plant manager first
chooses the capacity of her plant Kt . At this point, the plant can also choose to install
pollution abatement technology It . Next, a productivity shock t is realized. After
this shock is realized, the plant manager chooses labor Lt . Finally, a separate shock                     t

is realized, after which fuel Et is chosen. This             t   term captures a variety of different
short-run shocks to the level of output required by the plant such as unexpectedly high
electricity demand or binding transmission constraints limiting the amount of electricity
that can flow from the plant to demand centers.

       As in Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007), we assume that fuel is a perfect complement
to the other two inputs. Specifically, electricity is produced in each period based on the
following Leontiff production function:
   1
    There is a large previous literature that models the production of electricity as a function of capital,
labor and fuel (Barzel (1963); Nerlove (1963); Atkinson and Halvorsen (1976); Christensen and Greene
(1976); Gollop and Roberts (1983); Nelson and Wohar (1983); Gollop and Roberts (1985); Carlson et al.
(2000)).




                                                    57
                       QA               It
                        t = min{(1 - X ) F (Kt , Lt )exp(t + t ), g (Et )}                         (B.1)
                                                 Maximum Potential Output


where QA
       t is the actual quantity of electricity produced by the plant. We include the

(1 - X )It term to reflect that X% of the plant's electricity is used to run the pollu-
tion abatement technology if It = 1.2 We estimate total factor productivity t using
the method described in Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015). When estimating t , we
assume that F (K, L) is a translog production function (Atkinson and Halvorsen, 1976;
Christensen and Greene, 1976; Boisvert, 1982; Gollop and Roberts, 1983; Carlson et al.,
2000).3 Finally, one should think of g (E ) as being "S-shaped" like, for example, a logistic
function. This is because power plants have an optimal output level; it takes energy to
ramp up to this optimal level and not as much output can gleaned from additional fuel
use for output levels higher than this optimal level.4

       Conceptually, the timing assumptions for each period reflect the notion that building
plant capacity takes a longer time than adjusting the number of employees at the plant
site. It is thus difficult to adjust capacity in the short-run or medium-run in response
to productivity shocks such as advances in generating technology. Moreover, labor is
more difficult to adjust than fuel in the short-run due to hiring and firing frictions. Plant
managers can thus adjust their fuel input but not their labor or capital in response to
short-run shocks such as unexpectedly high electricity demand on a hot day.

       The plant manager minimizes her expected total costs across the two periods sub-
ject to output levels being governed by the production function presented in Appendix
Equation (B.1). Her realized total cost across the two periods is:

                                      2
                   L
                  c (L2 - L1 ) +2
                                            t-1 (PtK (Kt - Kt-1 ) + PtL Lt + PtE Et )              (B.2)
                                     t=1

   2
      The percentage of electricity output used to run the pollution abatement technology varies substan-
tially across plants, ranging from between 0.7% and 2.3% (Bellas and Lange, 2008).
    3
      Boisvert (1982) argues that the translog specification can be viewed in three ways: "as an exact
production function, as a second-order Taylor series approximation to a general, but unknown production
function, or as a second-order approximation to a CES production function." (p. 6).
    4
      An S-shaped g (E ) implies that the heat rate curve as a function of output is U-shaped. Namely,
the amount of input energy required to produce 1 additional MWh of electricity is large when the plant
is producing either very small quantities of electricity or close to its capacity but small when the plant
is producing close to its optimal level.




                                                    58
noting that K0 = 0 because the plant is first built in t = 1, and Kt must be greater than
Kt-1 for t=1,2.5 The squared difference between labor in periods 1 and 2 ­ i.e.: (L2 - L1 )2
­ captures the adjustment costs associated with choosing different levels of labor in period
2 versus period 1. Examples of these adjustment costs include union contracts that must
be renegotiated or litigated in order to fire employees, and redesigning the plant to
function with fewer workers.

       Given the stylized nature of the model, we deliberately do not specify the evolution
over time of either the productivity shocks t or the "short-run shocks"               t.   That being
said, the plant manager chooses K1 without having observed any shocks, L1 having
observed only 1 , E1 and K2 having observed (1 , 1 ), L2 having observed (1 , 1 , 2 )
and E2 having observed (1 , 1 , 2 , 2 ). When choosing each input in each time period,
the plant manager takes the expectation over the unobserved shocks conditioning on the
information in the shocks already observed to that point.


B.2        How does the CAA Impact Plants of Different Vintages?

The previous subsection discussed the plant manager's expected cost minimization prob-
lem in the absence of any air quality regulations. The Clean Air Act imposed two
separate types of regulation on fossil-fuel fired power plants. First, the National Ambi-
ent Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) mandated that annual county-level concentrations
of different pollutants remain below specified thresholds. Counties out of attainment
with the NAAQS often tasked the power plants located within their boundaries to re-
duce their emissions. Second, "new" plants built after 1972 were subject to additional
environmental regulations termed New Source Performance Standards (NSPS). Existing
plants built before 1972 were exempt from these additional regulations as long as they
did not make any "major modifications".

       The plant's pollution "production function" is

                                       
                                        M (E , f ) if I = 0
                                              t t      t
                                  Mt =
                                        0 if It = 1

   5
    Input price PtK thus captures the per-unit cost of building electricity generating capacity rather
than the relatively small costs associated with maintaining this capacity.



                                                 59
where, for simplicity, we set emissions Mt equal to zero if the plant has installed pollution
abatement technology (i.e: if It = 1). If It = 0, emissions are a function of heat energy Et
and characteristics of the fuel burned ft . For example, for the same heat energy, burning
lower sulfur coal results in less emissions.

   Once the power plant is built, the plant manager can reduce emissions in three differ-
ent ways. First, they can simply burn less fuel by reducing their level of output. Second,
they can change the type of fuel they burn; for example, a coal-fired power plant can
burn lower sulfur coal. Third, the plant can install pollution abatement technology.

   However, the NSPS potentially distorts how plants respond to air quality regulations.
Specifically, existing plants might choose not to install pollution abatement technology
because this would be a considered a major modification, and thus subject the plant
to the NSPS regardless of attainment status. Moreover, the NSPS obligated coal-fired
plants built after 1978 to install flue gas desulfurization technology ("scrubbers"), which
removes some portion of the sulfur dioxide, nitrogren dioxide, and fine particulates from
the emissions associated with burning coal.

   We consider three types of plants: plants built before 1963, plants built between
1963 and 1971, and plants built after 1972. Consistent with our suggestive evidence
on anticipation, we assume for this conceptual framework that the CAA is implemented
between periods 1 and 2 for the plants built before 1963, but before period 1 for the plants
built after 1963. Plants built after 1963 can thus choose initial levels of capital, boiler
technology, plant site, etc. with advance knowledge that the CAA will be implemented.

   Plants built before 1963 can comply with nonattainment by reducing output, changing
the mix of inputs, or installing pollution abatement technology. If the plant manager
chooses to reduce output, it will be difficult to adjust inputs to reflect this decrease in
output because capital and labor were chosen in period 1 without knowledge of the CAA.
Namely, adjusting capital downward in period 2 in response to the CAA is impossible
while adjusting labor downward comes with adjustment costs. In addition, power plants
typically have an optimal level of output; producing less than the optimum lowers the
thermal efficiency of the plant. As a result, the plant produces less output per unit of
input heat.

   Reducing emissions without decreasing output also comes with costs. First, plants
may hire labor specifically to ascertain how best to comply with environmental regula-

                                               60
tions. This ranges from lawyers who interpret environmental regulations to engineers who
install and maintain pollution abatement technology as well as make other regulation-
induced modifications to the plant. In addition, coal and oil fired power plants may
switch to fuel that emits less pollution when burned. For example, a plant may switch
from burning coal from Appalachia with higher heat and sulfur contents to low-sulfur
coal from the Powder River Basin (PRB) that has less heat energy per ton. PRB coal
is likely to have a higher price per mmBTU than Appalachian coal both because of its
lower heat content and the higher transportation costs to deliver PRB coal from Mon-
tana/Wyoming to East coast plants (Busse and Keohane, 2007). In addition, boilers are
typically tuned to burn a specific type of fuel; switching fuels is thus likely to come with
thermal efficiency losses.

   Plants built between 1963-1971 can also comply with nonattainment by reducing out-
put, changing their mix of inputs, or installing pollution abatement technology. However,
these plants know that the CAA will be implemented prior to period 1, and will thus
choose capital and labor optimally in period 1 to reflect this information. Moreover,
electric utilities with advance knowledge of the CAA will likely to choose to site and
design their plants in order to reduce the likelihood and costs of facing nonattainment.

   Finally, both sets of plants built before 1972 might choose to install pollution abate-
ment technology. However, installing this technology may be considered a "major mod-
ification" and thus subject the plant to the stricter environmental regulation associated
with New Source Performance Standards (NSPS). If the plant chooses this compliance
option, the plant incurs the costs associated with installing the technology as well as the
costs of operating this technology using electricity from the plant.

   Plants built after 1972 ("new plants") are already subject to the NSPS; installing pol-
lution abatement technology does not cause the plant to face stricter regulation. Indeed,
the NSPS obligated coal-fired plants built after 1978 to install scrubbers. Of course, as
with plants built between 1963-1971, new plants were built and staffed with knowledge of
the CAA. Capital K1 and labor L1 were thus chosen optimally to reflect the requirements
of the CAA.

   Summarizing, our conceptual framework provides several sets of main hypotheses.
First, for plants built before 1963, we expect that nonattainment with the NAAQS will
result in less output, little changes in capital, no change (or even an increase) in labor, and


                                              61
an increase in heat energy per MWh. Second, we expect that nonattainment will result
in little to no change in either output or heat energy per MWh for plants built between
1963-1971 because these plants were built and sited with knowledge that environmental
regulations were forthcoming.

   Third, "existing" plants built before 1972 are less likely to install pollution abatement
technology than "new" plants built after 1972 because installing this technology might
subject existing plants to the stricter environmental regulations associated with the New
Source Performance Standards (NSPS). In contrast, every new plant is subject to the
NSPS; based on this, our fourth hypothesis is that we should not expect substantial dif-
ferences across new plants located in attainment versus nonattainment counties. Instead,
new plants are more likely to comply with the NSPS by installing pollution abatement
technology rather than reducing output or changing their input mix for two reasons: (1)
the NSPS rules require relatively large reductions in emissions and (2) plants built after
1978 are obligated to install this technology.




                                            62
C      Data Construction and Data Description

This appendix section provides further details on data sources, data construction, and
data description, supporting the broad overview given in Section 4. Appendix Section
C.1 discusses the digitization of historical information on fossil-fuel-fired power plants.
Appendix Section C.2 describes the variables used in the estimation of our measure of
pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP), and provides the estimates of
the parameters of the production function. Appendix Section C.3 presents additional
descriptive figures and tables. The outline of all figures and tables in this appendix
section is below.


    · Figure C.1. Sample Data for Four Power Plants from the 1957 FPC Report

    · Figure C.2. Map of Counties with Fossil-Fuel-Fired Power Plants

    · Figure C.3.   Proportion of Electricity Generation Produced in Nonattainment
      Counties

    · Figure C.4. Annual Total Electricity Generating Capacity by Source Type

    · Figure C.5. Annual Total Electricity Generation and Capacity from Fossil-Fuel
      Power Plants By Vintage and Attainment Status

    · Figure C.6. Annual Total Electricity Generation and Capacity for Fossil-Fuel Power
      Plants by Vintage and Years in Nonattainment

    · Figure C.7. Annual Average Total Factor Productivity for Fossil-Fuel Power Plants
      by Attainment Status

    · Figure C.8. Annual Average Total Factor Productivity for Fossil-Fuel Power Plants
      by Vintage and Years in Nonattainment

    · Figure C.9. County-Level Distribution of the Number of Years Facing Nonattain-
      ment



    · Table C.1. Number of Plants by Attainment Status and Vintage



                                            63
· Table C.2. Attainment Status versus Lagged Attainment Status

· Table C.3. Summary Statistics: PU-TFP, Ouput, Inputs, and Attainment Status

· Table C.4. Production Function Estimates: Different Methods and Functional
  Forms




                                    64
C.1        Data Construction

We digitized power plant level data from the Federal Power Commission (FPC) reports for
the years 1938-1981.6 Most of the digitization was funded by the NSF grant SES 1627432.
We hired undergraduates and Master's students to manually enter the information from
the historical reports. Then, a different set of students checked the accuracy of the
information entered by the first group, and made corrections if needed.

       Beginning in 1938, detailed annual data are available for large steam power plants.
Steam power plants include coal-fired, gas-fired, and oil-fired power plants. The num-
ber of power plants listed in the first report, which covers all years between 1938-1947,
increases from 151 in 1938 to 200 in 1947. The number of plants listed in subsequent
annual volumes is 277 in 1950, 528 in 1960, 553 in 1970, and 647 in 1980.7

       The title of the FPC report for the years 1938-1947 is Steam-Electric Plant Con-
struction Cost and Annual Production Expenses, 1938-1947 (Single Volume). The title
of the FPC report for each subsequent year between 1948 and 1978 is Steam-Electric
Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses (Annual Supplements). Fi-
nally, the title of the relevant report for each year between 1979-1981 is Thermal-Electric
Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses (Annual Supplements). As an
example, we present a page from the 1957 report in Appendix Figure C.1.

       Starting in 1982, the annual reports include only a small sample of steam-electric
power plants. For this reason, we collect data from several other sources to construct
an annual plant-level data-set from 1982-1994 that can be appended to the 1938-1981
data-set built by digitizing the annual reports from the FPC:

       · Each plant's capacity in each year as well as each plant's latitude/longitude co-
         ordinates, state and county come from the eGrid database administered by the
         USEPA.8
         ­ http://www.epa.gov/egrid/download-data
   6
     In 1977, Congress reorganized FPC as the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).
   7
     The plants reported in 1938 accounted for 59% of the capacity and 75% of the generation of utility-
owned, fossil-fuel-fired steam-electric plants in the United States. The corresponding percentage of
capacity covered in the years 1947, 1950, 1960, 1970, and 1980 are 65%, 70%, 90%, 93%, and 92%
respectively. The corresponding percentage of generation covered in the years 1947, 1950, 1960, 1970,
and 1980 are 73%, 80%, 94%, 96%, and 91% respectively.
   8
     We used data from Form EIA-860 to supplement capacity where it was not listed in eGrid because
the plant shut down before 1996.

                                                  65
       · Annual plant-level total generation and consumption by fuel type come from Form
         EIA-759 which later became Form EIA-906.
         ­ http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/eia906u.html

       · The year of installation for each flue gas desulfurization (FGD) and flue gas par-
         ticulate (FGP) collector technologies for each plant is from Form EIA-767.
         ­ http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia767/

       · Annual total quantity of fuel purchased by each plant and annual average fuel prices
         per mmBTU for each plant are from Form EIA-423.
         ­ http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia423/

       · Annual plant-level data on number of employees and nonfuel expenses come from
         FERC Form 1.
         ­http://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/electric/general-information/electric-
         industry-forms/form-1-electric-utility-annual.9


C.2        Estimation of Total Factor Productivity

We estimate total factor productivity (TFP) using the procedure proposed by Ackerberg,
Caves and Frazer (2015). We do using data on each plant's output and inputs in each
year. Namely, our measure of output is annual plant-level net electricity generation in
MWh. The first input, capacity, is the total nameplate capacity of the plant in the year
in MW. The second input, labor, is a count of full-time equivalent employees at the plant
in the year. The final input, fuel, is the quantity of fuel consumed by the plant in the
year in mmBTU.

       In robustness checks, we also consider nonfuel costs as an input when estimating
TFP. Nonfuel costs include all nonfuel operations and maintenance expenses, such as
those for coolants, repairs, maintenance supervision, and engineering. As pointed out by
Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007), this variable is less than ideal as a measure of the
materials used in the production process, both because it reflects expenditures rather
than quantities, and because it includes the wage bill for the employees counted in labor.
   9
    Most of these data were generously provided by Ron Shadbegian and other researchers at the USEPA.
We use data from Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007) to supplement number of employees and nonfuel
expenses.


                                                 66
Namely, as nonfuel costs include payroll costs, both nonfuel costs and labor would vary
with changes in staffing.

   As explained in Appendix Section B, we assume a Leontief production function as
in Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007). In particular, fuel is assumed to be a perfect
complement for the other two inputs, capital and labor. We also follow the literature and
assume that the function determining how capital and labor map to output is translog
(Atkinson and Halvorsen, 1976; Christensen and Greene, 1976; Boisvert, 1982; Gollop
and Roberts, 1983; Carlson et al., 2000). Appendix Table C.4 reports the estimates of
the parameters of the production function.


C.3     Additional Descriptive Figures and Tables

Appendix Figure C.2 shows a map of the United States with all of the counties with
at least one fossil fuel power plant shaded in red. Appendix Figure C.3 plots the share
of annual electricity generation from fossil-fuel-fired plants located in counties in nonat-
tainment for each pollutant and overall, separately for existing plants and new plants.
Appendix Figure C.4 displays the annual total electricity generating capacity for each
source type, including nuclear and hydro. Appendix Figures C.5 and C.6 show the trends
in annual electricity generation and electricity generating capacity by vintage and differ-
ent bins defined by attainment status.

   Appendix Figures C.7 and C.8 display trends in annual pollution-unadjusted total
factor productivity by vintage and attainment status. Appendix Figure C.9 presents the
county-level distribution of the number of years that a county has been out of attainment
between 1972-1994.

   Appendix Table C.1 reports the number of plants in the sample by vintage and
attainment status. Appendix Table C.2 shows the empirical probabilities of transitioning
from nonattainment to attainment status, and vice versa. Appendix Table C.3 presents
summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis.




                                             67
  Figure C.1: Sample Data for Four Power Plants from the 1957 FPC Report




Source: Federal Power Commission Report "Steam-Electric Plant Construction Cost and Annual
Production Expenses ­ Tenth Annual Supplement ", 1957.




                                         68
                                      Figure C.2: Map of Counties with Fossil-Fuel-Fired Power Plants
69




     Notes: This figure displays which counties had fossil-fuel-fired power plants at any point between 1938-1994. The counties shaded in red were home
     to at least one fossil-fuel plant in our sample. There were no power plants in any year of our sample located in the counties shaded in white.
Figure C.3: Proportion of Electricity Generation Produced in Nonattainment Counties




                                             .7
   Share of Output in Nonattainment Counties
   .2      .3       .4      .5      .6




                                                         1970                     1975                         1980                                                               1985                   1990                         1995
                                                                                                                        Year

                                                                                                        Existing Plants                                                                     New Plants


                          (a) Share of Output from Nonattainment Counties: Any Pollutant Standard

                                                                   By Pollutant: Existing Plants                                                                                            By Pollutant: New Plants
   Share of Output from Plants in Nonattainment




                                                                                                                            Share of Output from Plants in Nonattainment
                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                  .3
                              .4




                                                                                                                                                     .2
                 .2




                                                                                                                                         .1
     0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                  1970      1975          1980          1985            1990    1995                                                       1970      1975        1980          1985            1990    1995
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                   Year

                                                                         TSP/PM                SO2                                                                                              TSP/PM                SO2
                                                                         CO                    O3/NO2                                                                                           CO                    O3/NO2



   (b) Share of Output from Nonattainment                                                                                   (c) Share of Output from Nonattainment
    Counties by Pollutant ­ Existing Plants                                                                                    Counties by Pollutant ­ New Plants

  Notes: The top panel of this figure documents the annual aggregate proportion of electricity pro-
  duction from plants in counties out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant. The bottom
  panels document the annual aggregate proportion of electricity production from plants in counties
  out of attainment with the NAAQS for each pollutant, separately for "existing" plants built before
  1972 and "new" plants built after 1972. "TSP/PM" refers to standards pertaining to either total
  suspended particulates (TSP) or particulate matter (PM), "SO2" refers to the standard associated
  with sulfur dioxide, "CO" refers to the standard associated with carbon monoxide, and "O3/NO2"
  refers the standards pertaining to either ambient ozone (O3 ) or nitrogen dioxide (N O2 ).




                                                                                                                       70
          Figure C.4: Annual Total Electricity Generating Capacity by Source Type
                                             .4
  Total Electricity Generating Capacity (TW)
           .1          .2
                        0         .3




                                                  1940   1950      1960        1970   1980       1990

                                                           Coal            Oil         Natural Gas
                                                           Hydro           Nuclear

Notes: This figure documents annual national total electricity production capacity by source type.
The data underlying this figure come from the eGrid database administered by the USEPA. The
thin dashed vertical green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1963 while the thicker vertical green
lines represent the 1970 Clean Air Act and its amendments in 1977.




                                                                          71
     Figure C.5: Annual Total Electricity Generation and Capacity from Fossil-Fuel Power Plants By Vintage and Attainment Status




                                                                                                    150
                .5       .4




                                                                                           Total Capacity (GW)
      Total Output (TWh)




                                                                                                          100
          .2      .3




                                                                                             50
                .1
72



                0




                                                                                                    0
                              1940   1950       1960      1970        1980          1990                         1940   1950       1960      1970        1980          1990

                                        AA, Before 1963          ENA, Before 1963                                          AA, Before 1963          ENA, Before 1963
                                        AA, 1963-1971            ENA, 1963-1971                                            AA, 1963-1971            ENA, 1963-1971
                                        AA, After 1972           ENA, After 1972                                           AA, After 1972           ENA, After 1972


                                            (a) Total Output                                                                   (b) Total Capacity
           Notes: This figure documents the annual total electricity generation produced by fossil-fuel-fired plants in the United States. Plants are located either
           in "ever-nonattainment" (ENA) counties that went out of attainment with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) at least once during
           our 1938-1994 sample period or in "always-attainment" (AA) counties that never went out of attainment between 1938-1994. We consider three plant
           vintage groups: plants built before 1963, plants built between 1963-1971, and plants built after 1972. The short-dashed green vertical line represents
           the passage of the Clean Air Act of 1963 and the dashed green vertical lines represent the passing of the Clean Air Act of 1970 and its amendments
           in 1977.
     Figure C.6: Annual Total Electricity Generation and Capacity for Fossil-Fuel Power Plants by Vintage and Years in Nonattainment




                                                                                                                                                             .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                   Total Output (TWh): Built Between 1963-1971
                                               .6
         Total Output (TWh): Built Before 1963




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Total Output (TWh): Built After 1972
                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                 .4




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                   .2       0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                    1940   1950          1960      1970       1980          1990                                                   1960   1970             1980                1990                                               1970                  1980                  1990

                                                                  AA                      ENA, <= 5 Years                                                                 AA                      ENA, <= 5 Years                                                               AA                  ENA, <= 5 Years
                                                                  ENA, > 5 Years                                                                                          ENA, > 5 Years                                                                                        ENA, > 5 Years



                                                    (a) Output ­ Built Before 1963                                        (b) Output ­ Built Between 1963-1971                                                                                                       (c) Output ­ Built After 1972




                                                                                                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                   Total Capacity (GW): Built Between 1963-1971
         Total Capacity (GW): Built Before 1963




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Total Capacity (GW): Built After 1972
73




                                                                                                                                                   75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  75
                           75       100




                                                                                                                                        50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                    50




                                                                                                                             25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
             25             0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                    1940   1950          1960      1970       1980          1990                                                   1960   1970             1980                1990                                               1970   1975           1980     1985         1990

                                                                  AA                      ENA, <= 5 Years                                                                 AA                      ENA, <= 5 Years                                                               AA                  ENA, <= 5 Years
                                                                  ENA, > 5 Years                                                                                          ENA, > 5 Years                                                                                        ENA, > 5 Years



                                                    (d) Capacity ­ Built Before 1963                               (e) Capacity ­ Built Between 1963-1971                                                                                                           (f) Capacity ­ Built After 1972

        Notes: This figure documents annual total electricity generation and annual total electricity generating capacity for fossil-fuel-fired power plants in the
        United States. We consider three vintage categories based on whether the plant was built before 1963, between 1963-1971, or after 1972. We consider
        three regulatory status categories: always-attainment (AA) ­ counties that never went out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant between
        1938-1994; ever-nonattainment for less than five years (ENA, 5 Years) ­ counties that went out of attainment with the NAAQS for less than five
        years between 1938-1994; and ENA for more than five years (ENA, >5 Years) ­ counties that went out of attainment with the NAAQS for more than
        five years. The thin dashed vertical green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1963 while the thicker green vertical lines represent the 1970 Clean Air
        Act and its amendments in 1977.
Figure C.7: Annual Average Total Factor Productivity for Fossil-Fuel Power Plants by
                         Vintage and Attainment Status




                                                 .5
     Pollution-Unadjusted Total Factor Productivity
       -1            -.5           0




                                                      1940       1950        1960          1970         1980        1990

                                                             AA, Built Before 1963                ENA, Built Before 1963
                                                             AA, Built Between 1963-1971          ENA, Built between 1963-1971


  Notes: This figure plots annual average pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity separately
  for plants built before 1963 versus built between 1963-1971 located in always-attainment ("AA")
  counties versus ever-nonattainment ("ENA") counties. "AA" counties never faced nonattainment
  between 1938-1994 while "ENA" counties faced nonattainment at least once between 1938-1994.
  The thin dashed vertical green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1963 while the thicker green
  vertical lines represent the 1970 Clean Air Act and its amendments in 1977.




                                                                                    74
     Figure C.8: Annual Average Total Factor Productivity for Fossil-Fuel Power Plants by Vintage and Years in Nonattainment
                  .5




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                    PU-TFP: Built Between 1963-1971
      PU-TFP: Built Before 1963




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                PU-TFP: Built After 1972
                             0




                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                -.5




                                                                                                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
       -1




                                                                                        -1




                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.5
                  -1.5




                                                                                                   -1.5
                                  1940        1960         1980              2000                                     1960   1970               1980       1990          2000                              1970   1975          1980      1985           1990      1995

                                          AA               ENA: <= 5 Years                                                     AA                      ENA: <= 5 Years                                                   AA                      ENA: <= 5 Years
                                          ENA, > 5 Years                                                                       ENA, > 5 Years                                                                            ENA, > 5 Years



                                  (a) PU-TFP ­ Built Before 1963                    (b) PU-TFP ­ Built Between 1963-1971                                                                                     (c) PU-TFP ­ Built After 1972

     Notes: This figure documents annual average pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP) for fossil-fuel-fired power plants in the United
     States. We consider three vintage categories based on whether the plant was built before 1963, between 1963-1971, or after 1972. We consider three
75




     regulatory status categories: "always-attainment" (AA) ­ counties that never went out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant between
     1938-1994; "ever-nonattainment" for less than five years (ENA, 5 Years) ­ counties that went out of attainment with the NAAQS for less than five
     years between 1938-1994; and ENA for more than five years ­ counties that went out of attainment with the NAAQS for more than five years. The
     thin dashed vertical green line represents the Clean Air Act of 1963 while the thicker green vertical lines represent the 1970 Clean Air Act and its
     amendments in 1977.
Figure C.9: County-Level Distribution of the Number of Years Facing Nonattainment




          40
          30
       Percent
        2010
          0




                 0           5              10           15           20                 25
                         Number of Years in Nonattainment Between 1972-1994


  Notes: This histogram plots the distribution of the number of years that the county was in nonat-
  tainment between 1972-1994. The unit of observation for this histogram is a county, considering only
  counties that were home to at least one fossil-fuel power plant in our sample spanning 1938-1994.




                                                76
           Table C.1: Number of Plants by Attainment Status and Vintage

Panel A. Number of Fossil-Fuel-Fired Power Plants
                     Built Before 1963 Built Between 1963-1971                     Built After 1972
Always Attainment           197                    46                                    147
Ever Nonattainment          372                    81                                     97
Total                       569                   127                                    244
Panel B. Proportion By Vintage
                     Built Before 1963 Built Between 1963-1971                     Built After 1972
Always Attainment           0.35                  0.36                                   0.60
Ever Nonattainment          0.65                  0.64                                   0.40
  Notes: The top panel of this table lists the number of fossil-fuel-fired power plants in our sample in
  each cell defined by the intersection of attainment status and vintage. The bottom panel lists the
  proportion of plants in a given vintage group in each attainment status. The first row of each panel
  focuses on plants that never faced nonattainment between 1972-1994 while the second row focuses
  on plants that faced nonattainment at least once between 1972-1994. The first, second and third
  columns of each panel consider plants built before 1963, plants built between 1963-1971, and plants
  built after 1972 respectively.




            Table C.2: Attainment Status versus Lagged Attainment Status

    Panel A. Number of Observations From 1972-1994
                                Attainment in Year t Nonattainment in Year t
    Attainment in Year t-1             6,630                   600
    Nonattainment in Year t-1           335                   5,398
    Panel B. Conditional Probability
                                Attainment in Year t Nonattainment in Year t
    Attainment in Year t-1             0.92                    0.08
    Nonattainment in Year t-1          0.06                    0.94
  Notes: The top panel of this table lists the number of observations in each of the four categories
  defined by attainment status in years t and t - 1. The bottom panel lists the probabilities of being
  in attainment and nonattainment in year t conditional on being in attainment or nonattainment in
  year t - 1. The unit of observation underlying this table is plant-year, spanning the sample period
  1972-1994.




                                                 77
 Table C.3: Summary Statistics: PU-TFP, Ouput, Inputs, and Attainment Status

Panel A: Power Plant Operations, Sample Period 1938-1994
Variable                                           No. of Obs. Mean Std. Dev.
Log Pollution-Unadjusted Total Factor Productivity    21,767      -0.56    0.76
Electricity Output (GWh)                              21,767    1,858.67 2,403.47
Electricity Generating Capacity (MW)                  21,767     435.09   502.63
Number of Employees                                   21,767     127.28   126.44
Fuel Burned (in Billion BTU)                          21,767     19.32    30.03
Panel B: Indicator for NAAQS Noncompliance, Sample Period 1972-1994
Variable                                           No. of Obs. Mean Std. Dev.
1[Out of Attainment with any NAAQS]                   10,374      0.51     0.50
1[Out of Attainment with NAAQS: TSP or PM]            10,374      0.17     0.38
1[Out of Attainment with NAAQS: SO2 ]                 10,374       0.05    0.22
1[Out of Attainment with NAAQS: CO]                   10,374       0.12    0.33
1[Out of Attainment with NAAQS: O3 or NO2 ]           10,374      0.41     0.49
 Notes: This table presents summary statistics pertaining to our difference-in-differences regressions
 assessing the impact of nonattainment on power plant operations. We estimate annual plant-level
 PU-TFP based on a translog production function with capital (electricity generating capacity), labor
 (average number of employees), and fuel (the heat input in billions of BTU of fuel burned) using the
 estimation procedure developed by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015).




                                                78
Table C.4: Production Function Estimates: Different Methods and Functional Forms

         Dep. Var.: Log Output         (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)

         Panel A. Estimated Parameters

         Log Labor (l)              1.712        2.137          0.309            0.313
                                    (0.003)       (0.011)        (0.000)          (0.014)

         Log Capacity (k)           0.193       -0.335          0.903            0.961
                                     (0.003)     (0.012)         (0.000)          (0.033)

         l×l                        -0.183      -0.126
                                     (0.003)     (0.006)

         l×k                        0.066       -0.155
                                     (0.000)     (0.012)

         k×k                         0.023        -0.012
                                     (0.009)     (0.012)

         Functional Form          Translog Translog          Cobb-Douglas     Cobb-Douglas
         Includes Nonfuel Cost?                  Y                                 Y
         Number of Obs.            24,749      24,384            24,749          24,384
         Number of Plants           940         935               940             935
         Panel B. Post-Estimation Elasticities

         Log Employees                 0.42        0.28           0.31             0.31
         Log Capacity                  0.74        0.89           0.90             0.96
         Log Nonfuel Expenses                      0.07                            0.03
 Notes : This table reports the production function estimates that are used to construct pollution-
 unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP). Panel A presents the estimated parameters of the
 production function with capital (electricity generating capacity), labor (average number of employ-
 ees), and fuel (the heat input in mmBTU from the fuel burned) using the estimation procedure
 developed by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015). We use two functional forms ­ Translog and
 Cobb-Douglas and two specifications ­ with and without nonfuel cost, which refers to all operating
 expenses other than those associated with fuel. Our preferred specification, which is the basis for
 the PU-TFP measure used in the main analysis, is presented in column 1. Panel B reports implied
 elasticities for each input. The unit of observation for all of these analyses is plant-year. *** denotes
 statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Standard errors in
 parentheses are calculated by bootstrapping.




                                                  79
D      Additional Results

This appendix section reports additional estimates in support of the main findings in the
paper. They shed light on the mechanisms behind the main findings, consider hetero-
geneity in the estimated effects, or test the robustness of the main results.

    Appendix Figure D.1 examines how the estimated impacts of nonattainment on power
plant outcomes for plants of different vintages vary by the first year of data in the analysis.
This figure highlights the importance of utilizing data from well before the Clean Air Act
(CAA) of 1970 or even the 1963 CAA.

    Appendix Table D.1 reports the estimated impacts of nonattainment on power plant
outcomes for more granular vintage groups. For reference, the main analysis estimates
separate effects only for plants built before 1963 versus plants built between 1963-1971.
Appendix Table D.2 presents robustness checks of the estimated impacts of nonattain-
ment on log output and log PU-TFP using alternative econometric specifications and
sample restrictions. Appendix Table D.3 reports the results of the Goodman-Bacon de-
composition. These results indicate that the bulk of the impacts of first-nonattainment
on outcomes come from a comparison of plants that ever versus never faced nonattain-
ment between 1972-1994. This highlights again the importance of estimating the effects
of nonattainment including data from before the implementation of the CAA in 1972.

    Appendix Table D.4 checks whether the estimated impact of nonattainment on
pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP) changes if we estimate PU-TFP
including a measure of input materials or consider alternative production functions. Ap-
pendix Table D.5 examines the heterogeneity of the main results by the plant's primary
fuel type. Appendix Table D.6 investigates the effects of nonattainment with the stan-
dards for specific pollutants rather than focusing on nonattainment with any pollutant
standard.

    Appendix Table D.7 reports heterogeneous impacts of nonattainment by the first year
that the county faces nonattainment, These results suggest again that the bulk of the
impacts are driven by the initial county-level designations of attainment status in 1972.
Appendix Table D.8 examines how annual statewide electricity generating capacity by
source responds to the proportion of counties in nonattainment in the state in the year.

    The outline of the figures and tables in this appendix section is below.

                                              80
· Figure D.1. Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by Vintage and
  Initial Sample Year



· Table D.1. Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by Additional
  Vintage Groups

· Table D.2. Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes from Alternative
  Specifications and Samples

· Table D.3. Results of the Goodman-Bacon Decomposition for First Nonattainment

· Table D.4. Impacts of Nonattainment on PU-TFP Estimated Using Alternative
  Production Functions and Specifications

· Table D.5. Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by Primary Fuel
  Type

· Table D.6. Impacts of Nonattainment on Plant Outcomes By Pollutant Standard

· Table D.7. Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by First Year in
  Nonattainment

· Table D.8. Impact of Proportion of Counties in Nonattainment on State-Level
  Capacity




                                     81
            Figure D.1: Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by Vintage
                                     and Initial Sample Year



                 .2




                                                                                                                   .2
 Estimated Effect of Nonattainment




                                                                                                   Estimated Effect of Nonattainment
                               .1




                                                                                                                                 .1
                        0




                                                                                                                          0
                -.1




                                                                                                                  -.1
         -.2




                                                                                                           -.2
  -.3




                                                                                                    -.3
                 -.4




                                                                                                                   -.4
                                     1940      1950                  1960              1970                                            1963           1966                     1969              1972
                                                 First Year in the Data                                                                                  First Year in the Data

                                              Estimated Effect              95% C.I.                                                                  Estimated Effect                95% C.I.



                                      (a) Effects on Log Output ­                                                                             (b) Effects on Log Output ­
                                           Built Before 1963                                                                                    Built Between 1963-1971
                 .2




                                                                                                                   .2
 Estimated Effect of Nonattainment




                                                                                                   Estimated Effect of Nonattainment
                               .1




                                                                                                                                 .1
                        0




                                                                                                                          0
                -.1




                                                                                                                  -.1
         -.2




                                                                                                           -.2
  -.3




                                                                                                    -.3
                 -.4




                                                                                                                   -.4




                                     1940      1950                  1960              1970                                            1963           1966                     1969              1972
                                                 First Year in the Data                                                                                  First Year in the Data

                                              Estimated Effect              95% C.I.                                                                  Estimated Effect                95% C.I.



                                     (c) Effects on Log PU-TFP ­                                                                              (d) Effects on Log PU-TFP ­
                                            Built Before 1963                                                                                   Built Between 1963-1971
Notes: This figure displays the estimated impacts of nonattainment on log output and the log of
pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP) by initial sample year, separately for plants
built before 1963 and for plants built between 1963-1971. Namely, for initial year X on the x-axis,
we artificially restrict the sample period used to estimate the relevant effect to X-1994 (ex: the effect
for initial year 1950 is estimated using data from 1950-1994). We estimate these effects using only
data from plants built before 1963 for the two left panels and plants built between 1963-1971 for the
two right panels. The short-dashed green vertical line represents the passage of the Clean Air Act of
1963 and the dashed green vertical lines represent the Clean Air Act of 1970 and its amendments in
1977. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and fuel-type-by-year
fixed effects. The 95% confidence intervals reported in these figures are based on standard errors
that are two-way clustered by county and year.




                                                                                              82
           Table D.1: Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes
                          By Additional Vintage Groups

                                          (1)              (2)        (3)           (4)             (5)
Dep. Var. (in Logs)                      Output          PU-TFP     Fuel Use   No. Employees      Capacity

NA × 1[Built Before 1955]                -0.226          -0.174     -0.155          -0.040         -0.118
                                          (0.085)         (0.062)   (0.078)        (0.039)          (0.051)

NA × 1[Built Between 1955-1962]         -0.289           -0.213      -0.112         0.013          -0.116
                                         (0.089)          (0.068)   (0.090)        (0.055)         (0.069)

NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1966]           -0.078          0.095      -0.028         -0.125          -0.121
                                         (0.134)         (0.094)    (0.140)        (0.087)         (0.078)

NA × 1[Built Between 1967-1971]           -0.082          -0.083     -0.012         0.024           0.008
                                         (0.115)         (0.106)    (0.087)        (0.053)         (0.051)

R2                                        0.822           0.608      0.752         0.870            0.915
Mean of Dep. Var.                         6.730           -0.562      9.155         4.489            5.462
Number of Obs.                            21,767          21,767     21,767        21,767           21,767
Number of Plants                           687             687         687           687              687
Plant FE                                    Y               Y           Y             Y                Y
State By Year FE                            Y               Y           Y             Y                Y
Fuel Type By Year FE                        Y               Y           Y             Y                Y
Vintage Group By Year FE                    Y               Y           Y             Y                Y
  Number of Plants by Vintage Group: There are 399 plants built before 1955, 161 plants built between
  1955 and 1962, 67 plants built between 1963 and 1967, and 60 plants built between 1967 and 1971.
  Notes: This table reports the impacts of nonattainment on power plant operations by additional
  vintage groups. For reference, in the main analysis, we consider only two vintage groups: plants built
  before 1963 and plants built between 1963-1971. In contrast, the specifications in this table present
  separate estimates for vintage groups defined by whether the plant was built before 1955, between
  1955-1962, between 1963-1966, or between 1967-1971. The unit of observation for the regressions
  in this table is plant-year, and the estimation considers all plants that were built before 1972. For
  all specifications, "nonattainment" (NA) is defined as the county being out of attainment with the
  NAAQS for any pollutant in the year. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-year
  fixed effects, fuel type by year fixed effects and vintage group by year fixed effects. Standard errors
  in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the
  1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                    83
Table D.2: Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes from Alternative
                          Specifications and Samples

                                        (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)
                                      Primary        Larger     Coal     Utility-State   No State
                                                                         By Year FE      Standard

Panel A. Log Output

NA × 1[Built Before 1963]            -0.247      -0.246       -0.277         -0.110      -0.313
                                      (0.071)     (0.079)      (0.093)      (0.066)       (0.085)

NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]        -0.060      -0.003      0.040         0.040         -0.009
                                      (0.091)     (0.081)     (0.084)       (0.086)       (0.109)

R2                                     0.818         0.775     0.837         0.856         0.825
Mean of Dep. Var.                      6.730         7.100     6.946         6.864         6.725


Panel B. Log PU-TFP

NA × 1[Built Before 1963]            -0.187      -0.154       -0.192        -0.091       -0.205
                                      (0.052)     (0.055)      (0.060)      (0.050)       (0.062)

NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]        0.020       0.079       0.096         0.061         0.003
                                      (0.074)     (0.062)     (0.058)       (0.067)       (0.085)

R2                                     0.605         0.619     0.609         0.731         0.619
Mean of Dep. Var.                      -0.562        -0.529    -0.538        -0.565        -0.584

Number of Obs.                         21,767        17,327    13,942        21,664        16,275
Number of Plants                        687           507       421           687           497
Plant FE                                 Y             Y         Y             Y             Y
Utility By State By Year FE                                                    Y
State By Year FE                         Y             Y         Y             Y             Y
Fuel Type By Year FE                     Y             Y         Y             Y             Y
Vintage Group by Year FE                 Y             Y         Y             Y             Y

Notes: The top and bottom panels of this table present estimates of the impact of nonattainment
on log output and the log of pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity (PU-TFP) respectively.
The unit of observation for these regressions is plant-year, considering only plants built before 1972.
We estimate separate effects for plants built before 1963 and plants built between 1963-1971. For
all specifications, "nonattainment" (NA) is defined as the county being out of attainment with
the NAAQS for any pollutant in the year. All specifications include plant fixed effects, state-by-
year fixed effects and fuel-type-by-year fixed effects. The specification considered in Column 5
additionally includes utility-by-state-by-year fixed effects, noting that this eliminates the need to
include state-by-year fixed effects. For Column 2, we keep only plants with capacity in the year they
were built greater than the 25% of the plant-level distribution of initial capacities. Column 3 focuses
only on coal-fired plants. Column 5 drops plants located in the ten states that had state-level air
quality standards by 1966 ­ California, Colorado, Delaware, Missouri, Montana, New York, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Texas (Stern, 1982). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way
clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level.




                                                84
Table D.3: Results of the Goodman-Bacon Decomposition for First Nonattainment

                                      (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
 Dep. Var. (in Logs)                 Output     PU-TFP      Fuel Use    No. Employees      Capacity

 Panel A. Strongly Balanced for 10 Years Before and After 1972
 Overall DD Estimate               -0.133    -0.035     0.062                -0.027          -0.101

 DD Est.: T vs. Never Treated         -0.172      -0.052      0.099          -0.016          -0.128
 DD Est.: Earlier T vs. Later C       -0.157      -0.010       0.041         -0.109          -0.135
 DD Est.: Later T vs. Earlier C        0.061      -0.011      -0.049          0.066           0.056

 Weights: T vs. Never Treated          0.597      0.597       0.597          0.597           0.597
 Weights: Earlier T vs. Later C        0.251      0.251       0.251          0.251           0.251
 Weights: Later T vs. Earlier C        0.153      0.153       0.153          0.153           0.153

 Number of Obs.                        3,948      3,948       3,948          3,948           3,948
 Number of Plants                       188        188         188            188             188
 Notes: This table reports the output from running the Goodman-Bacon decomposition on panel
 regressions of first nonattainment on outcomes (Goodman-Bacon, 2018). The unit of observation
 for these panel regressions is plant-year, and these regressions include plant fixed effects and year
 fixed effects. We consider only existing plants built before 1972. For all specifications, "first nonat-
 tainment" is an indicator variable that is equal to one for each year on or after the first year that
 the plant faced nonattainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant. The Goodman-Bacon method
 decomposes the overall difference-in-differences ("DD") effect of first nonattainment into three com-
 ponents: (i) counties that ever face nonattainment versus counties that never face nonattainment
 during our 1938-1994 sample period ("T vs. Never Treated"), (ii) counties that first face nonattain-
 ment earlier, using counties first facing nonattainment later as controls ("Earlier T vs. Later C"),
 and (iii) counties that first face nonattainment later, using counties first facing nonattainment earlier
 as controls ("Later T vs. Earlier C"). For each component, the decomposition provides both the
 DD estimate and the weight of this estimate in calculating the overall DD estimate. The overall DD
 estimate is reported in the first row of results in each panel. The decomposition requires a strongly
 balanced panel. To construct this, we include only plants with consecutive observations for 10 years
 before and after 1972. We also only consider observations in the 10 years before and after 1972.
 Plant-year observations must have data listed for output, electricity generating capacity, number of
 employees, and input energy for the whole 20 year span in order to be included.




                                                 85
Table D.4: Impacts of Nonattainment on PU-TFP Estimated Using Alternative
                   Production Functions and Specifications

  Dep. Var.: Log PU-TFP                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)

  NA × 1[Built Before 1963]                  -0.180        -0.168       -0.130       -0.120
                                              (0.050)       (0.047)      (0.045)      (0.044)

  NA × 1[Built Between 1963-1971]              0.017         -0.007       0.024        0.004
                                              (0.074)       (0.074)      (0.075)      (0.076)

  R2                                          0.603          0.606       0.609        0.625
  Mean of Dep. Var.                           -0.562        -1.900       0.411        -0.147
  Number of Obs.                              21,767        21,535       21,767       21,535
  Number of Plants                             687            687         687          687
  Plant FE                                      Y              Y           Y            Y
  State By Year FE                              Y              Y           Y            Y
  Fuel Type By Year FE                          Y              Y           Y            Y
  Vintage Group By Year FE                      Y              Y           Y            Y
  Functional Form                            Translog      Translog       CD           CD
  Estimation Method                            ACF           ACF          ACF          ACF
  Includes Nonfuel Expenses                                    Y                        Y
Notes: This table presents estimates of the impact of nonattainment on pollution-unadjusted total
factor productivity (PU-TFP). The unit of observation for these regressions is plant-year, considering
only plants built before 1972. We estimate separate effects for plants built before 1963 and plants
built between 1963-1971. For all specifications, "nonattainment" (NA) is defined as the county being
out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in the year. We estimate PU-TFP using the
methodology developed by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015). The first two columns estimate
PU-TFP assuming that the function relating capital and labor to output is translog while the next
two columns are based on the assumption that this function is Cobb-Douglas (CD). Finally, the even
columns include nonfuel expenditures as a measure of materials when estimating PU-TFP while the
odd columns estimate PU-TFP without including any measure of materials. Standard errors in
parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                               86
Table D.5: Impacts of Nonattainment on Power Plant Outcomes by Primary Fuel Type

                                      (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)
    Dep. Var. (in Logs)              Output     PU-TFP       Fuel Use    No. Employees     Capacity

    NA × 1[Coal Plant]              -0.288      -0.159      -0.228          -0.103         -0.153
                                     (0.083)     (0.054)     (0.077)         (0.040)        (0.051)

    NA × 1[Oil Plant]                 -0.069      -0.049      0.015           0.046          -0.122
                                     (0.192)     (0.092)     (0.198)         (0.125)        (0.148)

    NA × 1[Gas Plant]                 -0.102     -0.173       0.071          0.116           -0.010
                                     (0.115)     (0.094)     (0.112)         (0.059)        (0.068)

    R2                               0.818        0.604       0.747          0.860           0.912
    Mean of Dep. Var.                 6.730       -0.562       9.155          4.489           5.462
    Number of Obs.                   21,767       21,767      21,767         21,767          21,767
    Number of Plants                   687         687          687            687             687
    Plant FE                            Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
    State By Year FE                    Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
    Fuel Type By Year FE                Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
    Vintage Group By Year FE            Y           Y            Y              Y               Y
   Number of Plants by Primary Fuel Type: Focusing on plants built before 1972, there are 421 coal-
   fired plants, 70 oil-fired plants, and 196 gas-fired plants.
   Notes: This table measures how annual plant-level outcomes change with nonattainment interacted
   with three bins associated with whether the primary fuel burned by the plant was coal, natural gas,
   or oil. The fuel type is specified as "primary" if the plant's aggregate total heat input in mmBTU
   from the fuel type divided by the plant's aggregate total heat input in mmBTU from all fuel types is
   greater than 1/3. For all specifications, "nonattainment" (NA) is defined as the county being out of
   attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in the year. PU-TFP stands for pollution-unadjusted
   total factor productivity. The unit of observation for these regressions is plant-year, considering only
   plants built before 1972. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year.
   *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                   87
 Table D.6: Impacts of Nonattainment on Plant Outcomes By Pollutant Standard

                                    (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)                (5)
Dep. Var. (in Logs)                Output       PU-TFP       Fuel Use     No. Employees         Capacity

NA: TSP or PM                        -0.030       -0.051       -0.031           0.013             0.010
                                    (0.038)      (0.034)      (0.046)          (0.025)           (0.029)

NA: SO2                              -0.045       -0.021       -0.008           -0.013            -0.032
                                    (0.084)      (0.055)      (0.079)          (0.039)           (0.048)

NA: CO                              -0.165        -0.031       -0.090         -0.121            -0.141
                                    (0.095)      (0.061)      (0.087)          (0.045)          (0.054)

NA: O3 or NO2                      -0.155       -0.137         -0.081           0.003             -0.058
                                   (0.064)       (0.049)      (0.063)          (0.032)           (0.041)

R2                                  0.818        0.604        0.746             0.860            0.912
Mean of Dep. Var.                   6.730        -0.562       9.155             4.489            5.462
Number of Obs.                      21,767       21,767       21,767            21,767           21,767
Number of Plants                     687          687          687               687              687
Plant FE                              Y            Y            Y                 Y                Y
State By Year FE                      Y            Y            Y                 Y                Y
Fuel Type By Year FE                  Y            Y            Y                 Y                Y
Vintage Group By Year FE              Y            Y            Y                 Y                Y
  Notes: This table presents our regression results measuring how annual plant-level outcomes change
  when the county this plant is located in moves in and out of compliance with the NAAQS associated
  with each of four sets of pollutants: total suspended particulates or particulate matter (TSP or
  PM), sulfur dioxide (SO2 ), carbon monoxide (CO), and nitrogen dioxide or ozone (NO2 or O3 ).
  There are separate standards for O3 and NO2 , but we group these two standards together because
  the vast majority of counties that were in nonattainment for NO2 were also in nonattainment for
  O3 . PU-TFP stands for pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity, and NA for nonattainment.
  The unit of observation for these regressions is plant-year, considering only plants built before 1972.
  Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical
  significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                  88
Table D.7: Impacts of Nonattainment on Outcomes by First Year in Nonattainment

                                      (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)
Dep. Var. (in Logs)                  Output      PU-TFP       Fuel Use     No. Employees        Capacity

NA × First NA in 1972-1977          -0.260       -0.171        -0.157            -0.048         -0.139
                                     (0.068)      (0.047)      (0.065)          (0.033)          (0.044)

NA × First NA in 1978-1983            0.101        -0.068       0.136           0.142             0.128
                                     (0.140)      (0.115)      (0.123)          (0.076)          (0.098)

NA × First NA in 1984-1994            0.058        0.146        0.047            -0.015           0.068
                                     (0.253)      (0.186)      (0.253)          (0.251)          (0.115)

R2                                    0.818        0.605        0.747           0.860             0.913
Mean of Dep. Var.                     6.730       -0.562        9.155           4.489             5.462
Number of Obs.                       21,767       21,767       21,767           21,767           21,767
Number of Plants                       687          687          687             687               687
Plant FE                                Y            Y            Y               Y                 Y
State By Year FE                        Y            Y            Y               Y                 Y
Fuel Type By Year FE                    Y            Y            Y               Y                 Y
Vintage Group by Year FE                Y            Y            Y               Y                 Y
  Notes: This table measures how annual plant-level outcomes change with nonattainment interacted
  with three bins associated with whether the first year that the county the plant was located in went
  out of nonattainment was in 1972-1977, 1978-1983 or 1984-1994. For all specifications, "nonattain-
  ment" (NA) is defined as the county being out of attainment with the NAAQS for any pollutant in
  the year. PU-TFP stands for pollution-unadjusted total factor productivity. The unit of observa-
  tion for these regressions is plant-year, considering only plants built before 1972. Standard errors
  in parentheses are two-way clustered by county and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the
  1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.




                                                89
Table D.8: Impact of Proportion of Counties in Nonattainment on State-Level Capacity

                                    (1)                                 (2)                    (3)         (4)
 Dep. Var.: Capacity (in MW) Fossil Fuel: ST                  Fossil Fuel: GT or CC          Nuclear      Hydro

 Prop. in Nonattainment                     3972.5                    1321.3                1450.4        -501.5
                                            (2182.9)                   (491.2)              (713.2)      (948.7)

 R2                                           0.687                     0.581                 0.539       0.705
 Mean of Dep. Var.                           4,249.4                    588.3                 607.1      1,087.9
 Number of Obs.                               2,736                     2,736                 2,736       2,736
 Number of States                               48                        48                   48           48
 State FE                                       Y                         Y                     Y           Y
 Year FE                                        Y                         Y                     Y           Y
   Notes: This table presents estimates of the impact of annual state-level proportion of counties in
   nonattainment on annual state-level electricity generating capacity. Specifically, the independent
   variable of interest is the population-weighted proportion of counties in the state in nonattainment
   with the NAAQS for any pollutant in each year. The unit of observation for these regressions
   is state-year, excluding Alaska and Hawaii. All specifications include state fixed effects and year
   fixed effects. The dependent variable considered in Columns 1, 2, 3 and 4 is the annual state-level
   electricity generating capacity aggregating over fossil-fuel-fired sources using either steam turbines or
   internal combustion, fossil-fuel-fired sources using either gas turbines or a combined-cycle technology,
   nuclear sources, and hydro sources respectively. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered
   by state and year. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at
   the 10% level.




                                                   90
