                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               RACIAL DIVERSITY AND RACIAL POLICY PREFERENCES:
                    THE GREAT MIGRATION AND CIVIL RIGHTS

                                        Alvaro Calderon
                                         Vasiliki Fouka
                                        Marco Tabellini

                                      Working Paper 28965
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28965


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021


We thank Alberto Alesina, Sam Bazzi, Leah Boustan, Davide Cantoni, Melissa Dell, Ryan Enos,
Silvia Farina, Nicola Fontana, Jeff Frieden, Nicola Gennaioli, Luigi Guiso, Petra Moser, Markus
Nagler, Gerard Padro i Miquel, John Parman, Torsten Persson, Vincent Pons, Jim Snyder, Evan
Taylor, Gaspare Tortorici, Nico Voigtlaender, Matt Weinzierl, Gavin Wright and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Bocconi, Bologna, CEMFI, CGM Pitt Race and Identity Seminar,
George Mason, EIEF, Harvard, LMU, LSE, Northwestern Economic History Lunch, Nottingham,
PSE Migration Seminar, Rochester, Stanford, UBC, UCSD, UPF, Virtual Seminars in Economic
History, Warwick, the Atlanta 2019 EHA Annual Meetings, the Galatina Summer Meetings, the
2021 ERINN Conferences, the Tilburg Symposium on Social Cohesion, the Yale Politics and
History Conference, and the 2020 Virtual World Congress of the Econometric Society for useful
comments. We are grateful to Eric Schickler and Kathryn Pearson for sharing with us data on
signatures on discharge petitions, and to James Gregory for sharing datasets on NAACP presence
and CORE non-violent demonstrations. Silvia Farina, Ludovica Mosillo, Monia Tomasella,
Francesca Bramucci, Pier Paolo Creanza, Martina Cuneo, Federico Mattei, Sarah O'Brein, Gisela
Salim Peyer, Federico Scabbia, and Arjun Shah provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alvaro Calderon, Vasiliki Fouka, and Marco Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Racial Diversity and Racial Policy Preferences: The Great Migration and Civil Rights
Alvaro Calderon, Vasiliki Fouka, and Marco Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 28965
June 2021
JEL No. D72,J15,N92

                                          ABSTRACT

Between 1940 and 1970, more than 4 million African Americans moved from the South to the
North of the United States, during the Second Great Migration. This same period witnessed the
struggle and eventual success of the civil rights movement in ending institutionalized racial
discrimination. This paper shows that the Great Migration and support for civil rights are causally
linked. Predicting Black inflows with a shift-share instrument, we find that the Great Migration
increased support for the Democratic Party and encouraged pro-civil rights activism in northern
and western counties. These effects were not only driven by Black voters, but also by progressive
and working class segments of the white population. We identify the salience of conditions
prevailing in the South, measured through increased reporting of southern lynchings in northern
newspapers, as a possible channel through which the Great Migration increased whites' support
for civil rights. Mirroring the changes in the electorate, non-southern Congress members became
more likely to promote civil rights legislation, but also grew increasingly polarized along party
lines on racial issues.

Alvaro Calderon                                  Marco Tabellini
Department of Economics                          Harvard Business School
Stanford University                              279 Morgan Hall
579 Jane Stanford Way                            Soldiers Field Road
Stanford, CA 94305                               Boston, MA 02163
acald@nber.org                                   and CEPR
                                                 mtabellini@hbs.edu
Vasiliki Fouka
Stanford University
Department of Political Science
616 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and CEPR
and also NBER
vfouka@stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28965
1       Introduction
Racial inequality is a pervasive feature of US society, encompassing most of its domains
­ from earnings to employment opportunities, from intergenerational mobility to in-
carceration rates.1 One of the potential causes of the racial gap and of its unwavering
persistence is the lack of political empowerment of Black Americans who, for a major
part of American history, have been denied even the most fundamental civil right in
a democracy, namely the right to vote. Black political oppression was particularly
strong in the US South. Writing in 1944, Swedish economist and Nobel Prize winner
Gunnar Myrdal argued that migrating outside the region represented the most eective
strategy for Black Americans to achieve racial equality and finally gain political rights
(Myrdal, 1944). According to Myrdal, "[t]he average Northerner does not understand
the reality and the eects of such [Southern] discriminations", and "[t]o get publicity
is of the highest strategic importance to [Blacks]".
    Around the time of Myrdal's statement, many African Americans had already
started to move from the South to the North and West of the US, hoping to reach
a "Promised Land" (Boustan, 2016) and to leave behind them the system of disenfran-
chisement, violence, and discrimination perpetuated by the infamous Jim Crow laws.
Eventually, more than 4 million Black Americans migrated between 1940 and 1970 in
what is known as the Second Great Migration (henceforth, Great Migration).
    The Great Migration temporally coincided with the development and eventual suc-
cess of the civil rights movement ­ a turning point in the history of race relations,
which culminated in the passage of the Civil and Voting Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965.
Given the resistance of southern politicians to extend the franchise to Black Americans,
northern legislators and grassroots organizations based in the North, such as the Na-
tional Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the Congress
of Racial Equality (CORE), played a key role in the process of enfranchisement (Law-
son, 1976). Was Myrdal right? Did northward migration allow African Americans to
gain political power?
    In this paper, we study this question, analyzing the political eects of Black in-
migration to the US North and West between 1940 and 1970. First, we examine how
the Great Migration aected demand for civil rights and racial equality among northern
    1
    See, among others, recent works by Bayer and Charles (2018) and Chetty et al. (2020). Previous important
contributions on this topic include Smith and Welch (1989) and Neal and Johnson (1996). See also the review
in Altonji and Blank (1999).



                                                     1
voters. We measure support for civil rights in several ways, but use as main proxies
the Democratic vote share in Congressional elections and the frequency of non-violent
pro-civil rights demonstrations organized by grassroots organizations in the North.
Even though the Democratic Party was openly segregationist and stubbornly defended
white supremacy in the South until the early 1960s (Kuziemko and Washington, 2018;
Lawson, 1976), by the end of the 1930s in the North and West it had unambiguously
become the party defending Black people's interests and pushing for racial equality
(Schickler, 2016; Wasow, 2020).2 Second, we analyze the eects of Black in-migration
on the ideology and behavior of members of the House on race-related issues.
    The political eects of the Great Migration are far from obvious. On the one hand,
recent work in economics has documented that the Great Migration had substantial
negative eects on African Americans in the long run. Black in-migration to northern
cities increased racial residential segregation, as white residents fled urban areas for the
suburbs (Boustan, 2010). In turn, whites' residential choices, coupled with changes in
the allocation of local public goods away from education and towards policing, dras-
tically limited opportunities for economic and social mobility of African Americans
(Derenoncourt, 2018). Racial residential segregation and lower economic opportuni-
ties may have been accompanied by whites' political backlash, which reduced Black
Americans' political e cacy.
    On the other hand, the Great Migration might have promoted Black Americans'
political empowerment for at least two reasons. First, around 1940, Black individuals
were de facto or de jure prevented from voting in most southern states (Cascio and
Washington, 2014), whereas no restrictions to their political participation existed in
the North. The inflow of Black voters may have thus shifted northern politicians' in-
centives to introduce civil rights legislation. Second, Black arrivals may have moved
the preferences of at least some white voters in a more liberal direction. This might
have happened either because the Great Migration increased whites' awareness of the
conditions prevailing in the South, as envisioned by Myrdal (1944), or because pro-
gressive segments of the Democratic coalition saw an opportunity to jointly promote
racial equality and economic goals by forming a cross-race alliance, as suggested by
the political science literature (Adams, 1966; Frymer and Grumbach, 2020; Schickler,
2016).
   2
     Below, we corroborate this idea providing evidence consistent with the existing literature (Feinstein and
Schickler, 2008; Schickler, 2016). On party realignment during this historical period, see also Caughey et al.
(2020).



                                                      2
    To study the political eects of the Great Migration we estimate stacked first dif-
ference regressions, controlling for state time-varying unobservable characteristics, and
allowing counties to be on dierential trends depending on their initial Black share and
political conditions. To further account for potentially endogenous migration, we con-
struct a version of the shift-share instrument (Card, 2001; Boustan, 2010) that assigns
Black outflows from each southern state to northern counties based on pre-existing
settlements of African Americans outside the South.
    The shift-share instrument combines two separate sources of variation. First, it
leverages time-series variation in Black emigration rates from dierent southern states
for each decade between 1940 and 1970. Second, it allocates those southern outflows
to northern counties based on the "mix" ­ in terms of southern state composition ­ of
Black individuals living there in 1940. Since we always condition on the 1940 Black
share of the population, the instrument only exploits variation in the composition of
Black migrants across southern states over time.
    Several recent papers discuss identification in shift-share designs (Adao et al., 2019;
Borusyak et al., 2021; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020; Jaeger et al., 2018). As formal-
ized in Borusyak et al. (2021), a large number of shocks across southern counties that
are orthogonal to the evolution of the political landscape in northern counties would
represent a su cient condition for the shift-share instrument to be valid. We construct
versions of the instrument for which these conditions are likely to hold, and show that
our results are unchanged when using these alternative designs.
    First, as in Boustan (2010), we exploit only variation in local push factors across
southern counties to predict Black outflows from the South.3 Second, similar to
Derenoncourt (2018), we construct a version of the instrument based on a linked sample
of Black migrants between 1910 and 1930 from Abramitzky et al. (2020), which allows
us to use a county-to-county migration matrix to construct "initial shares" for early
Black residents in the US North. This instrument rests on variation in predicted mi-
gration ­ based on factors plausibly exogenous to political change in northern counties
­ from more than 1,200 southern counties.4
    The alternative push instruments just described also mitigate concerns that pull
shocks in northern counties both influenced the local political landscape and caused
   3
     Examples of such plausibly exogenous push shocks are WWII spending or the mechanization of cotton,
which occurred in the 1950s and impacted southern counties dierentially depending on their 1940 cotton
acreage.
   4
     This strategy also assuages potential concerns over serial correlation in migration flows from the same
location to the same destination (Jaeger et al., 2018).


                                                     3
out-migration from southern states that already had large enclaves in those counties
before 1940. We provide further evidence against this idea in two ways. First, we
show that the instrument is uncorrelated with WWII spending and New Deal relief
programs (Boustan et al., 2010; Boustan, 2016). Second, we replicate the analysis
separately controlling for a measure of labor demand predicted using the 1940 industry
composition of northern counties.
    We conduct a number of additional robustness checks to address the possibility that
the characteristics of northern areas where a dierent mix of southern born African
Americans settled before 1940 had persistent eects both on changes in racial attitudes
and on migration patterns (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020). First, we document that
the instrument is not correlated with the pre-1940 change in political conditions across
northern counties. Second, we allow counties to be on dierential trends by interact-
ing period dummies with several 1940 local characteristics, such as the Black and the
urban share of the population, initial support for the Democratic Party, distance from
the Mason-Dixon line, geographic coordinates, and the employment share in manufac-
turing.
    Given existing evidence that the Great Migration caused "white flight" (Boustan,
2010; Shertzer and Walsh, 2019), we verify that Black inflows did not lead to white
out-migration or to changes in the composition of white residents at the county level.
These results are not in contrast with previous work (Boustan, 2010). Since county
boundaries do not overlap with city-suburbs divides, and counties often include both
central cities and suburban rings, changes in population triggered by Black inflows
occurred within (and not between) the jurisdictions considered in our analysis.
    Turning to our main results, we find that Black in-migration had a strong, positive
impact on the Democratic vote share in Congressional elections. Our estimates imply
that one percentage point increase in the Black share raised the Democratic vote share
by 1.8 percentage points, or 4% relative to the 1940 mean. This is a large eect: even
under the aggressive assumption that all Black migrants immediately voted for the
Democratic Party upon arrival, support for the Democrats must have increased among
northern residents because of Black inflows. Complementing our electoral results, we
find that Black arrivals increased both the frequency of non-violent pro-civil rights
demonstrations organized by CORE and the presence of local NAACP chapters.
    Consistent with the view that African Americans were quickly incorporated in the
political life of northern cities (Moon, 1948), we find that Black in-migration had a


                                           4
positive but quantitatively small impact on turnout. This indicates that Black inflows
likely induced existing voters to switch away from the GOP. Since not all Black resi-
dents were already voting for the Democratic Party in the early 1940s, some switchers
were African Americans. However, the magnitude of our estimates implies that some
segments of the white electorate likely joined the Democratic voting bloc as well. Using
a subset of the data on pro-civil rights demonstrations, which reports the race of par-
ticipants, we indeed find that not only Black but also white individuals joined pro-civil
rights demonstrations.
    We provide additional, suggestive evidence that Black in-migration increased sup-
port for civil rights among northern whites by using historical survey data. State level
cross-sectional regressions reveal that, in the years preceding the 1964 Civil Rights Act
(CRA), white respondents living in states that received more Black migrants between
1940 and 1960 held more favorable views on race relations, considered racial equality
as one of the most fundamental issues for the country, and were more likely to vote for
the Democratic Party.
    To understand which segments of the white electorate became more supportive of
civil rights, we explore heterogeneity patterns in our results. Focusing on pro-civil
rights demonstrations, we exploit variation in county 1940 composition and historical
characteristics. First, we document that CORE demonstrations were more frequent
where the share of whites employed in manufacturing was higher, where the presence
of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) ­ the main force behind industrial
unionism ­ was stronger, and where elections were more competitive. These places
may have oered fertile grounds for the formation of a liberal cross-race coalition along
political and economic lines, as discussed extensively in Schickler (2016). Consistent
with labor unions supporting a cross-race coalition only, or especially, when labor
markets were tight (Bailer, 1944), pro-civil rights demonstrations occurred only where
labor demand, predicted using a Bartik-style approach, was stronger.
    Second, we consider the possibility that the Great Migration raised support for
civil rights among socially progressive whites by increasing the salience of the "race
problem" and activating their latent demand for racial equality (Allport, 1954; Myrdal,
1944). We document that pro-civil rights demonstrations were concentrated in counties
with a history of lower racial discrimination. Dippel and Heblich (2021) show that the
presence of the Forty-Eighters ­ socialist leaders expelled from Germany to the US after
the failed revolution of 1848-1849 ­ had long-lasting eects on support for civil rights


                                           5
and racial equality. We find that CORE demonstrations increased more in counties
closer to the cities where the Forty-Eighters initially settled, where one would expect
Black arrivals to induce a stronger sensitization of the white electorate.
    To more rigorously test the "information mechanism" envisioned by Myrdal (1944),
we compiled the list of all known lynchings committed by white oenders against Black
Americans in the US South between 1940 and 1964. Then, we searched for such episodes
in local newspapers of non-southern counties, identifying them with the joint mention
of the name of the victim and the place of the lynching. By conducting a series of event
studies, we document that, in the weeks following a lynching, northern local newspapers
were more likely to report the episode in counties that had received more African
Americans in previous years. Results are driven by white newspapers, and the higher
reporting lasts for more than one month after a lynching. These patterns resonate with
the idea that the Great Migration increased the salience of racial oppression prevailing
in the South, thereby raising support for civil rights among at least some segments of
the white electorate.
    Our findings may seem at odds with the literature on white flight and the detrimen-
tal consequences that the latter had on Black migrants and their ospring in the long
run (Boustan, 2010; Derenoncourt, 2018).5 However, Black political empowerment and
white flight are not necessarily in contrast with each other. For one, there is extensive
evidence that the Great Migration did economically benefit Black migrants (Baran
et al., 2020; Boustan, 2016; Collins and Wanamaker, 2014). In addition, whites may
have supported civil rights, while at the same time moving from central cities to the
suburbs. From the lens of a Tiebout (1956) framework, whites may have expressed their
preferences regarding neighborhood-level diversity and school mixing with their feet,
while using the ballot box to express their more abstract ideological preferences about
racial equality. Supporting this conjecture, we show that whites living in counties with
higher 1940 residential segregation were more likely to both support civil rights and
create more school districts, potentially to separate themselves from incoming Black
migrants.6
    In the second part of the paper, we turn to the ideology and behavior on racial issues
of legislators representing non-southern congressional districts (CDs). Similar to Autor
   5
     The Great Migration also increased racial disparities in incarceration rates (Eriksson, 2019; Muller, 2012),
and worsened public finances in northern cities (Tabellini, 2018). See Collins (2021) for a thorough review.
   6
     Consistent with polarization within the white electorate, historical survey data also suggest that the Great
Migration increased support for racial equality among white Democrats, but reduced it among Republicans.



                                                       6
et al. (2020), we construct a cross-walk that matches counties to CDs, and develop a
procedure that assigns CD boundaries, which changed over time due to redistricting,
to the geography of a baseline, the 78th , Congress. We measure legislators' ideology
on race-related issues using the scores from Bateman et al. (2017), which are based
on past voting behavior on civil rights bills, and take more negative values for more
liberal ideology.
    We find that, over time, CDs that received more African Americans were repre-
sented by legislators with a more liberal ideology on racial issues who were also more
likely to sign discharge petitions aimed at promoting civil rights bills (Pearson and
Schickler, 2009; Schickler, 2016). These average eects, however, mask substantial het-
erogeneity, as legislators of either party became increasingly polarized on racial issues.
    Our results are related to the literature on the civil rights movement. Several
papers have studied the consequences of the Civil Rights and the Voting Rights Acts
(Aneja and Avenancio-Leon, 2019; Bernini et al., 2018; Cascio et al., 2010; Cascio
and Washington, 2014; Reber, 2011), while many others, building on Carmines and
Stimson (1989), have investigated the causes of the southern "dealignment" (Besley
et al., 2010; Kousser, 2010; Kuziemko and Washington, 2018; Trende, 2012; Wright,
2013). We contribute to this literature by examining one of the causes of the civil
rights movement, and showing that the Great Migration likely influenced the latter.
Our findings are also consistent with and complement Schickler (2016) and Grant
(2020) who, respectively, argue that the incorporation of African Americans into the
Democratic coalition after the New Deal and the rising pivotal role of Black voters
at the national level due to the Great Migration were important mechanisms behind
party realignment in American politics.
    We also complement the growing literature on the political eects of migration
and the broader literature on inter-group relations (Alesina and Tabellini, 2020). Sev-
eral papers find that immigration and a larger size of the minority group can lead
to backlash among natives or majority members (Arzheimer, 2009; Enos, 2016; Dust-
mann et al., 2019; Tabellini, 2020). We instead show that, under certain conditions,
inter-group contact can favor the formation of cross-race social or political coalitions,
raising demand for racial equality also among members of the majority group.7 Sev-
eral factors can explain the dierence between our findings and those in the existing
  7
   Our findings are consistent with those in Lowe (2021), Rao (2019), and Steinmayr (2020) from India and
Austria respectively. We complement them by providing evidence from the US and in an instance where group
boundaries are defined by race rather than by caste, income, or refugee status.



                                                   7
literature. First, as the evidence from newspapers' reporting of southern Black lynch-
ings suggests, Black in-migration likely increased whites' awareness of the conditions
prevailing in the South (Myrdal, 1944). Second, the civil rights legislation was, by and
large, about the South, and northern whites would have been only indirectly ­ if at
all ­ aected, at least before 1965. Third, labor unions had incentives to incorporate
African Americans in their rank and files (Adams, 1966; Bailer, 1944; Schickler, 2016),
forging a shared working class identity and pursuing common goals ­ conditions that
contributed to positive inter-group contact (Allport, 1954). Finally, our average eects
mask substantial heterogeneity, indicating that the Great Migration did not improve
racial attitudes among all northern whites, and led to higher polarization both among
voters and among legislators.
    Our work also speaks to the literature on the relationship between voters' demand
and politicians' behavior (Caughey and Warshaw, 2018; Jones and Walsh, 2018; Kroth
et al., 2016; Lott and Kenny, 1999; Mian et al., 2010; Miller, 2008). Closest to our paper,
Cascio and Washington (2014) document that the Voting Rights Act (VRA) shifted
the distribution of local spending across southern counties towards Black Americans'
preferences, once the latter became eligible to vote. We expand on their findings by
focusing on the US North rather than the South, and by analyzing one of the potential
causes, rather than consequences, of the VRA ­ i.e., the response of northern politicians
to the change in the characteristics, and thus in the demands, of their constituency
due to Black in-migration.
    Finally, we complement the vast literature on the Great Migration (Collins, 2021).
Although several papers in economics have studied the eects of the Great Migration
on whites' residential decisions, intergenerational mobility, immigrant assimilation, and
public finance (Boustan, 2010; Derenoncourt, 2018; Fouka et al., 2021; Shertzer and
Walsh, 2019; Tabellini, 2018), little evidence exists on its political eects.


2     Historical Background
2.1    The Great Migration
Between 1940 and 1970, more than 4 million African Americans left the US South
for northern and western destinations. This unprecedented migration episode is usu-
ally referred to as the Second Great Migration. From 1915 to 1930, the First Great
Migration brought to the North 1.5 million Black Americans. However, the Second

                                            8
Great Migration ­ from now onwards the Great Migration ­ was substantially larger
in magnitude and had more profound implications for American politics and race rela-
tions (Boustan, 2016). Most Black migrants moved to urban centers in the Northeast
and mid-West, but the Great Migration was a geographically widespread phenomenon,
which aected also the West and less urbanized areas outside the South (Figure 1).8
    Black migrants were pulled to the North and West by economic opportunities and
pushed out of the South by racial oppression, political disenfranchisement, and poor
working conditions (Boustan, 2016). On the one hand, the outbreak of WWII increased
demand for labor in northern and western factories, raising the potential gains from
migration. Even after the WWII-related labor demand shock was over, higher expecta-
tions of upward social and economic mobility kept attracting African Americans to the
North at least until the late 1960s. On the other hand, widespread violence and dis-
enfranchisement, together with a separate and unequal school system, provided strong
incentives for Black Americans to leave the South (Feigenbaum et al., 2020; Margo,
1991). Moreover, the mechanization of agricultural harvest in the 1940s and 1950s re-
duced demand for labor in the already depressed southern agricultural sector, further
increasing the pool of prospective migrants (Grove and Heinicke, 2003; Whatley, 1985).
    Out-migration from the South was strongest during the 1940s, with a Black emi-
gration rate of almost 15%, but remained high until the late 1960s (Figure A.1). As a
consequence of this migration episode, during which the US South lost 40% of its 1940
Black population, the racial profile of the United States changed dramatically. While
only 25% of African Americans were living outside the South in 1940, this figure had
increased to more than 50% by 1970. On average, the Black share of the population in
northern and western cities moved from less than 4% to more than 15% in just three
decades. These numbers were an order of magnitude higher for main hubs like Chicago,
Detroit, or St. Louis, where the Black share moved from 8, 9, and 11% to 32, 43, and
41% respectively (Gibson and Jung, 2005).9
   8
     When defining the US South, we follow the Census classification but, as in Boustan (2010), we exclude
Maryland and Delaware ­ two states that received net Black inflows during the Great Migration (Table A.1).
As Figure 1 makes clear, most California's counties are missing from our sample due to the lack of data on
Congressional elections at the county level for this historical period. We return to this point in Section 3 and
in Appendix D.
   9
     In rural counties, the Black share remained substantially lower and rarely exceeded 2 or 3%.




                                                       9
2.2      Black Migrants and Northern Politics
The demographic change induced by the Great Migration had the potential to alter
the political equilibrium, especially in industrial and urban centers. In the US South,
Black Americans faced de jure disenfranchisement through the use of literacy tests,
poll taxes, and grandfather clauses (Cascio and Washington, 2014; Lawson, 1976).
On the contrary, they could, and in fact did, vote in the North (Moon, 1948). The
literature on social movements has documented that the enfranchisement of Black
migrants increased both the organizational capacity of the civil rights movement and
pressure on local politicians (McAdam, 1982). During the First Great Migration, both
Democrats and Republicans had tried to include African Americans in their voting
bloc. However, since the New Deal, the Democratic Party had emerged as the party
better equipped to address the demands of Black Americans outside the US South
(Caughey et al., 2020; Schickler, 2016).
    Figure A.2 plots the share of northern Democrats (blue bars) and Republicans (red
bars) voting in favor of civil rights bills between Congresses 78 and 88 (see Table A.2 for
the detailed list of bills). Both in the 1940s and in the 1950s, Democrats in the North
were more likely to support civil rights bills.10 Using data from Pearson and Schickler
(2009), Figure A.4 confirms these patterns by focusing on signatures on pro-civil rights
discharge petitions ­ another, more direct, measure of legislators' commitment to racial
equality (Schickler, 2016).11 Non-southern Democratic Congress members were at least
30 percentage points more likely than their Republican counterparts to sign a discharge
petition to promote civil rights legislation between Congress 78 and Congress 82. The
gap rose to more than 50 percentage points in the following decade (Table A.3).
    Northern Black residents were significantly more likely to support the Democratic
Party. Existing evidence indicates that at least 70% of registered Black voters outside
the South were voting Democratic already in 1936 ­ a share that gradually increased
over time (Bositis, 2012). Democrats also benefited from the behavior of labor unions
­ the CIO in particular ­ that, since the late 1930s, started to actively incorporate
African Americans in their ranks.12 This represented a shift away from the segrega-
  10
     Figure A.3 documents that the pattern is reversed once the US South is included.
  11
     At a time when southern Democrats could block any proposed civil rights-related bill even before it reached
the floor of the House, discharge petitions were filed by northern legislators to circumvent congressional
committees, and move bills to the floor for a vote (Beth et al., 2003). For more details see Section 3 and
Appendix C.
  12
     Using data from Gallup, Farber et al. (2021) document that, while non-southern white men were signifi-
cantly more likely than Black men to be union members in 1940, this pattern had been reversed by 1960.



                                                      10
tionist practices prevailing before 1940, and was not true for all unions.13 Abundant
anecdotal evidence exists that labor unions openly endorsed civil rights and backed
African Americans in their fight for racial equality (Adams, 1966; Bailer, 1944). For
instance, CIO leader J. Brophy declared in 1944 that "behind every lynching is the
figure of the labor exploiter...who would deny labor its fundamental rights". Similarly,
in 1942 Walter Reuther, a highly influential figure in the United Automobile Workers
(UAW), declared that "...[racial discrimination] must be put on top of the list with
union security and other major union demands" (Zieger, 2000). In line with these
statements, evidence from the Congressional Quarterly Almanac shows that, for the
42 cases in which the NAACP took a clear position on a proposed piece of legislation
between 1946 and 1955, the CIO openly took the very same position in 38 cases, and
never took a position conflicting with that of the NAACP (Schickler, 2016). As a result,
a class-based coalition, pushing for both racial and economic liberalism, emerged. This
gave additional leverage to Black activists and organizations such as the NAACP and
the CORE to exert pressure on northern Democrats to pursue the civil rights agenda.


3       Data
This section briefly describes the key outcomes of the paper. Appendix B presents
the time-invariant cross-walk used to map counties to CDs, fixing CD boundaries to
the baseline Congress of 1944 (Congress 78). Appendix C provides a more detailed
description of all data sources.
Demand for civil rights. We measure demand for civil rights using two main out-
comes: the Democratic vote share in Congressional elections, and the frequency of
pro-civil rights demonstrations. We complement these with data on the local presence
of NAACP chapters, on whites' attitudes obtained from the American National Elec-
tion Studies (ANES) and Gallup public opinion polls, and on references to lynchings
against Black Americans occurring in the US South reported in non-southern local
newspapers. Our focus on the Democratic vote share in Congressional elections is
motivated by the fact that, by 1940, Democrats had become the main supporters of
racial equality outside the US South (see Section 2.2) and that such support was more
likely to emerge in Congressional rather than Presidential elections (Caughey et al.,
 13
      For instance, the American Federation of Labor (AFL) remained openly segregationist.




                                                     11
2020; Schickler, 2016).14 To more directly capture demand for racial equality, we use
the dataset assembled by Gregory and Hermida (2019) combining a variety of sources
on the number of non-violent demonstrations organized between 1942 and 1970 by the
CORE ­ a major inter-racial civil rights organizations that coordinated sit-ins and
similar forms of civil disobedience.
Supply of civil rights. To measure legislators' support for civil rights we use the
ideology scores from Bateman et al. (2017) and signatures on discharge petitions to
promote civil rights legislation from Pearson and Schickler (2009). Ideology scores are a
function of legislators' past voting behavior on race-related bills and, as the commonly
used DW Nominate scores (Poole and Rosenthal, 1985), take more negative (resp.
positive) values for more liberal (resp. conservative) positions. Discharge petitions
represented an eective tool at the disposal of non-southern legislators for overcoming
the gatekeeping behavior of southern Democrats. The latter ­ due to the seniority
system prevailing at the time ­ frequently controlled committees that could block bills
aimed at increasing racial equality before they reached the floor of the House (Schickler,
2016).15
   Our final dataset is composed of the 1,263 non-southern counties (and, for the
analysis on legislators, 285 CDs) for which all outcomes are available for all Census
years. Since data on Congressional elections are not available for all years in several
counties in California, our baseline analysis excludes most of the state (Figures 1 and
A.5). Reassuringly, Appendix D shows that all results are unchanged when considering
the unbalanced sample, which includes California.
   Table 1 presents summary statistics for our main variables, reporting 1940 levels in
Panel A and their (decadal) changes in Panel B. The Black share in the average county
in our sample was around 3.5% in 1940, and increased to almost 9% in 1970 (not
shown). These average values, however, mask substantial heterogeneity. Figure A.5
plots the 1940 Black share for the counties in our sample, and shows that, in 1940,
Black migrants living outside the South were concentrated in the urban centers of the
Northeast and the Midwest, in border states, and in the Southwest. In 1940, the Black
share was already as high as 8% in Cook County (IL), and rose to 21.5% by 1970.
Similarly, the Black share in Philadelphia County (PA) increased from around 12% in
  14
    Data on Congressional elections come from Clubb et al. (1990). See Appendix C for more details.
  15
    If a proposed bill remained stuck in the Rules Committee (resp. a legislative committee) for more than
seven (resp. twenty) days, a discharge petition could be filed and, were it to receive at least 218 signatures,
the bill could move to the floor of the House (Beth et al., 2003).



                                                      12
1940 to almost 35% in 1970, whereas that in Clark County (NV) rose from less than
3% to about 10% during the same period (Figure A.6).
    The 1940 Democratic vote share in Congressional elections was on average 46.5%;
in the 78th Congress, civil rights scores were on average negative (-0.87), indicating
that northern legislators were relatively liberal on racial issues already by 1940. The
average decadal change in ideology scores was very close to zero, even though this masks
important dierences both between parties and between Congress periods (Bateman
et al., 2017; Schickler, 2016). Signatures on discharge petitions were significantly more
common in the 78th - 82nd than in the 83rd - 88th Congress period (Table A.4), and
their subjects changed markedly over time. While the poll tax and anti-discrimination
employment (FECP) legislation were the most common topics during the 1940s, 5 of
the 8 discharge petitions filed between the 83rd and the 88th Congress concerned the
CRA.16


4        Empirical Strategy
4.1        Estimating Equation
Our empirical analysis is divided in two parts. First, we estimate the eects of the
Great Migration on demand for civil rights legislation; second, we analyze the response
of northern legislators to changes in the composition and preferences of their electorate.
To be clear: we do not attempt to isolate the impact of changes in voters' demand, due
to Black inflows, on legislators' behavior. In fact, both parties likely re-optimized their
platforms strategically because of the Great Migration, in turn influencing the actions
of voters ­ both Black and white. Our goal is instead to estimate the "reduced form"
eect of Black in-migration on voters' demand and politicians' supply without taking
a stance on how the two influenced each other.
    Starting from the demand side and stacking the data for the three decades between
1940 and 1970, we estimate

                                     y c =    s   +     Blc + Xc + uc                                         (1)

where yc is the change in the outcome of interest in county c during decade  . When
focusing on electoral outcomes, yc refers to the Democratic vote share and turnout in
 16
      See Appendix C for the list of discharge petitions on civil rights by topic and Congress (Table C.1).


                                                       13
Congressional elections. When considering grassroots activism, yc is the probability
of pro-civil rights demonstrations organized by the CORE and the presence of local
NAACP chapters. In order to identify the eects for the average county, we weigh
regressions by 1940 county population, but results are robust to estimating unweighted
regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
    The key regressor of interest, Blc , is the change in the Black share in county c
during decade  . s includes interactions between decade and state dummies, and Xc
is a vector of interactions between decade dummies and 1940 county characteristics.
Our preferred specification includes the 1940 Black share and a dummy equal to one
for Democratic incumbency in 1940 Congressional elections. In Appendix D, we add
more interactions to probe the robustness of our results. Since equation (1) is taken in
stacked first dierences and always controls for interactions between period and state
dummies, the coe cient of interest, , is estimated from changes in the Black share
within the same county over time, as compared to other counties in the same state in
a given period.
    Turning to the supply of civil rights, c no longer refers to the county but, instead,
to the CD.17 When considering ideology scores, we restrict attention to two ­ rather
than three ­ periods, so as to end our analysis with the Congress that passed the CRA
(Congress 88). Instead, for signatures on discharge petitions, we are forced to estimate
equation (1) only for the 78-82 Congress period, when a su cient number of petitions
were filed both at the beginning and at the end of the decade.


4.2      Instrument for Changes in Black Population
The key empirical challenge for our analysis is that Black migrants might have sorted
in places that were already undergoing economic and political changes. To overcome
these and similar concerns, we predict Black inflows in northern area c during decade
 using a version of the shift-share instrument commonly adopted in the migration
literature (Boustan, 2010; Card, 2001). The instrument predicts the change in the
Black population in county c during decade  by interacting the share of Black migrants
born in southern state j and living in northern county c in 1940 (relative to all Black
migrants born in state j living outside that state in 1940), shjc , with the number of
Black migrants who left state j during period  , Blj  :
  17
    We construct a time-invariant unit, described in Appendix B, to deal with redistricting. Regressions are
weighed by CD population, and standard errors are clustered at the CD level.



                                                    14
                                          X
                                 Zc =              shjc Blj                           (2)
                                        j 2South

Since we are interested in the eects of changes in the Black share, we scale Zc by
1940 county population.
    As discussed in Boustan (2010) among others, Black settlements in the North were
highly persistent over time. At the turn of the twentieth century, as African Amer-
icans started to move northwards, migration patterns were influenced by the newly
constructed railroad network. For instance, the presence of the Illinois Central, which
connected several Mississippi counties to Chicago and a number of southern railroads
to northern hubs in Missouri and Illinois, explains why Black migrants from Mississippi
were disproportionately concentrated in Chicago or St. Louis (Grossman, 1991). The
stability of Black enclaves was further reinforced by the process of chain migration
during the First Great Migration (Collins and Wanamaker, 2015). Figure A.7 plots
the share of Black migrants born in Alabama, Mississippi, and Texas living in selected
northern counties in 1940, documenting the wide variation in settlement patterns across
both destination and origin areas.

4.2.1   Identifying Assumptions and Instrument Validity

Several recent papers discuss the conditions for the validity of shift-share designs (Adao
et al., 2019; Borusyak et al., 2021; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020; Jaeger et al., 2018).
One way to express the identifying assumption behind the instrument is as follows.
Conditional on controls, third factors aecting the trajectories of political conditions
after 1940 must not be simultaneously correlated with both: i) the 1940 mix, in terms
of southern state of origin, of Black enclaves across non-southern counties, and ii)
emigration rates from dierent southern states after 1940.
    As formalized in Borusyak et al. (2021), a large number of shocks that are or-
thogonal to changes in outcomes in the destination (in our setting, support for racial
equality in non-southern counties) guarantee the validity of the shift-share design. Our
instrument combines actual out-migration flows with a (southern) state to (northern)
county migration matrix. For these reasons, we cannot immediately invoke the result
in Borusyak et al. (2021). However, as described in detail in Appendix D, we verify
that our results are unchanged when using versions of the instrument that are likely
to meet the conditions in Borusyak et al. (2021).


                                            15
    First, as in Boustan (2010), we replace actual out-migration from southern states
with that estimated by exploiting only conditions across southern counties (and then
aggregated up to the state level), such as WWII spending, 1940 cotton acreage, and
1940 employment share in agriculture, manufacturing, and mining.18 Second, and
similar to Derenoncourt (2018), we develop an alternative version of the shift-share
instrument, based on a linked sample of African American migrants between 1910 and
1930 from Abramitzky et al. (2020). This instrument, which is based on a county-to-
county (rather than state-to-county) migration matrix, eectively exploits variation in
predicted migration from more than 1,200 southern counties. Since conditions across
southern counties are plausibly orthogonal to the evolution of political ideology in
northern counties (Derenoncourt, 2018), the identifying assumption is likely to hold in
this case (Borusyak et al., 2021).19
    Push instruments already reduce concerns about spurious correlation with specific
shocks hitting northern counties that both aected local conditions and influenced out-
migration across southern states over time. We provide two additional pieces of evi-
dence against this possibility. First, we document that the instrument is uncorrelated
with either WWII spending or the generosity of New Deal relief programs. Second,
similar to Sequeira et al. (2020), we replicate the analysis by separately controlling for
a measure of predicted labor demand, constructed by interacting the 1940 industrial
county composition with the national growth rate of dierent industries between 1940
and 1970.
    We also perform a number of additional robustness checks. First, we show that
pre-period changes in the outcomes of interest are not correlated with the instrument.
Second, we interact period dummies with several 1940 county characteristics (e.g., the
Black and the urban share of the population, support for the Democratic Party, and
the share of employment in manufacturing) and with time-invariant geographic controls
(e.g., distance from the Mason-Dixon line, latitude and longitude, distance from the
closest city where the Forty-Eighters settled).20
    These exercises assuage the concern that the characteristics of counties where Black
  18
     Predicting out-migration using southern push factors also assuages the potential concern of serial corre-
lation in migration flows from the same location to the same destination (Jaeger et al., 2018) over time.
  19
     In Appendix D, we also present standard errors corrected using the procedure from Adao et al. (2019).
  20
     Dippel and Heblich (2021) show that the Forty-Eighters ­ leaders of the failed 1848-1849 German revolution
who migrated to the US ­ had long-lasting and profound eects on support for racial equality. One may thus
be worried that distance from cities where the Forty-Eighters settled might be correlated both with enclaves
of Black individuals born in southern states that sent more migrants after 1940 and with the evolution of
political preferences in the US North and West.


                                                      16
migrants from specific states settled before 1940 may be correlated both with post-
1940 Black migration and with changes in support for civil rights in northern counties
(Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020). In particular, controlling for the interaction between
the 1940 Black share and period dummies, as we do in our preferred specification,
implies that the instrument only exploits variation in the (southern state) composition
of African Americans' enclaves across counties, holding constant the size of their Black
populations.


5       Demand for Civil Rights
5.1     Main Results
5.1.1    Congressional Elections

We start by studying the eects of the Great Migration on the Democratic vote share
in Congressional elections, which we interpret as a proxy for voters' demand for civil
rights. Panel A of Table 2 estimates equation (1) with OLS in columns 1 to 3, and with
2SLS from column 4 onwards. Column 1 only includes state by decade fixed eects,
while columns 2 and 3 add interactions between decade dummies and, respectively, the
1940 Black share and an indicator for Democratic incumbency in 1940. In all cases, the
point estimate on the change in the Black share is positive and statistically significant.
    Turning to 2SLS, Panel C shows that the instrument is strong, and the F-stat for
weak instruments is always above conventional levels. In our preferred specification
­ which includes interactions between period dummies and: i) state dummies; ii) the
1940 Black share; and iii) an indicator for Democratic incumbency in 1940 ­ the first
stage coe cient implies that one percentage point increase in the predicted Black share
raises the actual Black share by 0.75 percentage points (column 6).
    2SLS estimates confirm OLS results, but are larger in magnitude, especially for
our preferred specification (column 6) and when estimating long dierence regressions
(column 7). According to our preferred specification, one percentage point increase in
the Black share raised the Democratic vote share by 1.88 percentage points, or 4% rel-
ative to the 1940 mean. For large recipient counties such as Cook (IL) or Wayne (MI)
county, where the Black share increased by more than 15 percentage points between
1940 and 1970, Black in-migration had the potential to alter the political landscape
dramatically. These findings likely reflect a combination of i) migrants' direct political


                                           17
engagement, and ii) changes in the preferences and voting behavior of existing resi-
dents. We return to this point in Section 5.3 below, when exploring the mechanisms,
but we already note that the 2SLS coe cient in column 6 of Panel A is statistically
dierent from 1 at the 5% level.
    The dierence between OLS and 2SLS estimates indicates that Black migrants se-
lected areas where support for the Republican Party was rising faster. This might have
happened because these counties were experiencing faster income growth.21 Another
possibility, not in contrast with the previous one, is that the IV identifies a local aver-
age treatment eect (LATE) for counties that received more Black migrants because of
family networks and not because of economic conditions. If Black individuals moving
to a specific location due to the presence of networks were more politically engaged
relative to "economic migrants", this could explain why OLS coe cients are smaller
than 2SLS ones.
    Panel B of Table 2 estimates the impact of Black in-migration on turnout in Con-
gressional elections. The coe cient from our preferred specification (column 6) is
positive and statistically significant, although smaller than for the Democratic vote
share. As for the Democratic vote share, OLS coe cients are smaller than 2SLS ones
­ in this case even negative. The positive eect on turnout is in line with qualitative
evidence that Black migrants were quickly incorporated in the political life of northern
and western counties (Moon, 1948; Schickler, 2016).
    In Appendix E.1.1, we examine how results vary across decades (Table E.1), showing
that the eects of the Great Migration were stronger in the 1940s and in the 1960s, and
were, instead, muted in the 1950s.22 Appendix E.1.1 also verifies that Black inflows had
a positive, but smaller, eect on the Democratic vote share in Presidential elections.
This is consistent with Schickler (2016), who documents that support for racial equality
was stronger within the local fringes of the Democratic Party.

5.1.2     Pro-Civil Rights Demonstrations and NAACP Chapters

In Table 3, we turn to the frequency of non-violent demonstrations organized by CORE
in support of civil rights. The structure of the table mirrors that of Table 2, reporting
  21
     Consistent with this idea, in our sample there is a negative and statistically significant relationship between
the change in the Democratic vote share and a number of proxies for economic growth, such as population
growth, population density, and industrial expansion.
  22
     One interpretation for these patterns is that the economic downturns of the 1950s temporarily halted the
progress of race relations, cooling o whites' support for racial equality (Sugrue, 2014).



                                                        18
OLS and 2SLS estimates in columns 1 to 3 and 4 to 7 respectively, and presenting first
stage coe cients in Panel B. For brevity, we focus on our 2SLS preferred specification
(column 6).
    Black in-migration had a strong, positive eect on the probability of CORE demon-
strations. One percentage point increase in the Black share led to a 5.7 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of protests. CORE was created in 1942, and the frequency of
events in our sample of counties between 1942 and 1944 (included) was 0.09. Our esti-
mates thus imply that one percentage point increase in the Black share raised CORE
demonstrations by more than 60% relative to their pre-1945 values. Another way to
gauge the magnitude of these estimates is to consider that the average change in the
probability of CORE-led protests in our sample is 0.138. Hence, one percentage point
increase in the Black share explains more than one third of the change in pro-civil
rights demonstrations across non-southern counties between 1940 and 1970. We refer
the interested reader to Appendix E.1.2, where we use information on the cause and
the target of the protest to analyze the heterogeneity of results across type of events
(Figures E.1-E.2 and Table E.2).
    In Table 4, we focus on the 1940-1960 change in the probability that a county had a
NAACP chapter in place.23 In the full sample, there is no statistically significant eect
on the presence of NAACP (column 3). However, the impact of Black in-migration
becomes positive, statistically significant, and quantitatively relevant for counties that
did not have a chapter in 1940 (column 4).24 The fact that we do not find any eect
for counties that already had a chapter in place in 1940 is not surprising. In these
places, Black inflows likely increased the number of members of NAACP chapters ­
something that we are not able to measure in our data. Instead, in counties where the
NAACP was not present at baseline, Black in-migration likely created a critical mass
of activists that justified the opening of new local chapters.
  23
     We use this specification because, as noted in Appendix C, data on NAACP chapters are only available
for 1940 (or earlier) and 1960.
  24
     In column 4, the F-stat falls below conventional levels, suggesting that results should be interpreted with
some caution.




                                                      19
5.2      Robustness Checks
5.2.1     Addressing White Flight

A potential concern with the interpretation of our findings is that Black arrivals induced
white residents to move to another county (Boustan, 2010). We provide dierent pieces
of evidence, detailed in Appendix D and briefly summarized here, that our results are
not due to white flight. First, we replicate the analysis considering a larger geographic
unit, the commuting zone (CZ), which contained both central cities and their suburbs
(Tables D.1 and D.2). Any potential white flight induced by Black inflows should thus
take place within, and not across, CZs. Second, we replicate the analysis conducted in
Boustan (2010), and document that Black in-migration did lead to white departures in
central cities, but not in counties in our sample (Tables D.3, D.4, D.5, and D.6). Since
the central city-suburb divide does not overlap with county boundaries, the reallocation
of whites between cities and suburbs was likely absorbed within counties. Finally, we
show that Black inflows were not associated with changes in the composition of white
residents and, consistent with Boustan (2009), did not have any impact on whites'
labor market outcomes (Tables D.7 and D.8).25

5.2.2     Summary of Additional Robustness Checks

Appendix D performs additional robustness checks. First, we verify that results re-
main unchanged when constructing versions of the instrument that only exploit vari-
ation in push factors across southern counties (Tables D.9 and D.10), and that rely
on a county-to-county migration matrix to construct the initial shares (Table D.11).
Second, we show that the instrument is uncorrelated with two potential pull factors:
WWII spending and New Deal relief programs (Table D.12), and we replicate the
analysis controlling for predicted industrialization, constructed by exploiting the 1940
industrial composition of non-southern counties (Table D.13). Third, we check that
there are no pre-trends (Tables D.14 and D.24). Fourth, we interact period dummies
with several 1940 or time-invariant county characteristics, such as the urban share,
the employment share in manufacturing, the employment to population ratio, county
geographic coordinates, distance from the Mason-Dixon line and from the closest city
where the Forty-Eighters moved to (Tables D.15 and D.16).
  25
     Due to data limitation this exercise is conducted at the CZ level, estimating long dierence regressions
for the 1940-1960 period.



                                                    20
    We also verify that results: i) are robust to considering an unbalanced sample that
includes all county-decade observations for which outcomes are available, excluding po-
tential outliers, estimating alternative specifications, and measuring electoral outcomes
in dierent ways (Tables D.17, D.18, D.19, D.20, and D.21); ii) are not driven by the
simultaneous inflow of southern whites (Tables D.18 and D.19); and, iii) are robust
to clustering standard errors at the CZ level and to using the procedure suggested in
Adao et al. (2019) to adjust standard errors (Tables D.22 and D.23).26


5.3      Mechanisms
5.3.1     Black in-Migration and Whites' Attitudes Towards Civil Rights

Bounds on whites' voting behavior. We begin with a back of the envelope cal-
culation that suggests that not only Black but also white voters' behavior changed in
a progressive direction in response to Black in-migration. The coe cient reported in
Table 2, column 6, indicates that Black in-migration increased the Democratic vote
share by more than one for one. This points to the importance of changes in northern
residents' voting patterns. In Figure E.3, we compute how many white Republican
voters would need to switch to the Democratic Party under dierent assumptions on
Black turnout and voting preferences, in order to explain away our estimated eect on
Democratic vote share.27 If Black residents voted for the Democratic Party at a rate of
70%, as estimated by the literature (Bositis, 2012), and if we assume a similar behavior
for Black migrants, our 2SLS coe cient implies around three white voters switching
from the Republican to the Democratic party for every ten incoming Black migrants.
    Because it relies on assumptions about Black voting behavior, this exercise is sug-
gestive. We thus only report it in detail in Appendix E.2.1. Yet, it shows that, under
reasonable assumptions, Black migrants alone are not su cient to explain the increase
in the Democratic vote share estimated above, and that at least some northern residents
­ both Black and white ­ would have to start voting for the Democrats.
Additional evidence from CORE demonstrations. To corroborate the idea that
Black in-migration increased support for racial equality among at least some white vot-
ers, we exploit the fact that, for a subset of pro-civil rights demonstrations, we can
identify the race of participants. In column 7 of Table 3, we estimate our preferred
  26
    Appendix D also performs additional robustness checks on CD results presented in Section 6.
  27
    When performing this exercise, we fix turnout, assuming that the inflow of Black migrants can change the
preferences of existing voters but does not alter the number of northern residents (of either race) voting.


                                                    21
specification using as dependent variable the change in the probability of CORE demon-
strations with both Black and white participants. This represents a (very conservative)
lower-bound for the probability that whites joined pro-civil rights demonstrations, since
participants' race was reported only for approximately 40% of CORE events, and we
define a protest as having white participants only when their presence was explicitly
reported. The point estimate is smaller than that of the baseline specification (column
6), but remains positive and statistically significant at the 5% level.
Evidence from historical survey data. We complement the previous results with
historical survey data from the ANES. We are unable to conduct a county-level analysis
because of the very limited number of counties and of respondents per county included
in the survey (Appendix C). We instead perform this exercise at the state level. Since
questions on racial views are available only from the end of the 1950s, we estimate
cross-sectional regressions, correlating whites' racial attitudes and political preferences
in surveys conducted in years close to the CRA with the (instrumented) 1940-1960
change in the Black share in their state of residence.28 We include survey year and
Census region fixed eects and a set of 1940 state (manufacturing share, urban share,
share of unionized workers, Black share, and an indicator for Democratic incumbency
in Congressional elections) and individual (gender, marital status, and fixed eects for
both age and education) controls.29 We restrict attention to white respondents living
in non-southern states. To deal with the potential concern that white respondents may
have moved across states because of Black in-migration, we further restrict attention
to whites living in their state of birth.
    In Table 5, the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if support for civil rights
was considered by respondents as one of the most important problems for the country
in 1960 and 1964. In the same survey years, respondents were also asked whether they
opposed school and housing or working space integration. Combining these questions,
columns 1 to 3 verify that considering civil rights as one of the most important problems
is negatively correlated with opposition to racial integration. We thus interpret the
dependent variable in Table 5 as a proxy of support for racial equality. Columns
  28
     Although some of these questions were asked also after 1964, we refrain from using any post-CRA survey
dataset because of the potential direct eect of the bill on whites' racial attitudes (Kuziemko and Washington,
2018; Wheaton, 2020).
  29
     Since party identification and union membership may be endogenous to Black inflows, we do not include
them in our baseline specification. Adding these controls does not change any of our results. Results are
also robust to including further 1940 state level controls such as the immigrant share, the share of unskilled
workers, and other socioeconomic or political variables.




                                                     22
4 and 5 turn to the relationship between the 1940-1960 change in the Black share
and the dummy for civil rights being the most important issue, using OLS and 2SLS
respectively.
    2SLS estimates indicate that white respondents living in states that received more
Black migrants between 1940 and 1960 were significantly more likely to consider civil
rights one of the country's most important problems. The coe cient reported in column
5 implies that one percentage point increase in the Black share between 1940 and 1960
is associated with a 3.4 percentage points (or, 30%) higher probability of reporting
civil rights as the most important problem in the two ANES surveys asked before the
CRA.
    We also consider whites' political preferences. Focusing on survey waves between
1956 and 1964 and estimating 2SLS regressions, Table A.5 documents that white re-
spondents living in states that received more Black migrants between 1940 and 1960
were significantly more likely to vote for the Democratic Party. This relationship be-
comes an order of magnitude stronger when restricting attention to 1964 (columns 2
and 4). The fact that coe cients are higher for 1964 is consistent with the civil rights
issue featuring more prominently during the year that led to the passage of the CRA.30
    Appendix E.2.3 explores the heterogeneity of racial attitudes across white respon-
dents. It shows that the positive relationship between whites' attitudes towards racial
equality and Black in-migration was stronger among union members (Figure E.4). It
also reveals that self-identified Democrats were more supportive of civil rights in states
that received more African Americans between 1940 and 1960, while the opposite was
true for self-identified Republicans. Given the potential endogeneity of partisanship,
these patterns are merely suggestive. However, they indicate that the Great Migration
might have increased polarization on racial issues within the northern electorate.31

5.3.2    Unpacking the Channels Behind Whites' Support for Civil Rights

At least two mechanisms can explain the positive eects of Black in-migration on
support for racial equality among (at least some) northern whites. First, progressive
Democrats and labor unions may have made civil rights part of their agenda in order
to attract Black migrants, forging a class-based cross-race coalition between white and
Black members of the working class (Adams, 1966; Sugrue, 2008).
  30
   Appendix E.2.2 verifies that similar patterns hold when using data from Gallup (Table E.3).
  31
   In Table E.5 we also show that the change in the Black share was positively associated with feelings
towards Democrats, African Americans, and the NAACP among white respondents.


                                                  23
    Second, as envisioned by Myrdal (1944), exposure to Black migrants might have
increased whites' awareness of the brutal conditions prevailing in the South, in turn
fostering demand for more racial equality. Inter-group contact might have also reduced
negative stereotypes and prejudice held by whites, changing their attitudes towards
Black Americans (Allport, 1954; Schindler and Westcott, 2020).
    Economic and social factors may have interacted, reinforcing each other. For in-
stance, frequent contacts in an environment where Black and white workers had com-
mon goals and where they shared a common, class-based, identity may have reduced
some of the barriers that traditionally inhibited the formation of a racially diverse
coalition.32
Political and economic forces. As discussed in Section 2.2, starting in the late
1930s, some of the most important labor unions, such as the CIO, became a crucial
ally to African Americans' struggle for equality. Often, unions coordinated with grass-
roots movements such as the NAACP, jointly pushing for civil rights and progressive
economic policy (Schickler, 2016). To test the role of the labor movement, we split
counties above and below dierent proxies for the presence and strength of organized
labor, or for its incentives to incorporate African Americans. We report results in
Figure 2 and Table A.6, always defining the variables so that higher values refer to
stronger presence of, or incentives for, unions to support the civil rights movement.
    The surge in civil rights protests was concentrated in counties with a higher share
of white workers in manufacturing ­ the sector where unions were most widespread
(Bailer, 1944; Farber et al., 2021). In line with these results, the eects of the Great
Migration were stronger, although not statistically dierent, in counties belonging to
states where CIO membership rates were higher.33 Pro-civil rights protests were also
more frequent where political competition ­ defined as one minus the absolute value
of the margin of victory in 1940 Congressional elections ­ was higher. This finding is
consistent with labor unions (and the Democratic Party) having stronger incentives to
coordinate events where the Black vote was more valuable. Precisely in these areas,
a better organized political machine could have made a dierence in attracting and
mobilizing pivotal, Black and white, voters (McAdam, 1982; Pons, 2018).
    Labor unions, and white workers more generally, should have supported racial equal-
  32
     Using recent data, Frymer and Grumbach (2020) find that white union members hold more liberal attitudes
towards minorities in the US.
  33
     CIO membership rates are not available at the county level in a systematic way. We thus rely on 1939
state-level CIO membership from Troy (1957).



                                                    24
ity more when labor markets were tighter. Indeed, inter-group contact is more likely
to lead to cooperation when it happens in contexts with no competition over scarce re-
sources (Allport, 1954; Blalock, 1967).34 Consistent with this idea, Black in-migration
led to more demonstrations only where predicted labor demand was stronger. Instead,
when predicted labor demand was low, Black inflows significantly reduced the prob-
ability of pro-civil rights demonstrations.35 These findings are in line with anecdotal
accounts noting that backlash was more likely to emerge during economic downturns
(Bailer, 1943; Sugrue, 2014). They are also in line with the electoral results discussed
in Appendix E.1.1 (Table E.1), which document that the Great Migration had no ef-
fect on the Democratic vote share in the 1950s ­ a decade characterized by slack labor
markets and economic recession.
Social forces. It is possible that Black in-migration increased the salience of brutal
conditions and racial violence prevailing in the US South (Myrdal, 1944), leading to
greater sensitization of northern whites with liberal tendencies. If that was true, one
might expect attitudinal shifts to be more pronounced in counties that were already
more socially progressive. To test this idea, we split the sample above and below the
median of dierent proxies for progressive attitudes in the local electorate. We report
results in Figure 3, rescaling the variables so that higher values refer to socially more
progressive counties.
    First, we consider the discrimination index constructed in Qian and Tabellini (2020)
using historical data from a variety of sources, such as local presence of the KKK
and the lynching of Black Americans up to 1939. Results are an order of magnitude
larger in counties with lower historical discrimination. The same pattern, though less
pronounced, is evident when splitting counties as belonging to states with (blue bars)
and without (orange bars) miscegenation laws (Dahis et al., 2020). Second, pro-civil
rights demonstrations increased more in counties that were closer to one of the cities
where the Forty-Eighters originally settled. As shown in Dippel and Heblich (2021), the
presence of the Forty-Eighters was associated with stronger support for racial equality;
hence, whites in these places may have been more responsive to news about racial
oppression in the South.36
  34
     Several papers document that anti-minority sentiments are more likely to arise during times of hardship
(Grosfeld et al., 2020; Oster, 2004; Voigtl¨
                                           ander and Voth, 2012).
  35
     We predict labor demand using a Bartik-style approach, interacting 1940 industry shares at the county
level with national growth rates of each industry in each subsequent decade.
  36
     In a few instances, as documented in Table A.6, the F-stat falls below conventional levels, suggesting that
results should be interpreted with caution. This problem is particularly pronounced when focusing on counties



                                                      25
Evidence on information transmission. To more directly test Myrdal's "informa-
tion hypothesis", we obtained the list of (known) lynchings against African Americans
between 1940 and 1964 in the US South, compiled from the Monroe Works Today
project.37 Then, we searched for mentions of such episodes in any non-southern news-
paper that we could locate on the website Newspapers.com. To identify a lynching,
we search for the joint appearance in the same page of the name and surname of the
victim and the place where the lynching occurred. We restrict attention to a window
of 4 weeks before and 26 weeks after each episode, and focus on the subsample of 492
counties for which newspaper data is available.38 We could locate a total of 1,041
newspapers, only 5 of which explicitly targeted an African American public. In what
follows, we consider all newspapers, but results are unchanged when excluding from
our sample the 5 African American ones.
    We organize the data at the (northern) county-week-episode level, defining as "week
0" the week in which the lynching occurred (in a southern state). We create an indicator
variable if, in a given week, at least one mention of the lynching was found in a county's
local newspapers. Focusing on weeks 0 to 26, we regress this indicator against the
instrumented 1940-1960 change in the Black share in the county. Since the regressor of
interest is defined at the county level, we cannot include county fixed eects. However,
we include state, episode, and week fixed eects.39 Results from this exercise are
reported in Table 6.
    Column 1 considers any lynching that occurred between 1940 and 1964. It shows
that, in the weeks following the lynching of a southern Black individual, local news-
papers of northern counties were more likely to report the episode in areas that had
received more African Americans between 1940 and 1964. Column 2 runs a placebo
exercise, restricting attention to lynchings that occurred between 1940 and 1944. The
coe cient is no longer statistically significant, and smaller in size. This indicates that
further from the cities of the Forty-Eighters. Reassuringly, however, the pattern depicted in Figures 2 and 3
is consistent across proxies for political and social forces.
   37
      See also https://plaintalkhistory.com/monroeandflorencework/explore/map2-credits.html.
   38
      Table A.7 compares the characteristics of the full sample and the counties in the "newspapers' sample".
Not surprisingly, counties in the newspapers' sample had a higher total population, a higher Black share, and
were more likely to be urban in 1940. They also experienced a slightly larger increase in their (actual and
predicted) Black population share. However, reassuringly, the Democratic vote share and turnout ­ both their
1940 levels and their change ­ are remarkably similar between the two sets of counties. Table A.8 verifies that
our main results are unchanged when focusing on the sample of counties for which local newspapers could be
located.
   39
      As in the main analysis, regressions are weighed by 1940 county population, and standard errors are
clustered at the county level.




                                                      26
Black in-migration, and not other county-specific characteristics, increased the proba-
bility that a southern lynching was reported in a northern newspaper. Consistent with
an information transmission mechanism driven by migration, columns 3 to 5 show that
the coe cient on the change in the Black share becomes larger as we focus on lynchings
that happened in later years.
    Figure 4 explores the dynamics behind the patterns just described, zooming in on
the 12 weeks around the event ­ 4 weeks before and 8 weeks afterwards. Reassuringly,
there is no relationship between the mention of a lynching and the change in the Black
share in the weeks before the event. The eect of Black in-migration jumps on the
week of the lynching, and then gradually fades away, persisting for at least one month
after the event.
    Next, in Table 7, we expand the window to include also the 4 weeks before the
lynching, and interact the change in the Black share with an indicator equal to one for
all weeks after the lynching. We control for a full battery of county, episode, and week
by state fixed eects.40 Panel A focuses on the 1940-1960 change in the Black share. In
line with our previous results, the interaction between the post-event dummy and the
change in the Black share is positive and statistically significant when considering years
after 1945 (column 3), and this relationship becomes quantitatively larger as we restrict
attention to episodes that occurred later (columns 4 to 6). Again, when considering
lynchings that occurred between 1940 and 1944, the coe cient is quantitatively small
and not statistically significant. Panel B confirms results of Panel A focusing on the
1940-1950 (resp. 1950-1960) change in the Black share in columns 1 to 3 (resp. 4 to
6).
    Table A.9 compares the eects of Black in-migration when the lynching happened in
the southern state that is predicted to have sent more Black Americans into a specific
county (columns 1, 3, and 5) relative to the cases in which the lynching took place
in another southern state (columns 2, 4, and 6). Results from this exercise are less
precise, but suggest stronger eects for lynchings that happened in the largest state of
origin of a northern county's Black migrants ­ especially for the 1940 to 1950 decade.
    Taken together, this evidence is consistent with Myrdal's hypothesis: Black in-
migration increased the salience of southern discrimination among northern whites.
This, in turn, could be a factor behind changed whites' attitudes towards civil rights
in Black migrant destinations.
  40
    County (resp. state by week) fixed eects absorb the main eect of the change in the Black share (resp.
the post-event dummy).


                                                   27
5.3.3       Residential Segregation and Independent Local Governments

Our findings do not necessarily imply that white residents welcomed Black migrants
into their neighborhoods. Both existing work (Boustan, 2010) and our own analysis
(Table D.5) indicate that the Great Migration increased within-county racial segrega-
tion as whites exerted more eort to avoid sharing public goods with Black Americans
(Alesina et al., 1999). Segregation responses might have been compatible with sup-
port for civil rights. For one, civil rights legislation was, at least until 1965, a matter
that aected mostly the US South. Additionally, increased segregation may itself have
helped defuse whites' animosity caused by Black migration into white neighborhoods.
    Appendix E.2.4 provides evidence consistent with the latter conjecture (Table E.6).
First, Black in-migration increased the frequency of CORE demonstrations only in
counties with higher 1940 residential segregation. That is, support for civil rights
increased more in counties where inter-group contact in the housing market was lower.
Second, Black inflows led to the creation of more school districts in counties where
residential segregation was higher.41 One interpretation of these patterns, consistent
with historical evidence (Sugrue, 2008), is that population sorting within counties and
the creation of independent jurisdictions might have reduced potential backlash by
allowing whites to live in racially homogeneous communities, where the probability
of sharing public goods with Black Americans was low. This, in turn, could have
facilitated support for civil rights as a national-level policy issue, and progressive voting
motivated by abstract principles of racial equality.


6        Legislators' Behavior
6.1        Ideology Scores and Discharge Petitions
Ideology scores. We begin the analysis of legislators' behavior by focusing on the
ideology scores from Bateman et al. (2017), which take more negative values for more
liberal voting behavior on civil rights bills. Columns 1 to 3 in Table 8 present results
for the change in agnostic ideology scores, stacking the data for the 78-82 and the
82-88 Congress periods, reporting OLS, 2SLS, and first stage coe cients in Panels A,
B, and C respectively. Following Autor et al. (2020) and Bonomi et al. (2020), to deal
with mean reversion, in addition to the controls included in our preferred specification
 41
      These results are in line with those in Alesina et al. (2004).



                                                         28
above, we also add the interaction between period dummies and the baseline ideology
score of legislators. The 2SLS coe cient reported in column 1 (Panel B) is negative,
but quantitatively small and imprecisely estimated.42
    When examining results separately by Congress period, a more nuanced picture
emerges. Black in-migration had a strong, negative eect on the ideology scores of
legislators in the first Congress period (column 2), and a negligible, positive, and
not statistically significant eect in the second period (column 3). While the F-stat
falls below conventional levels in column 2, suggesting that our estimates should be
interpreted with some caution, these findings indicate that legislators' ideology moved
to the left between Congress 78 and Congress 82, and did not change significantly
afterwards. Results are robust to focusing on the constrained version of the ideology
scores (columns 4 to 6).
    In our baseline specification, we map the 1940-1950 (resp. 1950-1960) Black in-
migration to the 78-82 (resp. 82-88) Congress period, so as to both have the longest
periods without redistricting and end the analysis with the Congress that passed the
CRA. Appendix D.8 verifies that our findings are robust to dierent timing conventions.
It also shows that there are no pre-trends, that results are robust to restricting the
sample to CDs that only span the counties from the balanced dataset in Section 5, and
that our estimates are not influenced by strategic gerrymandering, possibly induced by
Black in-migration (Kaufman et al., 2017).
Signatures on discharge petitions. Due to gatekeeping imposed by southern
Democrats, civil rights bills were unlikely to reach the floor of the House, unless
northern legislators were willing to undertake non-standard actions. Discharge pe-
titions represent the best example of such non-conventional tools at the disposal of
non-southern legislators (Pearson and Schickler, 2009). Since there are not enough dis-
charge petitions filed during the 82-88 Congress period, we focus on the 1940s, when
several discharge petitions were filed and signed on the same topics ­ fair employment
legislation (FEPC), the poll tax, and anti-lynching legislation ­ both at the beginning
and at the end of the decade.
    Although all three topics featured prominently in the political debate during the
1940s, legislation against discrimination in federal employment likely represented the
most salient category, where northern legislators may have tried to signal their (pro-
civil rights) stance the most. First, the salience of the poll tax and anti-lynching
  42
   As for other tables, the discrepancy between OLS and 2SLS estimates indicates that Black migrants were
more likely to move to areas with growing support for Republican, more conservative legislators.


                                                   29
legislation gradually declined relative to that of FEPC during the 1940s.43 Second,
anti-lynching legislation and, to a lesser extent, the abolition of the poll tax almost
exclusively concerned racial relations in the South; conversely, employment protection
legislation had a direct impact both in the South and in the North (Sugrue, 2014).
    Figure 5 plots the 2SLS point estimate (with 95% confidence intervals), showing
that Black in-migration increased the probability of signing a discharge petition on
all topics. Consistent with the previous discussion, the coe cient is larger and more
precisely estimated for FEPC legislation than for other categories.44


6.2      Political Polarization
We examine the possibility that the Great Migration increased political polarization
following the approach used in Autor et al. (2020) and Tabellini (2020) for trade and
immigration respectively. We define liberal (resp. moderate) Democrats those leg-
islators with an ideology score below (resp. above) the median score for Democrats
in Congress 78. Likewise, moderate (resp. conservative) Republicans are defined as
Congress members with an ideology score below (resp. above) the median score for
Republicans in Congress 78. Table A.11 estimates our baseline stacked first dierence
specification, using as dependent variable the change in the probability of electing a
liberal Democrat, a moderate Democrat, a moderate Republican, and a conservative
Republican in columns 1 to 4 respectively.
    In Panel A, we pool both Congress periods together. Black in-migration had a
positive, but small and not statistically significant, eect on the probability of electing
a liberal Democrat. The remaining coe cients are also imprecisely estimated. How-
ever, when considering each Congress period in isolation, a dierent picture stands
out. During the 1940s (Panel B), Black in-migration had a strong, positive eect on
the probability of electing a liberal Democrat (column 1), while reducing the proba-
bility of electing both moderate Democrats (column 2) and conservative Republicans
(column 4). If anything, the probability of electing a moderate Republican (column 3)
increased with Black inflows, even though results are not statistically significant. Dur-
  43
     The last discharge petition on either the poll tax or anti-lynching legislation was filed during the 80th
Congress, whereas discharge petitions on FEPC were filed also in the early 1950s (Table C.1).
  44
     Table A.10 reports the coe cients associated with Figure 5. The change in the probability of signing a
petition on FEPC, anti-lynching legislation, and the poll tax is taken over Congresses 81 to 78, 80 to 77, and
79 to 77 respectively. Since petitions on the three topics were not always signed in the same Congress year
and were not always comparable with each other (Table C.1), we checked the robustness of our results using
alternative time windows. Reassuringly, they always remained similar to those presented in Figure 5.



                                                     30
ing the 1950s (Panel C), in stark contrast with the previous decade, Black in-migration
increased the probability of electing a conservative Republican, while reducing that of
electing a moderate Republican. The eects of Black in-migration on the probabil-
ity of electing Democrats with dierent ideological stances are very small in size and
imprecisely estimated.
    Figure 6 plots the coe cients reported in Panels B and C of Table A.11. These
results suggest that the Great Migration led to changes in legislators' ideology both
between and within parties. In the 1940s, Black inflows triggered a general shift towards
a more liberal ideology on racial issues within both parties. Moreover, and in line with
a between-party adjustment, the probability of electing a (liberal) Democrat increased
more than that of electing a (moderate) Republican. In the 1950s, most of the action
came from internal changes within the GOP, with legislators moving to the right. Such
rightward shift may have been motivated by strategic considerations, as the GOP tried
to win the votes of whites who were becoming increasingly concerned about the racial
mixing of their neighborhoods (Sugrue, 2014).
    Since results during the 1940s are quantitatively larger than those in the 1950s, on
average, legislators' ideology moved to the left. However, when inspecting these dynam-
ics more carefully, polarization becomes evident. The patterns identified here resemble
those appearing in the ANES analysis above, which showed that white Democrats
and Republicans had, respectively, more positive and more negative views towards
civil rights in states receiving more African Americans. Our findings are also consis-
tent with the possibility that local responses to the Great Migration might have been
partly influenced by national considerations. Even though Democrats "lost the South"
by promoting the civil rights agenda (Kuziemko and Washington, 2018), this strategy
might have allowed them to win urban areas of the West and the North. At the same
time, the Republican Party might have tried to strengthen its conservative position at
the national level, so as to attract dissatisfied southern whites leaving the Democratic
Party.


7    Conclusions
The Great Migration was the single largest episode of internal migration in American
history. Between 1940 and 1970, more than 4 million Black Americans left the US
South for northern and western destinations. During this same period, the civil rights


                                           31
movement struggled and eventually succeeded to eliminate institutionalized discrimina-
tion and formal impediments to Black political participation. In this paper, we study
the eects that Black in-migration had on both voters' demand for and legislators'
supply of civil rights.
    Using a version of the shift-share instrument, we find that Black in-migration in-
creased the Democratic vote share in Congressional elections and raised the frequency
of pro-civil rights demonstrations. Our estimates suggest that these eects were at
least in part due to the behavior of white voters, who also joined grassroots civil rights
activities. Evidence from local newspapers indicates that migration-induced informa-
tion transmission likely contributed to the change in whites' racial attitudes. Next, we
document that legislators representing CDs that received more African Americans be-
came more liberal on racial issues, and more actively supported civil rights legislation.
These average eects, however, mask substantial polarization between parties.
    Our paper complements the existing literature on the Great Migration, which has,
especially in recent times, emphasized the long run, negative impact that this episode
had on both racial residential segregation and economic mobility for African Americans.
Our findings, instead, paint a more nuanced picture. They indicate that, as predicted
by Gunnar Myrdal in 1944, Black in-migration to the US North and West was in-
strumental for the development of the civil rights movement, and for the concomitant
political changes that led to Black political empowerment and progress towards racial
equality in the United States.
    When contrasted with other works on the political eects of migration, our results
raise an intriguing set of questions. Under what conditions can migration and inter-
group contact more broadly lead to the formation of cross-group coalitions? When,
instead, is backlash from original residents more likely to prevail? In the specific
context of the Great Migration and of the civil rights movement, our evidence suggests
that cross-race cooperation can emerge when individuals belonging to dierent groups
share similar goals and identities (in this context, class-based), and when information
about discrimination becomes available to majority group members who are already
more open to diversity. In contexts where inter-group competition over scarce resources
cannot be defused (for instance, by increased segregation in the labor market) majority
backlash is instead more likely to emerge.




                                           32
References
Abramitzky, R., L. Boustan, and M. Rashid (2020). Census Linking Project: Version
 1.0 [dataset]. https://censuslinkingproject.org.

Adams, H. S. (1966). "The Dingell-Lesinski 1964 Primary Race". The Western Political
 Quarterly 19 (4), 688­696.

Adao, R., M. Koles´
                  ar, and E. Morales (2019). "Shift-share Designs: Theory and
 Inference". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4), 1949­2010.

Adler, E. S. (2003). Congressional District Data File, [78]. University of Colorado,
 Boulder, CO. http://socsci. colorado. edu/~ esadler/research. htm .

Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and W. Easterly (1999). "Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions".
  The Quarterly journal of economics 114 (4), 1243­1284.

Alesina, A., R. Baqir, and C. Hoxby (2004). "Political Jurisdictions in Heterogeneous
  Communities". Journal of political Economy 112 (2), 348­396.

Alesina, A. F. and M. Tabellini (2020). "The Political Eects of Immigration: Culture
  or Economics?". CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP15486.

Allport, G. W. (1954). The Nature of Prejudice. Oxford, England: Addison-Wesley.

Altonji, J. G. and R. M. Blank (1999). "Race and Gender in the Labor Market".
  Handbook of labor economics 3, 3143­3259.

Aneja, A. and C. F. Avenancio-Leon (2019). "The Eect of Political Power on Labor
 Market Inequality: Evidence from the 1965 Voting Rights Act". Working paper.

Arzheimer, K. (2009). "Contextual Factors and the Extreme Right Vote in Western
  Europe, 1980­2002". American Journal of Political Science 53 (2), 259­275.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. Hanson, and K. Majlesi (2020). "Importing Political Polariza-
 tion? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure". American Economic
 Review 110 (10), 3139­83.

Autor, David, H. and D. Dorn (2013). "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
 Polarization of the US Labor Market". American Economic Review 103 (5), 1553­97.

Bailer, L. H. (1943). "The Negro Automobile Worker". Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 51 (5), 415­428.

Bailer, L. H. (1944). "The Automobile Unions and Negro Labor". Political Science
  Quarterly 59 (4), 548­577.



                                         33
Bailey, M. J., C. Cole, M. Henderson, and C. Massey (2020). "How Well Do Automated
  Linking Methods Perform? Lessons from US Historical Data". Journal of Economic
  Literature 58 (4), 997­1044.

Baran, C., E. Chyn, and B. A. Stuart (2020). "The Great Migration and Educational
  Opportunity". Working Paper.

Bateman, D. A., J. D. Clinton, and J. S. Lapinski (2017). "A House Divided? Roll
  Calls, Polarization, and Policy Dierences in the US House, 1877­2011". American
  Journal of Political Science 61 (3), 698­714.

Bayer, P. and K. K. Charles (2018). "Divergent Paths: A New Perspective on Earnings
  Dierences between Black and White Men since 1940". The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 133 (3), 1459­1501.

Bernini, A., G. Facchini, and C. Testa (2018). "Race, Representation and Local Gov-
  ernments in the US South: The Eect of the Voting Rights Act". Discussion paper
  No. 12774, CEPR.

Besley, T., T. Persson, and D. M. Sturm (2010). "Political Competition, Policy and
  Growth: Theory and Evidence from the US". The Review of Economic Studies 77 (4),
  1329­1352.

Beth, R. S., Government, and F. Division (2003). The Discharge Rule in the House:
  Principal Features and Uses. Congressional Research Service.

Blalock, H. M. (1967). Toward a Theory of Minority-Group Relations, Volume 325.
  New York: Wiley.

Bonomi, G., N. Gennaioli, and G. Tabellini (2020). "Identity, Beliefs, and Political
  Conflict". Working Paper.

Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2021). "Quasi-experimental Shift-share Research
  Designs". The Review of Economic Studies . Forthcoming.

Bositis, D. A. (2012). Blacks and the 2012 Democratic National Convention. Joint
  Center for Political and Economic Studies.

Boustan, L. P. (2009). "Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and
  Racial Wage Convergence in the North, 1940­1970". The Journal of Economic
  History 69 (3), 755­782.

Boustan, L. P. (2010). "Was Postwar Suburbanization "White Flight"? Evidence from
  the Black Migration". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 417­443.

Boustan, L. P. (2016). Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in Northern
  Cities and Labor Markets. Princeton University Press.

                                         34
Boustan, L. P., D. Bunten, and O. Hearey (2018). "Urbanization in the United States,
  1800-2000". In Oxford Handbook of American Economic History.

Boustan, L. P., P. V. Fishback, and S. Kantor (2010). "The Eect of Internal Migration
  on Local Labor Markets: American Cities during the Great Depression". Journal of
  Labor Economics 28 (4), 719­746.

Bowles, G. K., J. D. Tarver, C. L. Beale, and E. S. Lee (1990). Net Migration of the Pop-
  ulation by Age, Sex, and Race, 1950-1970 [computer file]. ICPSR ed., Study (8493).

Card, D. (2001). "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
  Impacts of Higher Immigration". Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1), 22­64.

Carmines, E. G. and J. A. Stimson (1989). Issue Evolution: Race and the Transfor-
  mation of American Politics. Princeton University Press.

Cascio, E., N. Gordon, E. Lewis, and S. Reber (2010). "Paying for Progress: Condi-
  tional Grants and the Desegregation of Southern Schools". The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 125 (1), 445­482.

Cascio, E. U. and E. Washington (2014). "Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of
  Voting Rights and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965". The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 379­433.

Caughey, D., M. C. Dougal, and E. Schickler (2020). "Policy and Performance in the
  New Deal Realignment: Evidence from Old Data and New Methods". The Journal
  of Politics 82 (2), 494­508.

Caughey, D. and C. Warshaw (2018). "Policy Preferences and Policy Change: Dynamic
  Responsiveness in the American States, 1936­2014". American Political Science
  Review 112 (2), 249­266.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2020). "Race and Economic
 Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective". The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 135 (2), 711­783.

Clubb, J. M., W. H. Flanigan, and N. H. Zingale (1990). Partisan Realignment: Voters,
  Parties, and Government in American History. Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE.

Collins, W. J. (2021). "The Great Migration of Black Americans from the US South:
  A Guide and Interpretation". Explorations in Economic History (101382).

Collins, W. J. and R. A. Margo (2007). "The Economic Aftermath of the 1960s Riots
  in American Cities: Evidence from Property Values". The Journal of Economic
  History 67 (4), 849­883.



                                           35
Collins, W. J. and M. H. Wanamaker (2014). "Selection and Economic Gains in the
  Great Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data".
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (1), 220­52.
Collins, W. J. and M. H. Wanamaker (2015). "The Great Migration in Black and
  White: New Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern Migrants". The
  Journal of Economic History 75 (4), 947­992.
Dahis, R., E. Nix, and N. Qian (2020). "Choosing Racial Identity in the United States,
 1880-1940". Working Paper 26465, NBER.
Derenoncourt, E. (2018). "Can You Move to Opportunity? Evidence from the Great
  Migration". Working paper.
Dippel, C. and S. Heblich (2021). "Leadership in Social Movements: Evidence from the
  "Forty-Eighters" in the Civil War". American Economic Review 111 (2), 472­505.
Dustmann, C., K. Vasiljeva, and A. P. Damm (2019). "Refugee Migration and Electoral
 Outcomes". Review of Economic Studies 86 (5), 2035­2091.
Engstrom, E. (2013). Partisan Gerrymandering and the Construction of American
  Democracy. University of Michigan Press.
Enos, R. D. (2016). "What the Demolition of Public Housing Teaches Us about the
  Impact of Racial Threat on Political Behavior". American Journal of Political Sci-
  ence 60 (1), 123­142.
Eriksson, K. (2019). "Moving North and into Jail? The Great Migration and Black
  Incarceration". Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 159, 526­538.
Farber, H. S., D. Herbst, I. Kuziemko, and S. Naidu (2021). Unions and Inequality over
  the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data*. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics . qjab012.
Feigenbaum, J. J. and A. B. Hall (2015). "How Legislators Respond to Localized
  Economic Shocks: Evidence from Chinese Import Competition". The Journal of
  Politics 77 (4), 1012­1030.
Feigenbaum, J. J., S. Mazumder, and C. B. Smith (2020). "When Coercive Economies
  Fail: The Political Economy of the US South After the Boll Weevil". Working Paper
  27161, NBER.
Feinstein, B. D. and E. Schickler (2008). "Platforms and Partners: The Civil Rights
  Realignment Reconsidered". Studies in American Political Development 22 (1), 1.
Fouka, V., S. Mazumder, and M. Tabellini (2021). "From Immigrants to Americans:
  Race and Assimilation during the Great Migration". The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies . Forthcoming.

                                         36
Frymer, P. and J. M. Grumbach (2020). "Labor Unions and White Racial Politics".
  American Journal of Political Science .
Gardner, J. and W. Cohen (1992). "Demographic Characteristics of the Popula-
 tion of the United States, 1930-1950: County-Level". Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-
 university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1992-02-16.
 https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR00020.v1 .
Gentzkow, M. (2016). "Polarization in 2016". Toulouse Network for Information
 Technology Whitepaper .
Gibson, C. and K. Jung (2005). Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals by
  Race, 1790 to 1990, and by Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, for Large Cities and
  Other Urban Places in the United States. Citeseer.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2020). "Bartik Instruments: What,
 When, Why, and How". American Economic Review 110 (8), 2586­2624.
Grant, K. (2020). Relocation & Realignment: How the Great Migration Changed the
  Face of the Democratic Party. Temple University Press.
Gregory, J. N. (1995). "The Southern Diaspora and the Urban Dispossessed: Demon-
  strating the Census Public Use Microdata Samples". The Journal of American
  History 82 (1), 111­134.
Gregory, J. N. (2006). The Southern Diaspora: How the Great Migrations of Black and
  White Southerners Transformed America. University of North Carolina Press.
Gregory, J. N. and J. Estrada (2019). "NAACP History and Geography. Mapping
  American Social Movement".
Gregory, J. N. and A. Hermida (2019). "Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) Actions,
  1942-1972. Mapping American Social Movement".
Grosfeld, I., S. O. Sakalli, and E. Zhuravskaya (2020). "Middleman Minorities and
  Ethnic Violence: Anti-Jewish Pogroms in the Russian Empire". The Review of
  Economic Studies 87 (1), 289­342.
Grossman, J. R. (1991). Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great
  Migration. University of Chicago Press.
Grove, W. A. and C. Heinicke (2003). "Better Opportunities or Worse? The Demise
  of Cotton Harvest Labor, 1949­1964". The Journal of Economic History 63 (3),
  736­767.
Haines, M. R. et al. (2010). "Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data:
  the United States, 1790­2002". Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for
  Political and Social Research .

                                        37
Jaeger, D. A., J. Ruist, and J. Stuhler (2018). "Shift-share Instruments and the Impact
  of Immigration". Working paper 24285, NBER.

Jones, D. B. and R. Walsh (2018). "How Do Voters Matter? Evidence from US
  Congressional Redistricting". Journal of Public Economics 158, 25­47.

Katznelson, I. and J. S. Lapinski (2006). "The Substance of Representation: Studying
 Policy Content and Legislative Behavior". In The Macropolitics of Congress, pp.
 96­126. Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ.

Kaufman, A., G. King, and M. Komisarchik (2017). "How to Measure Legislative
 District Compactness if you only know it When you see it". American Journal of
 Political Science .

Kousser, J. M. (2010). "The Immutability of Categories and The Reshaping of Southern
 Politics". Annual Review of Political Science 13, 365­383.

Kroth, V., V. Larcinese, and J. Wehner (2016). "A Better Life for All? Democratization
  and Electrification in Post-apartheid South Africa". The Journal of Politics 78 (3),
  774­791.

Kuziemko, I. and E. Washington (2018). "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South?
 Bringing New Data to an Old Debate". American Economic Review 108 (10), 2830­
 67.

Lawson, S. F. (1976). Black Ballots: Voting Rights in the South, 1944-1969. Columbia
  University Press.

Logan, T. D. and J. M. Parman (2017). "The National Rise in Residential Segregation".
  The Journal of Economic History 77 (1), 127­170.

Lott, Jr, J. R. and L. W. Kenny (1999). "Did Women's Surage Change the Size and
  Scope of Government?". Journal of political Economy 107 (6), 1163­1198.

Lowe, M. (2021). "Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Ad-
  versarial Caste Integration". American Economic Review 111 (6), 1807­44.

Margo, R. A. (1991). "Segregated Schools and the Mobility Hypothesis: a Model of
 Local Government Discrimination". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (1),
 61­73.

McAdam, D. (1982). Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-
 1970. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2010). "The Political Economy of the US Mortgage
 Default Crisis". American Economic Review 100 (5), 1967­98.


                                          38
Miller, G. (2008). "Women's Surage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in
 American History". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3), 1287­1327.
Moon, H. L. (1948). Balance of Power: The Negro Vote. Greenwood Publishing Group.
Muller, C. (2012). "Northward Migration and the Rise of Racial Disparity in American
 Incarceration, 1880­1950". American Journal of Sociology 118 (2), 281­326.
Myrdal, G. (1944). An American Dilemma: the Negro Problem and Modern Democracy.
 Harper and Row, Publishers.
Neal, D. A. and W. R. Johnson (1996). "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
  Wage Dierences". Journal of political Economy 104 (5), 869­895.
Oster, E. (2004). "Witchcraft, Weather and Economic Growth in Renaissance Europe".
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (1), 215­228.
Pearson, K. and E. Schickler (2009). "Discharge Petitions, Agenda Control, and the
  Congressional Committee System, 1929­76". The Journal of Politics 71 (4), 1238­
  1256.
Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2011). "Assessing Inherent Model Bias: An Application to Na-
  tive Displacement in Response to Immigration". Journal of Urban Economics 69 (1),
  82­91.
Pons, V. (2018). "Will a Five-minute Discussion Change Your Mind? A Countrywide
  Experiment on Voter Choice in France". American Economic Review 108 (6), 1322­
  63.
Poole, K. T. and H. Rosenthal (1985). "A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
  Analysis". American Journal of Political Science 29 (2), 357­384.
Qian, N. and M. Tabellini (2020). "Discrimination, Disenfranchisement and African
  American WWII Military Enlistment".
Rao, G. (2019). "Familiarity does not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination,
  and Diversity in Delhi Schools". American Economic Review 109 (3), 774­809.
Reber, S. J. (2011). "From Separate and Unequal to Integrated and Equal? School
  Desegregation and School Finance in Louisiana". The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 93 (2), 404­415.
Reny, T. T. and B. J. Newman (2018). "Protecting the Right to Discriminate: The Sec-
  ond Great Migration and Racial Threat in the American West". American Political
  Science Review 112 (4), 1104­1110.
Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek (2015). Integrated Public
 Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota .

                                         39
Schickler, E. (2016). Racial Realignment: The Transformation of American Liberalism,
  1932­1965. Princeton University Press.

Schindler, D. and M. Westcott (2020). "Shocking Racial Attitudes: Black G.I.s in
  Europe". The Review of Economic Studies 88 (1), 489­520.

Sequeira, S., N. Nunn, and N. Qian (2020). "Immigrants and the Making of America".
  Review of Economic Studies 87 (1), 382­419.

Shertzer, A. and R. P. Walsh (2019). "Racial Sorting and the Emergence of Segregation
  in American Cities". Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (3), 1­14.

Smith, J. P. and F. R. Welch (1989). "Black Economic Progress After Myrdal". Journal
  of economic literature 27 (2), 519­564.

Snyder, J. M. and S. Ansolabehere (2008). The End of Inequality: One Person, One
  Vote and the Reshaping of American Politics. WW Norton and Company.

Steinmayr, A. (2020). "Contact versus Exposure: Refugee Presence and Voting for the
  Far-Right". Review of Economics and Statistics , 1­47.

Sugrue, T. J. (2008). Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights
  in the North. Random House.

Sugrue, T. J. (2014). The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in Postwar
  Detroit-Updated Edition. Princeton University Press.

Swift, E. K., R. G. Brookshire, D. T. Canon, E. C. Fink, J. R. Hibbing, B. D. Humes,
  M. J. Malbin, and K. C. Martis (2000). Database of Congressional Historical Statis-
  tics [computer file]. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and
  Social Research .

Tabellini, M. (2018). "Racial Heterogeneity and Local Government Finances: Evidence
  from the Great Migration". Working Paper No. 19-006, Harvard Business School
  BGIE Unit.

Tabellini, M. (2020). "Gifts of The Immigrants, Woes of The Natives: Lessons from
  The Age of Mass Migration". Review of Economic Studies 87 (1), 454­486.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956). "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures". Journal of political
  economy 64 (5), 416­424.

Tolbert, C. M. and M. Sizer (1996). US Commuting Zones and Labor Market Areas:
  A 1990 Update. Technical report.

Trende, S. (2012). The Lost Majority: Why the Future of Government Is Up for
  Grabs-and Who Will Take It. St. Martin's Press.

                                         40
Troy, L. (1957). "Distribution of Union Membership among the States, 1939 and 1953".
  NBER Books .

Voigtl¨
      ander, N. and H.-J. Voth (2012). "Persecution Perpetuated: the Medieval Ori-
  gins of anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany". The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 127 (3), 1339­1392.

Wasow, O. (2020). "Agenda Seeding: How 1960s Black Protests Moved Elites, Public
 Opinion and Voting". American Political Science Review , 1­22.

Whatley, W. C. (1985). "A History of Mechanization in the Cotton South: the Insti-
 tutional Hypothesis". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (4), 1191­1215.

Wheaton, B. (2020). "Laws, Beliefs, and Backlash". Working Paper.

Wright, G. (2013). Sharing the Prize. Harvard University Press.

Zieger, R. H. (2000). The CIO, 1935-1955. University of North Carolina Press.




                                        41
Figures and Tables

        Figure 1. Change in the Black Share across US Counties, 1940 to 1970




Notes: The map plots the change in the share of Black individuals in the population between 1940 and 1970
for the non-southern counties (1,263) in our sample.




                                                   42
Figure 2. Heterogeneity by County Characteristics ­ Political and Economic Forces




Notes: The bars report the marginal eect of changes in the Black share (with corresponding 95% confidence
intervals) on the change in the probability of non-violent demonstrations in support of civil rights for counties
with each 1940 variable above (resp. below) the sample median in orange (resp. blue). Section 5.3.2 describes
how each variable is constructed. Coe cients and standard errors reported in Table A.6.



   Figure 3. Heterogeneity by County Characteristics ­ Social and Cultural Forces




Notes: The bars report the marginal eect of changes in the Black share (with corresponding 95% confidence
intervals) on the change in the probability of non-violent demonstrations in support of civil rights for counties
that are more (resp. less) socially progressive in orange (resp. blue). Section 5.3.2 describes how each variable
is constructed. Coe cients and standard errors reported in Table A.6.




                                                      43
                               Figure 4. Newspapers ­ Event Study




Notes: The figure plots 2SLS coe cients (with corresponding 95% intervals) on the 1940-1960 change in
the Black share in county-week level regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if
any mention about the lynching of a Black individual in the US South appeared in newspapers of the (non-
southern) county in each week. Week 0 refers to the week when the lynching occurred. See the main text
for more details. All regressions control for state and lynching episode fixed eects, and are weighed by 1940
county population. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.



                    Figure 5. Change in Signatures on Discharge Petitions




Notes: The figure plots the 2SLS coe cient (with corresponding 95% confidence intervals) for the eects of
the 1940-1950 change in the Black share on the corresponding change in the number of signatures on discharge
petitions per legislator. The first dot on the left ("All") includes discharge petitions on employment protection
legislation (FEPC), to promote anti-lynching legislation, and to abolish the poll tax. The three remaining
dots refer to each of the three issues. Results and details of the specification are reported in Table A.10.




                                                      44
                 Figure 6. Black in-Migration and Political Polarization

                                          Panel A: 1940s




                                          Panel B: 1950s




Notes: Each bar reports 2SLS coe cients (with corresponding 95% confidence intervals) for the eect of
changes in the Black share on the change in the probability of electing a member of the House with the
corresponding political orientation between Congress 78 and Congress 82 (Panel A) and between Congress
82 and Congress 88 (Panel B). The ideology indicators are defined in the main text (Section 6.2).



                                                 45
                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics
         Variables                Mean         Median          St. Dev.          Min         Max          Obs

 Panel A: 1940 levels
 Black Share (County)             3.60           2.10            0.04             0          46.50       1,263
 Black Share (CD)                 6.80           7.20            0.047            0          25.40         285
 Democratic Vote Share            46.55          49.00           12.91            0          85.00       1,263
 Turnout                          69.39          69.60           8.29           23.00        97.90       1,263
 Civil Rights Scores              -0.87          -0.81           0.71           -2.01         1.43         285

 Panel B: Changes
 Black Share (County)             1.78           0.72            2.53          -11.88        12.79       3,789
 Black Share (CD)                 5.25           5.58            2.81           -1.26        12.86         570
 Democratic Vote Share            1.53           0.67            11.11         -67.19        72.80       3,789
 Turnout                          -6.49         -13.50           17.06         -64.30        43.00       3,789
 Civil Rights Scores              0.07             0             0.71           -2.91         1.95         570

 Notes: The sample includes the 1,263 non-southern US counties (see Table A.1 for our definition of southern
states) for which electoral returns in Congressional elections are available for all Census years between 1940 and
1970, and with at least one African American resident in 1940. When relevant, county variables are collapsed
at the Congressional District level, fixing boundaries to Congress 78 as explained in the text. Democratic
vote share and turnout refer to Congressional elections, and civil rights scores are the ideology scores from
Bateman et al. (2017). Panel A presents 1940 values, while Panel B reports decadal changes for each of the
variables.




                                                         46
                                      Table 2. Congressional Elections
 Dependent Variable           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
                              OLS           OLS           OLS           2SLS         2SLS          2SLS         2SLS

 Panel A: Change in Democratic Vote Share (1940 mean: 46.55)
 Change Black              0.537***      0.538***      0.611***      0.712***      1.255***     1.885***      1.938***
 Share                      (0.108)       (0.124)       (0.146)       (0.162)       (0.277)      (0.439)       (0.464)

 Panel B: Change in Turnout (1940 mean: 69.39)
 Change Black              -0.274**      -0.298***     -0.293***       0.094        0.399*       0.756**       0.809**
 Share                      (0.121)       (0.112)       (0.109)       (0.187)       (0.235)      (0.348)       (0.356)

 Panel C: First stage
 Predicted Change                                                    0.976***      1.002***     0.758***      0.803***
 Black Share                                                          (0.261)       (0.260)      (0.233)       (0.249)

 Specification                FD            FD             FD            FD           FD            FD           LD
 1940 Black Share                            X              X                          X             X            X
 1940 Dem Incumbent                                         X                                        X            X

 F-Stat                                                                 13.95        14.88         10.57        10.42
 Observations                3,789         3,789          3,789         3,789        3,789         3,789        1,263

 Notes: The sample includes the 1,263 non-southern US counties (see Table A.1 for the definition of southern states)
for which electoral returns in Congressional elections are available for all Census years between 1940 and 1970, and
with at least one African American resident in 1940. The table reports stacked first dierence regressions in columns 1
to 6, and long dierence regressions in column 7. The dependent variable is the decadal change in the Democratic vote
share (resp. turnout) in Congressional elections in Panel A (resp. Panel B). Panel C reports the first stage associated
with 2SLS regressions. Columns 1 to 3 estimate equation (1) in the text with OLS, while remaining columns report
2SLS estimates. The main regressor of interest is the change in the Black share, which is instrumented with the
shift-share instrument described in equation (2) in the text from column 4 onwards. All regressions are weighed by
1940 county population, and control for state by period fixed eects. 1940 Black share (resp. 1940 Dem Incumbent)
refers to interactions between period dummies and the 1940 Black share (resp. a dummy equal to 1 if the Democratic
vote share in 1940 was higher than the Republicans vote share). F-stat is the K-P F-stat for weak instruments.
Robust standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05, 
p< 0.1.




                                                          47
                                     Table 3. CORE Demonstrations
 Dependent Variable                             Change in 1[Pro-Civil Rights Demonstration]
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
                                  OLS         OLS          OLS         2SLS        2SLS         2SLS        2SLS

 Panel A: Main Estimates
 Change Black                   0.033       0.024        0.025       0.075        0.053       0.057        0.033
 Share                          (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.014)      (0.013)     (0.018)      (0.016)

 Panel B: First Stage
 Predicted Change                                                    0.976        1.002       0.758        0.758
 Black Share                                                         (0.261)      (0.260)     (0.233)      (0.233)

 1940 Black Share                               X             X                      X            X           X
 1940 Dem Incumbent                                           X                                   X           X
 White Participants                                                                                           X
 F-Stat                                                                13.95       14.88        10.57       10.57
 Observations                    3,789        3,789       3,789        3,789       3,789        3,789       3,789

  Notes: The sample includes the 1,263 non-southern US counties (see Table A.1 for the definition of southern states)
for which electoral returns in Congressional elections are available for all Census years between 1940 and 1970, and
with at least one African American resident in 1940. The dependent variable is the change in the probability of
non-violent demonstrations in support of civil rights coordinated by the CORE. Columns 1 to 3 estimate equation
(1) in the text with OLS, while remaining columns report 2SLS estimates. The main regressor of interest is the
change in the Black share, which is instrumented with the shift-share instrument described in equation (2) in the
text from column 4 onwards. All regressions are weighed by 1940 county population, and control for state by period
fixed eects. 1940 Black share (resp. 1940 Dem Incumbent) refers to interactions between period dummies and the
1940 Black share (resp. a dummy equal to 1 if the Democratic vote share in 1940 was higher than the Republicans
vote share). Column 7 includes only those demonstrations that were joined by at least some white participants.
F-stat is the K-P F-stat for weak instruments. Robust standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses.
Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                         48
                                        Table 4. NAACP Chapters
 Dependent Variable                                1940-1960 Change in 1[NAACP Chapter]
                                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                                        OLS                   OLS                  2SLS                 2SLS

 Panel A: Main Estimates
 Change Black Share                   -0.022                 0.051                -0.029               0.070
                                       (0.008)               (0.016)             (0.024)               (0.035)

 Panel B: First Stage
 Predicted Change Black                                                          0.780                 0.624
 Share                                                                           (0.231)               (0.247)

 F-stat                                                                           11.41                 6.392
 Observations                           1,263                 1,069               1,263                 1,069
 Sample                             Full sample          No NAACP              Full sample          No NAACP
                                                           in 1940                                    in 1940

 Notes: The sample includes the 1,263 non-southern US counties (see Table A.1 for the definition of southern states)
for which electoral returns in Congressional elections are available for all Census years between 1940 and 1970, and
with at least one African American resident in 1940. The dependent variable is the change (between 1940 and 1960)
in the presence of NAACP chapters. Columns 2 and 4 restrict attention to counties with no NAACP chapter in
1940. Columns 1 and 2 estimate OLS regressions, whereas columns 3 and 4 present 2SLS results. The main regressor
of interest is the 1940-1960 Change Black Share, and is instrumented with the shift-share instrument constructed
in the text in columns 3 and 4. All regressions are weighed by 1940 county population, and include: i) state fixed
eects; ii) the 1940 Black share; and iii) a dummy equal to 1 if the Democratic vote share in 1940 was higher than
the Republican vote share. F-stat is the K-P F-stat for weak instruments. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
county level, in parentheses. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                        49
                      Table 5. Whites' Most Important Problem (ANES)
 Dependent Variable                            1[Pro Civil Rights: Most Important Problem]
                                      (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                      OLS              OLS             OLS            OLS            2SLS

 Panel A: Main Estimates
 1[Pro Segregation]                 -0.059
                                     (0.022)
 1[Against School                                   -0.071
  Integration]                                       (0.024)
 1[Against Housing/Work                                               -0.064
  Integration]                                                       (0.038)

 Change Black Share                                                                  0.015          0.034
                                                                                    (0.013)         (0.014)

 Panel B: First Stage
 Predicted Change                                                                                  2.748
 Black Share                                                                                       (0.439)

 Geography FE                         State           State           State         Region          Region
 State Controls                                                                       X               X

 F-Stat                                                                                              39.20
 Observations                          909             811             813            927             927
 Mean Dependent Variable              0.112           0.113           0.112          0.111           0.111

 Notes: The sample is restricted to white ANES respondents living in the US North in years 1960 and 1964,
and residing in their state of birth. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent reports
that supporting civil rights is among the most important issues facing the country at the time of the interview
(see online appendix D for exact wording and additional details on the construction of the variable). The
regressor of interest in column 2 (resp. column 3) is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent is against the
integration of schools (resp. of working environment and housing). Pro-segregation in column 1 is a dummy
if the respondent is either against school integration or against working-housing integration. Change Black
share (columns 4 and 5) is the change in the Black share at the state level between 1940 and 1960. Column
4 reports OLS estimates, while column 5 presents 2SLS estimates, instrumenting the change in the Black
share with the predicted number of Black migrants over 1940 state population. Panel B reports the first
stage. All regressions include survey year fixed eects and individual controls of respondents (gender, age and
education fixed eects and marital status). Columns 1 to 3 control for state fixed eects, while columns 4
and 5 control for region fixed eects and 1940 state characteristics (Black share; Democratic incumbency in
Congressional elections; share in manufacturing; share of workers in the CIO; urban share). The bottom row
reports the average of the dependent variable. F-stat in column 5 is the K-P F-stat for weak instruments.
Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, in parentheses.  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                      50
       Table 6. Evidence from Northern Newspapers: Cross-sectional Regressions
 Dependent Variable                                        1[Any Mention]
                                (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)

 Panel A: Main Estimates
 Change Black Share          0.253**            0.135           0.348**          0.532**         0.677**
                             (0.128)           (0.086)          (0.163)          (0.235)         (0.301)

 Panel B: First Stage
 Predicted Change           1.071***          1.032***         1.098***         1.093***         1.081***
 Black Share                 (0.289)           (0.287)          (0.291)          (0.291)          (0.289)

 F-stat                       13.76             12.95            14.26           14.08            13.96
 Observations                311,803           141,332          170,471          79,721           59,665
 State FE                       X                 X                X                X                X
 Episode FE                     X                 X                X                X                X
 Week FE                        X                 X                X                X                X
 Weeks                       0 to 26          0 to 26           0 to 26          0 to 26          0 to 26
 Sample                      1940+           1940-1944          1945+            1950+            1955+
 Notes: The sample is restricted to the 492 counties in our sample for which newspapers' data were available.
The table reports county-week-episode level regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to
1 if at least one mention about the lynching of a Black individual in the US South appeared in the local
newspapers of the county in each week from 0 to 26. Week 0 is defined as the week in which the lynching
occurred. The main regressor of interest is the 1940 to 1960 change in the Black share in the county, and is
instrumented with the shift-share instrument described in equation (2) in the text. All regressions include
state, week, and episode fixed eects, and are weighed by 1940 county population. The last row of the table
indicates the sample of lynchings considered. When the last year is not specified, it corresponds to 1964
(included). F-stat refers to the K-P F-stat for weak instruments. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
county level, in parentheses. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                      51
                 Table 7. Evidence from Northern Newspapers: Event-Study Design
 Dependent Variable                                                      1[Any Mention]
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
 Panel A. 1940-1960 Change in Black Share
 Change Black Share * POST             0.237*           0.113         0.325**         0.476**         0.691**        1.050***
                                       (0.126)         (0.085)        (0.162)         (0.228)         (0.306)         (0.262)
 F-stat                                13.61           12.76           14.04           13.78           13.5           12.87
 Observations                         357,979         162,303         195,671          91,544         68,520          22,047
 Events                                1940+         1940-1944         1945+           1950+          1955+           1960+

 Panel B. Decadal Changes in Black Share
 Change Black Share * POST              0.248         0.764**         1.127**          0.262          1.194*         1.825***
                                       (0.161)        (0.317)         (0.447)         (0.189)         (0.625)         (0.534)

 F-stat                                20.96           22.95           22.51           8.433          8.624           8.227
 Observations                         162,303         195,671          91,544         266,429         68,520          22,047
 Change Black share                  1940-1950       1940-1950       1940-1950      1950-1960       1950-1960       1950-1960
 Events                              1940-1944         1945+           1950+        1940-1949         1955+           1960+
 County FE                                X               X               X              X               X               X
 Episode FE                               X               X               X              X               X               X
 State-week FE                            X               X               X              X               X               X
 Notes: The sample is restricted to the 492 counties in our sample for which newspapers' data were available. The table reports
county-week-episode level regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one mention about the
lynching of a Black individual in the US South appeared in the local newspapers of the county in each week from -4 to 26. Week
0 is defined as the week in which the lynching occurred. The main regressor of interest is the 1940 to 1960 (resp. decadal) change
in the Black share in the county in Panel A (resp. Panel B) interacted with an indicator for weeks 0 and above (POST). The
change in the Black share is instrumented with the shift-share instrument described in equation (2) in the text. All regressions
include county, state by week, and episode fixed eects, and are weighed by 1940 county population. Columns 1 to 3 (resp. 4 to
6) of Panel B consider the 1940-1950 (resp. 1950-1960) change in the Black share. The last row of the table indicates the sample
of lynchings considered. When the last year is not specified, it corresponds to 1964 (included). F-stat refers to the K-P F-stat
for weak instruments. Robust standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Significance levels:  p< 0.01, 
p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                           52
                               Table 8. Changes in Legislators' Ideology
 Dependent Variable Change in Civil Rights Ideology (Lower Values = More Liberal Ideology)
                                     Agnostic Scores                              Constrained Scores
                                 (Baseline Mean: -0.872)                        (Baseline Mean: -0.853)
                               (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)

 Panel A: OLS
 Change Black Share           0.008        -0.139***       0.049**          0.002        -0.150***        0.044**
                             (0.014)        (0.036)        (0.020)         (0.015)        (0.041)         (0.022)

 Panel B: 2SLS
 Change Black Share           -0.051       -0.300***        0.046           -0.054       -0.337***         0.058
                             (0.039)        (0.116)        (0.056)         (0.041)        (0.124)         (0.059)

 Panel C: First stage
 Predicted Change     1.570***              1.054***      1.944***        1.553***        1.050***       1.917***
 Black Share           (0.438)               (0.377)       (0.557)         (0.442)         (0.377)        (0.564)

 F-Stat                       12.87           7.814           12.19         12.35           7.770          11.57
 Observations                  570             285             285           570             285            285

 Congress Period          78-82; 82-88        78-82           82-88     78-82; 82-88        78-82          82-88

  Notes: The dependent variable is the change in the civil rights ideology scores from Bateman et al. (2017) ­
"Agnostic" scores in columns 1 to 3, and "Constrained" scores in columns 4 to 6. Lower (resp. higher) values of the
score refer to more liberal (resp. conservative) ideology (see also Bateman et al., 2017, for more details). Columns 1
and 4 (resp. 2-3, and 5-6) estimate stacked first dierence regressions (resp. first dierence regressions for Congress
period 78-82 and 82-88). Panel A reports OLS results and Panel B reports 2SLS results, while Panels C presents
first stage estimates. All regressions are weighed by 1940 congressional district population and control for state by
year fixed eects and include interactions between period dummies and: i) the 1940 Black share in the congressional
district; ii) a dummy for Democratic incumbency in the 78th Congress in the district; and iii) the ideology score in
the district in the 78th Congress. First dierence regressions do not include interactions with period dummies since
these are automatically dropped. F-stat refers to the K-P F-stat for weak instruments. Robust standard errors,
clustered at the congressional district level, in parentheses. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                         53
