                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT AND LABOR MONOPSONY POWER

                                         Wyatt Brooks
                                      Joseph P. Kaboski
                                       Illenin O. Kondo
                                         Yao Amber Li
                                           Wei Qian

                                      Working Paper 28977
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28977


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Financial support from CEPR's STEG research programme is gratefully acknowledged.
Kaboski has significant financial relationships with Yale University's YRISE, the IMF, and
STEG.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Wyatt Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, Illenin O. Kondo, Yao Amber Li, and Wei Qian.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Infrastructure Investment and Labor Monopsony Power
Wyatt Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, Illenin O. Kondo, Yao Amber Li, and Wei Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 28977
July 2021
JEL No. J0,J42,O1,O18

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper we study whether or not transportation infrastructure disrupts local monopsony
power in labor markets using an expansion of the national highway system in India. Using panel
data on manufacturing firms, we find that monopsony power in labor markets is reduced among
firms near newly constructed highways relative to firms that remain far from highways. We
estimate that the highways reduce labor markdowns significantly. We use changes in the
composition of inputs to identify these effects separately from the reduction of output markups
that occurs simultaneously. The impacts of highway construction are therefore pro-competitive in
both output and input markets, and act to increase the share of income that labor receives by
1.8--2.3 percentage points.

Wyatt Brooks                                  Yao Amber Li
W. P. Carey School of Business                Department of Economics
Arizona State University                      Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
PO Box 879801                                 Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Tempe, AZ 85287                               Hong Kong SAR-PRC
wjbrooks@asu.edu                              yaoli@ust.hk

Joseph P. Kaboski                             Wei Qian
Department of Economics                       University of Notre Dame
University of Notre Dame                      Departments of Economics
3039 Nanovic Hall                             wqian@nd.edu
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Illenin O. Kondo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
kondo@illenin.com
1    Introduction
Investments in transportation infrastructure are key to promoting economic growth and
spreading growth geographically by lowering trade costs (e.g., Donaldson, 2018), inducing
firm growth (e.g., Lu, 2020), increasing competition (e.g., Asturias et al., 2019), and allowing
workers to commute (e.g., Asher and Novosad, 2020). Yet the effect that transportation
infrastructure has on wages is potentially ambiguous as connecting markets causes many
things to change simultaneously: workers may work in other markets (raising local wages),
firms may attract workers from new markets where wages are lower (lowering local wages),
and local production may increase or decrease based on changes in output competition across
markets.
    In this paper, we study an aspect of how wages are affected by transportation infrastruc-
ture that has received less attention: to what extent does transportation infrastructure affect
the ability of firms to exercise monopsony power in local labor markets? In principle, easier
labor commutes may increase the mobility of a labor force that is otherwise captive to the lo-
cal labor market. This is especially important in rural areas that are otherwise unconnected
by roads. We address this question in the context of the India's Golden Quadrilateral (GQ)
expressway expansion initiative. The Golden Quadrilateral initiative is of interest for several
reasons. First, it is one of the largest highway expansions in the world. Second, in developing
countries monopsony power may be particularly strong. India has traditionally been known
for having spatially segmented markets where the potential for monopsony power is high
(see, for example, Brooks et al., 2021; Binswanger and Mark R. Rosenzweig, 1984; Braver-
man and Stiglitz, 1982, 1986). Finally, the GQ was built quite rapidly, expanding from only
5 to 95 percent complete between 2001 and 2006.
    We focus on labor "markdowns" and their impact on labor's share of aggregate income. A
markdown is the ratio of the value of the marginal product of labor to the wage that is above
and beyond what is explained by a markup in the output market. As an example, suppose
a firm uses oil and labor as inputs. We observe that the value of the marginal product of oil
exceeds its input price by 10%, while the value of the marginal product of labor exceeds the
wage by 32%. By assuming that the market for materials (oil, in this example) is competitive,
we can apply the methods of Brooks et al. (2021) to disentangle the firm's markup on its
output from the markdown on labor. In this example, since oil is competitive, the 10%
gap between the value of the marginal product of oil and its price is equal to the markup
on its output. Then the markdown on its labor is simply 20% (i.e., 1.32/1.1-1). Applying
these methods to detailed geographic data, we find substantial pre-existing labor markdowns
in the data. We then show that for firms near the newly constructed expressway, average


                                               1
markdowns are reduced substantially.
    Figure 1 illustrates the pattern for three different measures of the markdown.                                      It shows
the time path of labor markdowns by tercile of how close a firm's district is to                                        the GQ,
which is all but completed in 2006. The paths of the three terciles show roughly                                        identical
increases until 2006, at which point the markdowns in the most remote locations                                         continue
to rise, while the two terciles closest to the expressway flatten off.

                         Figure 1: Impact of Highway on Markdowns by Proximity Tercile


                              Markdown (DLW)                                                     Markdown (CD)
   .9 1.2 1.5




                                                                     .9 1.2 1.5
   .6




                                                                     .6
   .3




                                                                     .3
   0




                                                                     0


                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011                    1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011


                              Markdown (CRS)
   .9 1.2 1.5
   .6
   .3
   0




                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011


                         Tercile 1 (closest)                     Tercile 2                             Tercile 3 (furthest)

Note: This graph shows the time path of labor markdowns by tercile of how close a firm's district is to
the Golden Quadrilateral. The reported markdown is the weighted average of firms' markdowns, where the
weight is the product of the firms' average labor compensation and the survey-provided sampling weight.
DLW, CD and CRS are the three methods we use to measure markdowns, and their construction is explained
in Section 3.3. The vertical line indicates the year 2006 when GQ is mostly completed.


    We delve into the causes of the lower markdowns for connected districts. First, we show
that even though the impact of the GQ connection on markups is perhaps negative, it cannot
account for the lower markdown. Instead we measure relative increases in labor compen-
sation and labor's share among connected firms. While we cannot isolate the precise way

                                                                 2
in which these lower markdowns are manifested, we rule out several possible explanations.
In particular, we do not find strong evidence that the highway-induced reduction in labor
markdowns is correlated with the firm labor share. Neither do we find evidence of increased
labor supply elasticity or changes in skill premia in integrated labor markets.
    Nevertheless, the markdown patterns we uncover are economically significant. Mark-
downs induce an aggregate labor's share that is between 3 and 7 percentage points lower
than it would be in the absence of markdowns. The introduction of the GQ reduces mark-
downs and leads to an increase in the aggregate labor's share of aggregate output by about
1.8 to 2.3 percentage points.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review the relevant literature in the
remaining introduction. Section 2 reviews a general model of firm with monopsony power,
and uses it to derive our formula for markdowns. In Section 3, we give background on the
Golden Quadrilateral initiative, our data, and our practical measurement of markups and
markdowns. Section 4 then presents the empirical analysis, and Section 5 concludes.


1.1    Related Literature
This paper contributes to multiple ongoing areas of research. There is a growing literature
on labor monopsony, especially in the United States (Card et al., 2018; Gouin-Bonenfant,
2018; Lamadon et al., 2019; Berger et al., 2018; Hershbein et al., 2020). The first three
examine the sharing of rents in labor markets with search and matching frictions. Berger
et al. (2018) study a similar labor market using mergers for identification. Hershbein et al.
(2020) study classical monopoly power, documenting time series patterns in markdowns in
the U.S., including a sharp increase after 2000. Most directly, we borrow our measure for
markdowns on labor from Brooks et al. (2021), which also focuses on labor markdown in
India. This paper is novel in looking at the impact of large-scale infrastructure investment
on firms' monopsony power, however.
    Another series of papers have analyzed the impacts of infrastructure investments on
firms and labor markets. Most closely related is Asturias et al. (2019), which uses a trade
model to quantify the impact of increased competition in the product market from the ex-
pansion of the Golden Quadrilateral highway system in India. We utilize their data and
complement their findings by empirically assessing the impact of the GQ on labor market
competition. Although they find impacts on markups, the techniques developed here are
robust to variation in product market markups, and those markups do not affect our estima-
tion of input markdowns. Other work has studied the impact of roads on labor migration.
For example, Asher and Novosad (2020) show that the primary impact of a large national


                                             3
rural road construction program connecting villages in India is an occupational move away
from agriculture to wage income, and suggest that this is driven by labor opportunities from
outside the villages. Similarly, Brooks and Donovan (2020) show how bridge infrastructure
investment in Nicaragua substantially changed labor patterns by allowing rural workers to
access new labor markets. We complement this literature by showing how changes in labor
market opportunities and competition for workers impacts firms' ability to markdown wages
monopsonistically.1
    Several other papers have looked at the impact of the National Trunk Highway Sys-
tem, another major highway expansion but in China. Using a before-after approach and
region level data, Faber (2014) finds that it lowered the industrial output and growth of
newly connected areas. In contrast, using more continuous variation and firm-level data,
Lu (2020) finds that the same project promotes growth of firms in newly connected areas
using variations in the timing of highway segment construction. Alder and Kondo (2020)
show how the highway planning in China was driven by political economy considerations,
and they solve for the optimal highway system devoid of such consideration. An advantage
of our India setting is that we do not suffer from the challenge of disentangling multiple
reforms--including relaxation of the Hukou system that allows for more migration and uni-
lateral trade liberalization­which could have a first-order impact on the labor markets and
confound interpretation.


2       Model
Following Brooks et al. (2021), this section derives our measure of the markdown and links
it to labor's share of income.


2.1     Monopsonistic Firm's Problem
We consider the problem of a firm who has market power in both the product market, the
local labor market, and potentially other input markets. We index the firm and its output
by n = 1...N , its industry by i = 1...I , and its location by k = 1...K . Firms use two inputs:
labor and materials. Importantly, the firm is a price-taker in one input market. In our
application, materials will be the input for which the firm is a price-taker.2
    Letting xM                                                L
             nki denote the quantities of materials and xnki denote the labor employed by

    1
      See also Alder (2016) for a study of the aggregate and regional effects of the GQ and counterfactual
network designs using a Ricardian spatial trade model.
    2
      Brooks et al. (2021) develop this model with an arbitrary number of inputs. Our results extend to this
case so long as the firm is a price-taker in at least one of them.

                                                     4
firm n located in k and operating in industry i, we express the industry-specific production
function quite generally as:
                                 ynki = Fi (xL      M
                                             nki , xnki ; Znki )                         (1)

where Znki is a set of firm-level characteristics, including productivity but also any other
potential firm or location-specific factors that might affect the level or shape of technology.
   For labor input, the firm faces an inverse supply function that depends on the aggregate
                L
labor supply Xki  in location k and industry i:

                                                 L
                                                wki = GL  L
                                                       i Xki ,                                          (2)

where the aggregate quantity equals, by market clearing, the total input demanded across
all Nki firms in the industry and location:

                                                              Nki
                                                     L
                                                    Xki   =         xL
                                                                     nki .                              (3)
                                                              n=1

                                                                              M
Again, the supply of materials is perfectly elastic at a given factor price, wki . The most
natural interpretation of this assumption is that materials are traded both within country
and internationally so that local firms have no market power to exert over their prices.3
   Likewise, the firm faces an inverse demand for its output, given the output of all other
goods, which we denote {yjki }j =i :

                                         pnki = Hi (ynki ; {yjki }j =i )                                (4)

Here we assume that firms face a single demand function. This would be the case if they
sell to a single national market and if there are no transportation costs across locations.4
    The firm's profit maximization problem is therefore:

                                                                 M M        L L
                                    max             pnki ynki - wki xnki - wki xnki                     (5)
                              {ynki ,xM     L
                                      nki ,xnki }



subject to:
                                         ynki = Fi (xL      M
                                                     nki , xnki ; Znki )

   3
      We believe this assumption is reasonable among the Indian manufacturing firms being studied in this
paper, but we admit it may not be appropriate in every context. See Morlacco (2019) for a discussion of
market power among large French importers.
    4
      Alternatively, the model could be extended to include a competitive wholesale sector in each location
that buys the local output from the firms, then sells it to many locations based on transportation costs and
variation in local demand. The firms internalize that their choice of output affects wholesaler demand so
that there are still markups for their output. This case is not presented here for ease of exposition.

                                                              5
                                   pnki = Hi (ynki ; {yjki }j =i )
                                         L
                                        wki = GL  L
                                               i Xki .

                               L
    The fact that pnki and wki    are both functions in the constraints emphasizes that firms
internalize their effect on both output prices and input prices. In particular, by producing
more output, they reduce the price of their own output, and by choosing to use more labor,
firms internalize the effect of higher wages.
    Using nki as the Lagrange multiplier on the production function, the firm's first-order
conditions are:
                                            pnki
                                     pnki +      ynki = nki                                (6)
                                            ynki
                                           L
                                 L       wki             Fi
                                wki +     L
                                              xL
                                               nki = nki                                   (7)
                                         xnki            xL
                                                          nki

                                         M               Fi
                                        wki = nki                                          (8)
                                                         xM
                                                          nki

   Notice that equations (6), (7) and (8) can be rewritten, respectively, as:

                                     nki       log(pnki )
                                          =1+                                              (9)
                                     pnki      log(ynki )

                                   ynki log(
                                         log(Fi )
                                             xL )
                                                                         L
                                                                   log(wki )
                                               nki
                             nki      L L
                                                     =1+                L
                                                                                          (10)
                                     wki xnki                      log(xnki )

                                            ynki log(
                                                  log(Fi )
                                                      xM )
                                                         nki
                                      nki       M M
                                                                  =1                      (11)
                                               wki xnki

2.2    Markups
We define a markup as the ratio of output price to marginal cost. A common measure for
markups from de Loecker and Warzynski (2012) is the ratio of the the elasticity of an input
to its cost share. However, that ratio which we define as µLnki for labor input is not, in
general, equal to the markup:
                                                      log(Fi )
                                                      log(xL
                                                           nki )
                                        µL
                                         nki            L xL
                                                      wki
                                                                   .                      (12)
                                                            nki
                                                      pnki ynki

    In the absence of monopsony power, using any input implies the same measured markup.
However, this is no longer true with monopsony power. If the firm is not price-taking in labor,
for example, µLnki could exceed one for two reasons: market power in the output market, or
monopsonistic market power in the labor market. Here our assumption that the material


                                                     6
input M is perfectly elastically supplied is helpful, since it provides a way of measuring
markups in output prices without being confounded by the presence of monopsonistic market
power on other inputs.
    Manipulating the equations above, we can solve for the markup µM   nki making use of the
price-taking input as follows:

                                         wkiM xM
                                               nki
                                         pnki ynki           1            log(pnki )
                                                        =          =1+               .                     (13)
                                          log(Fi )          µM
                                                             nki          log(ynki )
                                          log(xM
                                               nki )



2.3      Markdowns
Taking the ratio of equations (7) and (8), we can then isolate monopsony power in the market
for labor relative to the markup:

                                                       µL
                                                        nki
                                                                         L
                                                                   log(wki )
                                             m,         M
                                                            = 1 +       L
                                                                                                           (14)
                                                       µnki        log(xnki )
    In other words, the left-hand side is a properly normalized measure of the exercise of
classical monopsonistic market power, i.e., what the literature refers to as a "markdown".
This gives us a clear way of measuring the markdown. At times, we refer to the markdown
as the "markdown ratio" to emphasize that the markdown is calculated as the ratio of two
markup measures.
                                                             L
    Substituting in the definition of the aggregate supply Xki  = N     ki  L
                                                                       n=1 xnki , and manipulating
                                                                L   L
                                                               wki xnki
shows how this equals the ratio of the share of firm sLnki =    w L xL
                                                                         to the elasticity of labor
                                                                                  l   ki lki
                        L)
                   log(Xki
supply    L   =         L
                   log(wki )
                             .   Then:
                                                         L
                                                   log(wki )   1
                                                        L
                                                              = sLnki .                                    (15)
                                                   log(xnki )   L

    and the markdown equation becomes:

                                                       µL
                                                        nki      1
                                                        M
                                                            = 1 + sLnki .                                  (16)
                                                       µnki       L

    Thus, a markdown will be high when either the elasticity of labor supply is low or the
firm has a large share of the market.5




    5
     In principle, the ratio may also reflect other frictions that can distort the firm's labor input choice away
from the price-taking allocation, but we emphasize that the component associated with market share reflects
the exercise of monopsony power.

                                                                   7
2.4    Labor's Share of Income
Again, following Brooks et al. (2021), we can derive the aggregate factor payment share for
labor. Labor's share of value added in this economy is therefore:

                                                I       K        Nki
                                                                        L L
                                                                       wki xnki
                                                i=1 k=1 n=1
                            L =        I    K     Nki
                                                                                         .   (17)
                                                                          M M
                                                            (pnki ynki - wki xnki )
                                    i=1 k=1 n=1


Define the labor share of a given firm in the national labor pool as:
                                                              L L
                                   L                         wki xnki
                                   nki =            I       K    Nki
                                                                                  .          (18)
                                                                        L L
                                                                       wki xnki
                                                i=1 k=1 n=1


    Then notice by taking the reciprocal of the labor share, we can derive an expression that
depends on firm-level labor shares of the national labor pool, and ratios of input expenditure
to revenue:
                          I   K Nki                     I   K Nki   M M
                  1                  pnki ynki L                   wki xnki L
                     =                 L L
                                                 nki -               L L
                                                                             nki .        (19)
                  L      i=1 k=1 n=1
                                     w ki x nki        i=1 k=1 n=1
                                                                   wki x nki

    Finally, notice that the ratios of input expenditure to revenue appear in the definitions
of the markups. That is:
                                            L                                 M
                                            nki                               nki
                             µL
                              nki           L xL
                                           wki
                                                        ,         µM
                                                                   nki         M xM
                                                                             wki
                                                                                             (20)
                                               nki                                 nki
                                           pnki ynki                         pnki ynki


where for any input m,
                                           m             log(Fi )
                                           nki                      .                        (21)
                                                         log(xm
                                                              nki )

   These imply that:

               pnki ynki  µL
                           nki             pnki ynki  µM
                                                       nki
                                                            M M
                                                           wki xnki µL   M
                                                                     nki nki
                 L L
                         = L   ,             M M
                                                     = M = L L = M L .
               wki xnki   nki              wki xnki   nki  wki xnki µnki nki

   Finally, this can be substituted into equation (19) to get:

                                   I       K    Nki
                          1                                 µL    M     M
                                                             nki µnki - nki L
                            =                                              nki .             (22)
                          L        i=1 k=1 n=1
                                                            µM
                                                             nki
                                                                      L
                                                                    nki



                                                             8
    We have only rearranged definitions, to put labor's share into a form where we can easily
isolate the role of markdowns (and markups) by constructing and applying counterfactual
series of µL         M
           nki and µnki into the above formula. In particular, looking at equation (16) and
                                                   µL
setting sLnki = 0, we construct a counterfactual µM
                                                    nki
                                                         = 1 that gives labor's share when
                                                    nki
monopsony power has been eliminated.


3        Policy Background, Data, and Measures
This section explains the policy initiative, data, and various measures for markdowns that
we utilize.


3.1        The Golden Quadrilateral Initiative
The Golden Quadrilateral is a highway system in India that is so named because it connects
the largest metropolitan areas across India: Delhi in the north, Calcutta in the east, Chennai
in the south, and Mumbai in the west in a circuit. The Quadrilateral spans 5,846 km, making
it the largest highway system in India, and among the largest in the world.
    The initiative was implemented by the National Highways Authority of India. It con-
nected the four urban areas with an expressway with four to six lanes across for the first time.
Prior to its construction no expressway connected the cities: only two percent of national
highways were four lanes, over a quarter of national highways were of "poor" road quality,
and about a quarter of the roads were considered congested (World Bank, 2002). This system
was intended to greatly reduce travel times. For example, the Delhi-Gurgaon Expressway,
which is a part of Golden Quadrilateral Highway Project, has reduced the traveling time
between Gurgaon and Delhi from 60 minutes to approximately 20 minutes.
    It was announced in 1999 and construction started in 2001. The original estimated
cost was 600 billion rupees (about $12.8 billion in 2001), but the project was completed
significantly under budget at 250 billion rupees ($5.3 billion in 2001). Nevertheless, the total
cost was sizable; it would have constituted 1 percent of GDP in 2001.
    Asturias et al. (2019) geocoded the 127 stretches that comprise the highway. They show
that it was built quite rapidly; while only 5% was complete in 2001, 95% was complete
by 2006, the original target date.6 A second stage that involved a cross across the four
corners was only ten percent complete by 2006. Hence, we follow Asturias et al. (2019) and
focus on the original quadrilateral, using 2006 as the key date. Figure 2 below reproduces


    6
        The expressway was not fully completed until 2013.

                                                      9
their Figure 1 and shows the Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) completion on top of the previous
(non-expressway) road network.




           Figure 2: Road Network in India and the Golden Quadrilateral (GQ)


    Another important policy that impacted labor markets around the same time is the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act of 2005 (NREGA), which guaranteed 100 days
a year of government-sponsored manual labor employment to any adult in rural areas willing
to work. As this introduced an alternative source of employment, it is possible for this to
have reduced monopsony power. However, since it is guaranteed in rural areas it is likely to
have impacted those areas far from the GQ, rather than those closer to the GQ. Nevertheless,
we consider NREGA in our robustness analyses.


3.2    Data
We utilize two datasets. The road and geospatial data come from the previously mentioned
Asturias et al. (2019). Their data is based on geospatial data for all the National Highways
of India supplied by ML Infomap, which they augment using information provided by the
NHAI on the completion dates of various 127 stretches.
    We link these data to the panel version of India's Annual Survey of Industries, which
is collected by their Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. These data are
establishment level, so we have information on the actual location of production. Although
not completely representative, the coverage is broad, containing all large plants (greater
than 50 employees) and a sample of smaller plants that depends on the industry and the


                                            10
number of plants within that industry and state. The approximate number of establishments
contained in the sample varies from 23,000 to 44,000 over the years 1999 to 2011. We focus
on manufacturing and use the narrow 4-digit industry classification. We utilize measures of
output (the value of gross output), material expenditures (the total value of domestic and
imported items purchased for production), labor payments (the sum of wage, bonus, and
contribution to provident and other funds), and capital (the value of fixed assets, net of
depreciation). Labor payment data is used to construct share of the labor market at the
district and 4-digit industry level.
    Geographically, the finest data we have is at the district level. There are over 600 dis-
tricts in India, and the highway data measures the shortest straight-line distance between
the highway and the most populous city in the district.7 We then link these data to the firm
district to yield estimates of firm distance to the highway. We start by dropping the areas
within 50 km of the four major urban centers. We then construct terciles of districts based
on their proximity to the completed expressway. Figure 3 shows the three terciles; red are
closest (1st tercile) whereas yellow are furthest (3rd tercile). The tercile boundaries around
the highway are large. The first tercile includes districts within 55 kilometers of the ex-
pressway, while the second includes districts within 191 kilometers. Clearly, these cannot be
interpreted directly as commuting zones. However, in a spatial model of partially integrated
labor markets, the spatial spillovers can extend far beyond the first order effects on directly
connected labor markets.89 By its nature, distance to the highway will be geographically
clustered. To assuage concerns, we drop areas within 50 kilometers of the four metro cen-
ters, and we also show that our results are robust to separately controlling for coastal areas.
Finally, we show that our results are robust to the use of distance to the minimum distance
straight-line connection between metro centers, an identification robustness procedure used
by Asturias et al. (2019) and Alder and Kondo (2020).




   7
      The district classification follows the 2011 Census of India. The number of districts has increased from
640 in the year 2011 to 720 as of 2018.
    8
      For example, Allen and Arkolakis (2014) find that the impacts of the U.S. interstate system extend
far beyond the actual interstates. Similarly, Caliendo et al. (2019) find extensive indirect impacts of China
trade shocks on labor markets throughout the United States.
    9
      Moreover, in the appendix we show that our results are largely robust to the inclusion of state*time
dummies, which indicates that the identification comes off of within-state, across-district variation.

                                                     11
                                        Golden Quadrilateral



                                        Delhi




                                                                     Calcutta



                       Mumbai




                                                 Chennai

                       Targeted areas
                       Tercile 1
                       Tercile 2
                       Tercile 3



                       Figure 3: Indian Districts by GQ Proximity Terciles
Note: This graph plots the terciles of districts based on their proximity to the completed expressway. The
first tercile includes districts within 55 kilometers of the expressway, while the second includes districts
within 191 kilometers. The targeted areas are districts within 50 kilometers radius from the center of the
four "corners" of the Golden Quadrilateral: Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai, and Mumbai.



3.3     Measuring Markdowns and Markups
We measure markdowns according to equation (16), which requires measuring markups. This
can be done in various ways, which we explore in this subsection. Following Brooks et al.
(2021), we consider three alternative approaches to measuring markups, all of which they
report as giving comparable results.
                                                                                 M
    Using the formula in equation (13) requires an output elasticity, defined as i,t =   log(Fi )
                                                                                       log(xM
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                             nkit )
The standard approach, used by de Loecker and Warzynski (2012) (referred to hereafter as
DLW), is to estimate the production function by applying the methods of Ackerberg et al.
(2015). They estimate translog production functions, which can then be used to easily solve
for the output elasticities. Although most common, this approach has some important short-
comings, especially when used in conjunction with DLW to estimate markups. The main
limitation is that the production is only identified for the case of either a value-added pro-


                                                    12
duction function or a gross output production function in which materials are Leontieff (see
Ackerberg et al. (2015) and also Gandhi et al. (2020) for a full explanation). Either of these
special cases preclude the estimation of the elasticity of output with respect to materials,
the precise parameter necessary to apply the de Loecker and Warzynski (2012) formula.10
Since this is the standard way of estimating markups (e.g., de Loecker and Warzynski (2012),
Edmond et al. (2015), de Loecker et al. (2016), and Brooks et al. (2020)), we present this as
one measure, but we allow for several alternatives. We label this markup method "DLW",
since it most closely follows their implementation.
    Our second method is to estimate markups as the gross profit margin. This is a valid
method as long as the production function is constant returns to scale and the firm is price-
taking in its inputs (i.e., there is no monopsony power). Again, the second condition is
problematic given our focus on monopsony.11 The precise formula we use is:

                                             sales        py
                                   µM
                                    nkit =         =              .                                       (23)
                                             costs   RK + wL + qM
where we can measure sales (py ), labor payments (wL), and materials expenditures (qM )
directly from the data. For capital, we have the stock of capital (K ) rather than the payments
to capital (RK ). The key therefore is to differentiate payments to capital from profits that
stem from markups/market power. Notice that the reason this measure of markups is less
appropriate in the presence of markdowns is because it attributes all profits (in excess of
returns to capital) to markups (higher revenues per unit of output), while some actually
would come from markdowns (lower costs per unit of output).
     We discipline the return to capital using the cost of capital measured in the data using
R = r +  . We look at the return on corporate bonds, which yields a value of r = 0.08.
We assume a standard depreciation rate of  = 0.05 to yield R values of 0.13 in India. This
yields an average markup of 1.21. We label this second markup measure as "CRS", which
stands for the constant returns to scale assumption.
                                                                                             M
     Our third method uses the markup formula in equation (13), but instead of estimating i,t  ,
it simply assumes that the production function is Cobb-Douglas with respect to materials,
      M
i.e., i,t = M . This is a strong assumption on functional form, but it is internally consistent
and is therefore our preferred method. This measure of the markup is merely the inverse
of the share of materials normalized by a scalar, the elasticity of output with respect to
materials, M . This scalar cannot be identified from the factor payment share to materials
  10
      An additional limitation is that it assumes a production function that is constant across firms (within
an industry) and only differs by a factor-neutral productivity parameter.
   11
      It is, however, less restrictive along other dimensions. It allows for firm-specific production functions
that are time-varying, for example. In this sense, it also allows for more general forms of technological
change, including factor augmenting technical change.

                                                      13
in the presence of market power. Hence, we need to simply assign a value. Specifically, we
choose M so that the average level of these markups equals the average measured using the
CRS method.12 Naturally, the qualitative patterns are independent of this scaling, but the
magnitudes depend on it. We refer to this third markup measure as "CD", which stands
for Cobb-Douglas. In each case, markups are clearly measured with substantial error. We
therefore winsorize 3 percent in both sides of the tails of each 2-digit industry in each year.
    In addition, we can measure the labor-based markup µL     nkit . We measure the labor-based
markup again using the CD approach, assuming a constant L . However, since we lack a solid
target for markdowns (analogous to our the markup target used to assign M ), L cannot
be identified in the same way. Instead, we calibrate this elasticity by using a structural
prediction of the model. Namely, equation (16) says that if the firm has no market power,
then the ratio µL      M                                              L
                nkit /µnkit is equal to one. We choose the value of  to satisfy this equation.
                                                                                              13

We again winsorize the 3% tails of the distribution in each 2-digit industry in each year.
Notice in the CD case that the markdown becomes materials payments divided by labor
payments multiplied by a constant equaling the ratio L /M .
    Table 1 gives summary statistics for the most important measures coming from this
analysis, including implied values of markups and markdowns. The first three columns give
summary statistics based on sampling weighted data using the survey-provided sampling
weights. Average markups range from 1.07 (in the CD formula) to 1.42 (in the DLW formula).
The average values of the markdowns are 1.01 across all three formulas. The average firm
is located 119 km from the completed GQ highway, and has a labor market share of 0.10 in
the district-industry.
    The last three columns give alternative summary statistics that additionally weight by
labor-compensation, which lead to somewhat larger markdowns.14 The regressions we report
utilize survey-provided sampling weights alone. Theory gives us no direction in choosing
between raw (sample-weighted) regressions and labor-compensation weighted, since these

   12
     The reported averages are not equal because of the winsorizing process.
   13
     To be more precise, we start with unnormalized values µ~L                    L    L
                                                             nkit = pnkit ynkit /wkit xnkit . We then regress
 L      M
µ
~nkit /µnkit on labor share and a constant:

                                            ~L
                                            µnkit
                                                  =  + sL
                                                        nkit + unkit
                                            µM
                                             nkit

We then set µL                 ~L
                 nkit equal to µnkit /^, effectively assigning L = 1/     ^. This guarantees that the predicted value
of that ratio is equal to one when the labor share is zero.
   14
      If si,t is the sampling weight for firm i at time t and ci,t is the average labor compensation of firm i,
then the new sampling weight is:
                                                               si,t ci,t
                                                 weighti,t =
                                                               j sj,t cj,t
.

                                                         14
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                        Simple Average    Labor-Comp. Weighted
                                     Mean Median SD Mean Median           SD
       Markup (DLW)                  1.42     1.27   0.51 1.56    1.42   0.66
       Markup (CD)                   1.07     0.94   0.40 1.21    1.10   0.43
       Markup (CRS)                  1.21     1.15   0.28 1.34    1.27   0.36
       Markdown (DLW)                1.01     0.51   1.43 1.13    0.54   1.78
       Markdown (CD)                 1.01     0.50   1.48 1.09    0.54   1.82
       Markdown (CRS)                1.01     0.53   1.38 1.07    0.58   1.62
       log(labor compensation)       14.0     13.8    1.7  18.4   18.3    2.4
       Labor's share                 0.44     0.31   0.51 0.37    0.24   0.49
       Labor market share (state)    0.03    0.003 0.11 0.26      0.10   0.32
       Labor market share (district) 0.10     0.02   0.20 0.46    0.33   0.40
       Distance to highway (km)       119      72    137    92     22     125
       Distance by groups
         Tercile 1                     6        0     14     6     0      14
         Tercile 2                   128      135     39   129    134      38
         Tercile 3                   299      273    112   295    264     108
       Notes: Market shares are computed using 4-digit industries. Labor compensation is in
       thousand Rupees (in real value). We winsorize the markup, markdown, and labor's share
       measures above and below the 3rd and 97th percentiles. Columns 1-3 report weighted
       summary statistics where the weight is the survey-provided sampling weights. Columns 4-6
       report weighted summary statistics where the weight is the product of the firms' average
       labor compensation and the survey-provided sampling weight.


should be identical. Empirically, the magnitudes of coefficients are very similar, but standard
errors are larger and so we lose significance when weighting by labor compensation.15
    Examining these summary statistics, we must acknowledge that the distribution of (nor-
malized) measured markdowns is not consistent with the distribution implied by the theory
along a key dimension. In particular, the median markdown ratio is well below one, while the
formula in equation (16) implies markdown ratios weakly greater than one. However, we are
not distressed by this apparent conflict, since it would follow naturally from measurement
error, which is clearly present in the data. Since markdown ratios have the markup in the
denominator, classical measurement error in the denominator would lead to non-classical
measurement error in markdowns. It would impute a rightward skew to the distribution,
which we see, with the mean well above the median.
    However, by Jensen's inequality, the average markdown in the raw distribution may be

  15
     The coefficients on the triple interaction of the firm share with the highway implementation in Table 5
are not inconsistent with the results being weaker for the largest firms. However, if one is concerned that
measurement for the smallest firms may be poor, our results are robust to dropping the smallest 20% of
firms as shown in Table A.7 of the appendix.

                                                    15
then overstated, so that our rescaling factor may be too large. When we normalize L
using the regression constant as above, the normalization may push too many firms below
a markdown ratio of one. Again, this scaling will affect the level of markdown ratios and
therefore the magnitude of regression coefficients, but it has no effect at all on qualitative
patterns nor the implications for the impact of labor market power on labor's share.16 It will
only affect the magnitudes of markdown ratios and the estimated regression coefficients.17
    The validity and robustness of our markdown measures is an important concern. We
can evaluate the validity of our measures on multiple fronts. First, we can examine areas
where market power is unlikely. In these four urban areas, which we drop from our analyses,
we do not measure positive markups on average, and, while there is still considerable varia-
tion across firms, the standard deviation is a third less than outside of these urban centers.
Second, our markdown measurement relies on the assumption of Cobb-Douglas production
functions, or at least a log linear local approximation to the production functions around
the relevant production points for the small changes we measure. Looking more closely, we
can examine the markdown of electricity, which is unlikely to be monopsonistic. The implied
markdown is remarkably stable (or, equivalently, non existent once properly scaled), reflect-
ing the fact that the average electricity share of expenditures is stable, fluctuating between
13 and 15 percent. Thus, Cobb-Douglas seems reasonable. Third, using the same methods,
Brooks et al. (2021) find that the various measures are robust to estimating assumptions,
and the results in Figure 1 and the remaining analysis confirm this.18 Finally, we will also
see that our markdowns are correlated with firm labor market share, consistent with the
exercise of monopsony power.




  16                                                                            L
      To see that this has no impact on aggregate labor's share, note that nki     in the denominator of the
right-hand side in equation (22) cancels with the implicit  in the numerator of µL
                                                             L                             M
                                                                                     nki /µnki .
   17
      For example, since the sampling-weighted median markdown in Table 1 is 0.5 for the CD benchmark,
an alternative normalization in which we rescale so that the median markdown ratio is one would merely
imply multiplying markdowns, regression coefficients, and standard errors that follow by 2. This alternative
scaling would be consistent with an assumption that measurement error for the median firm is zero and
the median firm has a negligible market share. The median market share is just 0.003, and this is nearly
identical for firms with markdown ratios near the median.
   18
      Moreover, the Brooks et al. (2021) results, and those of Hershbein et al. (2020) for the U.S., show that
the markdowns are not capturing labor adjustment costs. Hershbein et al. (2020) use a number of other
specifications that go beyond Cobb-Douglas, and find very similar results across their specifications.

                                                     16
4      Empirical Analysis
4.1     Main Results
In this section we present our empirical results. Our principle test is to evaluate how con-
nection to the expressway impacts labor market markdowns. We therefore estimate the
following equation:

    µL
     nkit
          = n + t +  ln(pynkit ) + 1  tercile=1  t>2006 + 2  tercile=2  t>2006 + unkit
    µM
     nkit
                                                                                   (24)

where n and t are firm- and time-fixed effects; tercile=1 and tercile=2 are indicators for
whether the firm is located in one of the closest or middle terciles of locations from the
expressway; and t>2006 is an indicator for whether the date is after the "completion" (i.e.,
95%) date. We also control for the (log) level of output, pynkit , since the ability to exercise
monopsony power may be greater when firms are larger. We exclude those firms located
within 50 km of the four major metropolitan "corners" of the Golden Quadrilateral to focus
on newly connected areas (although this does not have important impacts on our results).
Since the omitted group is the group that is furthest from the GQ, the estimates of interest
are 1 and 2 , the coefficient on the double interactions, as they are interpreted as the
impact of connection relative to those firms that remain unconnected. (Since they would be
subsumed by the plant and year-specific fixed effects, we do not include the tercile indicators
or completion indicator as direct effects.)
    The estimates are presented in Table 2. (Standard errors are clustered at the district
level throughout the results we present.) As anticipated by theory, firm size is substantially
associated with an ability to exercise monopsony power. More to the point, however, we
see that relative to the unconnected firms in the third tercile, the firms in the first and
second tercile show smaller markdowns after connection, and the 1 and 2 estimates are
significant at the 1 percent level. The magnitude of the first and the second terciles are
quantitatively similar and indeed, statistically indistinguishable. Moreover, the estimates
are very similar across the three alternative measures of markdowns. The estimates are also
economically significant: recalling that the average markdown was about 1.15 percent across
these specifications, we cannot reject that connection to the GQ fully eliminates the exercise
of monopsony power.




                                              17
                             Table 2: Impact of Highway on Markdown

                                  (1)                                (2)                     (3)
                           Markdown (DLW)                      Markdown (CD)          Markdown (CRS)
  1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}    -0.073***                          -0.072***               -0.069***
                               (0.021)                             (0.021)                (0.020)
  1{tercile=2} × 1{t>2006}    -0.088***                          -0.087***               -0.082***
                               (0.023)                             (0.024)                (0.022)

  log(output)                               0.369***                0.365***                0.320***
                                             (0.015)                 (0.015)                 (0.014)

  Firm FE                                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes
  Year FE                                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes
  Observations                              238,456                  238,456                238,456
  Adjusted R-squared                         0.845                    0.850                  0.848
  Notes: Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Stan-
  dard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant
  at 5%. * significant at 10%.



4.2     Robustness
Next we study the robustness of these results to additional controls or specifications. The
results of these exercises are given in the appendix.
    First, while we cannot allow for district-specific year-to-year variation, in Table A.1
we add state-time dummies as controls which allow for year-to-year variation to differ at a
subnational level. For some states and years, these state-specific time patterns are significant,
but our results are quite robust, which indicates that the identification is driven by within-
state, across-district variation.
    Second, Figure 3 shows that many coastal areas are close the to GQ, and perhaps coastal
districts had a differential time pattern. We allow for this by creating a dummy for the
coastal district, and interacting it with time dummies as well as shown in Table A.2. The
time trend is insignificant, and the results are virtually unchanged.
    Third, we have noted NREGA, which was enacted around the same time and may have
disproportionately impacted rural districts relative to more urban districts. In Table A.3 we
allow for two district-level controls: the number of job cards per capita, which measures the
extensive margin or breadth of the program, and the total per capita labor expenditures,
which measures the intensive margin or depth of the program. The former is ultimately
significant, and associated with a larger markdown, but it does not impact our result for the
impact of the GQ.

                                                     18
    Finally, to account for potentially endogenous placement of roads, we also construct
terciles using the distance to a straight line, minimum distance connection between the
metro centers, and our results are again robust. In sum, the results are quite robust, and
this is true for each table we present. These results are given in Table A.4.
    To get a better sense of the year-to-year identification, we start by grouping the first two
terciles together (since their magnitudes were similar). We then interact this group with
every year in the sample (instead of relying on the post-2006 sample). That is, we estimate:

                µL
                 nkit
                      = n + t + ln(pynkit ) +        t  tercile=1,2  t + unkit              (25)
                µM
                 nkit

     The estimates of t over time, along with their 95% confidence intervals, are presented
visually in Figure 4. The omitted year is completion year of 2006, which is therefore normal-
ized to zero. We see that prior to 2006, the estimates are not statistically different from zero.
After 2006, however, the coefficients show a strong break becoming negative and significantly
so. However, using a Chow test, we reject a single linear trend in the data at the 5% level,
i.e., a structural break in 2006 exists in the data.
     We therefore find strong evidence for the decline of markdowns after the road is connected.
We now try to understand this finding in more depth.
     One possible explanation for the declining markdown measure is that it fell because
markups rose. Recall that the markdown is the ratio of two measures of "markups": the
labor measured markup over the true markup. One reason that the markdown could fall is
that the true markup rises. Another reason to look at markups is because the markdown
reflects the ratio of materials payments to labor payments. A decrease in materials payments,
due to access to cheaper inputs that the expressway opened up together with a low elasticity
of substitution toward inputs, for example, could appear as an increase in markdowns. This
would also show up as an increase in markups.
     For both of these reasons, we examine the impact of the expressway on the markups them-
selves. That is, we run regressions analogous to those in Table 2, but where the dependent
variable is the markup rather than the markdown.
     The results are presented in Table 3. We find mixed evidence regarding the impact of
highway on markups. The coefficients on the double interactions are small and statistically
insignificant when using the CD and DLW measures. For the CRS estimates, the magnitude
is larger (at least five times as large), and the impact on the first and second terciles is
statistically significant. Recall, however, that a problem with the CRS measure of markups
is that the gross profit margin can incorporate profitability that comes from markdowns.
Hence, these larger results are not inconsistent with the results that markdowns fell in these


                                               19
                                         Figure 4: Impact of Highway Proximity on Markdowns over Time


                                       Effect on Markdown (DLW)                                                       Effect on Markdown (CD)
   -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                                  -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011                                 1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011


                                       Effect on Markdown (CRS)
   -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011



Notes: This graph plots the estimates of the effect of highway on markdown over time, along with their
95% confidence intervals. The vertical dashed line indicates the year of highway completion. The horizontal
black lines indicate the simple time-average of the estimates before and after the highway completion.


areas. In any case, the result that connection reduces markups is consistent with the idea
that the expressway lowered not only travel costs but trade costs as well, and induced more
competition into these regions. Indeed, this is the central argument in Asturias et al. (2019).
    Figure 5 is the analog to Figure 4 for markups. The trends are less stark, and, except in
the case of the CRS measure, not statistically different from zero after the highway.
    In sum, there is some evidence that markups fell as a result of the GQ, but this evidence
is weaker than that for markdowns. In any case, a drop in markups cannot be a contributing
factor to the observed decline in markdowns as the markup is in the denominator of the
markdown.




                                                                             20
                                Table 3: Impact of Highway on Markup

                                 (1)                                     (2)                       (3)
                           Markup (DLW)                             Markup (CD)              Markup (CRS)
  1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}     -0.009                                  -0.002                  -0.025***
                              (0.008)                                 (0.006)                    (0.006)
  1{tercile=2}× 1{t>2006}      0.004                                    0.003                   -0.014**
                              (0.009)                                 (0.007)                    (0.006)

  log(output)                                  -0.017***                 -0.018***               0.083***
                                                (0.004)                   (0.003)                 (0.004)

  Firm FE                                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes
  Year FE                                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes
  Observations                                  238,456                   238,456                 238,456
  Adjusted R-squared                             0.690                     0.715                   0.650
  Notes: Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Stan-
  dard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant
  at 5%. * significant at 10%.


4.3     Labor Compensation
We now explore payments to labor more closely. In particular, we continue to combine the
first two terciles into a single group, and we examine other dependent variables impacted
by the expressway connection: labor compensation, labor's share, and the shares of labor in
the market at either the state or district level. The results are shown in Table 4.

                    Table 4: Impact of Highway on Labor Payment Measures

                                     (1)                       (2)               (3)                   (4)
                          log(Labor compensation)         labor's share     Labor market      Labor market
                                                                            share (state)     share (district)
 1{tercile=1,2}                     0.111***                  0.048***        0.005***              0.008***
 × 1{t>2006}                         (0.016)                   (0.009)         (0.002)               (0.003)

 log(output)                        0.539***                  -0.206***       0.009***              0.015***
                                     (0.006)                   (0.007)         (0.001)               (0.001)

 Firm FE                              Yes                       Yes              Yes                   Yes
 Year FE                              Yes                       Yes              Yes                   Yes
 Observations                       238,456                   238,456          238,456               238,456
 Adjusted R-squared                  0.957                     0.506            0.814                 0.760
 Notes: Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clustered
 at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant at 10%.




                                                         21
                                         Figure 5: Impact of Highway Proximity on Markups over Time


                                       Effect on Markup (DLW)                                                          Effect on Markup (CD)
   -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                                                                  -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011                                 1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011


                                       Effect on Markup (CRS)
   -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15




                                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011



Notes: This graph plots the estimates of the effect of highway on markup over time, along with their 95%
confidence intervals. The vertical dashed line indicates the year of highway completion.


    Focusing on column (1), it is not surprising that (log) labor compensation is strongly
correlated with size. Although the coefficient may seem low relative to advanced economies,
it is comparable to labor's payment share as shown in Table 1. Again, more to the point,
the coefficient on the interaction term shows that labor compensation increases by 11 (log)
percentage points for those newly connected firms. Moreover, in column (2), we see that
labor's share increases by 5 percentage point. Hence, we have direct evidence that labor
compensation and labor's share is directly impacted. 19
    Columns (3) and (4) examine how connection to the expressway impacts the market
share in the labor market. We find a significant increase in the market share of connected
firms. The market share increases by 0.5 percentage points in the state-industry and 0.8

  19
     The magnitude of the change in labor's share is lower than the magnitude of the drop in the mark-
down, however. Presumably this reflects a negative correlation between increases in labor compensation and
increases in material expenditures across firms in connected districts.

                                                                             22
percentage points in the district-industry. Recall equation (16): in theory markdowns are
increasing in labor market share and decreasing in the elasticity of labor supply. Therefore,
the drop in markdowns of connected firms cannot be explained by decreases in market share
in the labor market.
    Finally, in Figure 6 we check for the possibility of pre-existing trends in labor's share and
labor compensation. We find no evidence at all of a pre-trend in labor's share as shown in the
left panel. The right panel, however, exhibits three years that are significantly below zero.
Nevertheless, applying a linear trend and using a Chow test for structural break in trend, we
cannot reject a straight line, i.e., the lack of a structural break in trend in 2006. Again, the
upward pretrend would not be inconsistent with the gradual construction of the expressway,
of course, and so our results are best interpreted as a before and after comparison indicated
by the horizontal lines which are the average pre- and post-2006 coefficients.


      Figure 6: Impact of Highway Proximity on Labor Payment Measures over Time


                        Effect on Labor's Share                       Effect on Log of Labor Compensation
         .15




                                                                 .15
         .1




                                                                 .1
         .05




                                                                 .05
         0




                                                                 0
         -.05




                                                                 -.05
         -.1




                                                                 -.1
         -.15




                                                                 -.15




                1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011          1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011



Notes: This graph plots the estimates of the effect of highway over time on labor's value-added share and
log of labor compensation, along with their 95% confidence intervals. The vertical dashed line indicates the
year of highway completion.




                                                                 23
4.4    Effect on Elasticity of Labor Supply
Next, we examine whether the effective elasticity of labor supply changed in response to
the expressway connection. We have a fixed geographic sense of a labor market, but the
expressway may have changed the effective pool from which workers can be drawn. In that
sense, the labor supply elasticity is not necessarily picking up the elasticity of an individual
worker or even a fixed set of workers, but the elasticity of supply that comes from neighboring
areas responding to wages, or, in the case of a markdown, the ability of workers to find
employment in neighboring areas if wages were suppressed.
    To operationalize this, we start with equation (16) as motivation for the following regres-
sion equation:

  µL
   nkit
   M
        = n + t + ln(pynkit ) + 1  sL                       L
                                    nkit + 2  tercile=1,2  snkit +
  µnkit
                         3  tercile=1,2  t>2006 + 4  tercile=1,2  t>2006  sL
                                                                           nkit + unkit (26)


where sL nkit is again the firm's share in the labor market. Here the triple interaction coefficient
4 is of particular interest as it reflects the post-access change in the inverse labor supply
elasticity. If the elasticity of labor supply increased, we would expect this coefficient to be
negative.
    In estimating a different version of (16), however, Brooks et al. (2021) note that the
firm's labor compensation shows up in the denominator of the markdown and the numerator
of the labor market share. Hence, any measurement error will cause a spurious correlation.
To avoid this, they use a two-stage regression, which we also adopt, instrumenting for labor
market share by using the firm's share in the local product market. Intuitively, the more
output a firm produces, the more labor it should hire, but this should not directly affect the
ratio of materials and labor payments (i.e., the markdown). (In the case that factor ratio
increases with the scale of operations, we can add log output as a separate control in the
regression.)
    Table 5 shows the second stage results of these equations. (The first stage is quite strong
and is included as Table A.5 in the appendix.) Column (1) measures the labor market share
at the state level, while column (2) measures it at the district level. The estimated coefficient
on firm's labor market share of 0.319 in column (1) implies a labor supply elasticity of about
3.1 at the state level before 2006, whereas the coefficient of 0.092 at the district level imply
an elasticity of 10.3 at the district level. Both estimates are strongly statistically significant
and the larger elasticity at the district level is consistent with more integration in the labor



                                                24
market across districts than across states. 20
    Nevertheless, our primary focus is the interaction terms with post-2006, and those firms in
proximity to the expressway. These coefficients are puzzling, however. The triple interaction
coefficient, 4 above, is insignificant at the state level and the district level. Instead, we
see that firms' markdowns fell in connected areas after the expressway is completed, but
that decline happens uniformly across all firms rather than disproportionately for firms who
have more labor market power. Thus, the observed decline in markups does not have the
direct interpretation of an increase in labor supply elasticity that comes from increased labor
market integration.

                    Table 5: Relationship between Markdown and Labor Market Share

                                                                        (1)                       (2)
                                                                    Dependent Variable = Markdown (CD)
                                                            State-level Labor Market District-level Labor Market

  Firm's Share                                                        0.319***                            0.092***
                                                                       (0.050)                             (0.034)
  Firm's Share × 1{t>2006}                                              -0.033                              -0.016
                                                                       (0.039)                             (0.028)
  Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}                                         0.003                               0.005
                                                                       (0.063)                             (0.042)
  Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                              0.076                             0.072**
                                                                       (0.062)                             (0.036)
  1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                                           -0.057**                           -0.069***
                                                                       (0.022)                             (0.026)

  Firm FE                                                                Yes                                 Yes
  Year FE                                                                Yes                                 Yes
  Observations                                                         104,813                             104,813
  First Stage F-statistics                                              1423                                4608

   before highway
   L                                                                   3.10***                            10.31***
                                                                        (0.37)                             (2.54)
   after highway
   L                                                                   2.74***                            6.53***
                                                                        (0.42)                             (0.94)
  Notes: We define labor markets as industry and location specific. We choose 4-digit industry level. The location
  level is chosen as state (in specification 1) or district (in specification 2). In all regressions, we use firm's share in the
  local product market as an instrument for its labor market share. Observations in these regressions are weighted by
  survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at
  1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant at 10%.


    We have also examined whether the decline in markdown is instead a spurious artifact

   20
     The coefficients drop precipitously once we control for log output and the implied elasticities become
quite large, 12 and 44, respectively. We view these elasticities as implausibly large, and we therefore interpret
the log output control as a second proxy for labor market share.

                                                               25
of a decline in input prices that comes from connection. A decline in the prices of materials,
together with a low elasticity of substitution with respect to materials, could lower the ratio
of material expenditures to labor compensation, which we might falsely interpret as a decline
in markdown. We indeed find that connection leads to significantly lower input prices, and
the measured markdowns can be significantly decreasing in materials prices, but this does
not undermine our measured impact of the highway connection on markdowns as shown in
Table A.6 of the appendix.
    In sum, the decrease in markdowns is not easily explained with the existing theory as a
decline in monopsony power coming from either lower labor market shares or increased labor
supply elasticity. It remains an open question.


4.5     Aggregate Labor Share
We last examine the impact of monopsony power and the change in monopsony power that
comes from the expressway on aggregate labor's share in the manufacturing sector. Following
equation (4), we calculate the actual and counterfactual labor's share in the data in every
year. We construct two counterfactuals: labor's share in the absence of all markdowns (which
is higher than observed) driven by market-power and labor's share in the absence of highway
(which is lower than observed). The latter counterfactual is constructed by subtracting the
coefficients in the CD case of Table 2 from the firm-specific markdowns of those firms located
closer to the expressway.
    The results are below in Figure 7. The solid line shows the actual, observed movements
in labor's share in manufacturing. The dashed line above it shows the counterfactual labor's
share in the absence of market-power driven markdowns. The overall impact of monopsony
is sizable, especially early in the sample, confirming the results of Brooks et al. (2021). It
ranges from a high of 7 percentage points (in 1999) to a low of 3 percentage points (in
2009).21
    Monopsony can therefore explain a substantial amount of why labor's share is low in
Indian manufacturing. Starting in 2006, we add the dash-dot line, which shows the impact
of the expressway by plotting what the counterfactual labor's share would have been in the
absence of the highway. Labor's share in this counterfactual world is smaller, indicating
that the expressway increased observed labor's share by between 1.8 (2007) and 2.3 (2011)
percentage points. The impact of the expressway is smaller for three reasons. First, the
expressway does not completely eliminate monopsony power for firms closer to it. Second,

  21
     It is surprising that weighted markdowns are rising over time in Figure 1, but their impact on labor's
share is falling over time. We conjecture that this is driven by a changing correlation between markdowns
and labor's share.

                                                    26
not all firms are impacted by the expressway. Third, the impact occurs in a time where
monopsony power is less important for labor's share.


                                    Aggregate Labor's Share
    .6
    .4
    .2
    0




         1999         2001            2003             2005            2007            2009            2011

                           Without markdowns                         Without the expressway
                           Original


    Figure 7: Aggregate Labor's Share in Manufacturing: Observed and Counterfactual
Notes: This graph plots the time path of the observed aggregate labor's share (solid line), the implied labor's
share in a counterfactual economy without estimated markdowns (dashed line), and the implied labor's share
in a counterfactual economy without the expressway (dash-dotted line).


  In sum, our empirical results show a sizable impact for the expressway both in decreasing
markdowns and increasing labor's share.


5        Conclusion
This paper presents some of the first evidence available on the role of infrastructure in affect-
ing firm markdowns by evaluating the impact of India's Golden Quadrilateral expressway
expansion on the monopsony power in the labor market. Firms in districts closer to the
highway exhibit significantly lower markdowns than firms in more remote areas. The impact
of highway on markdowns is substantial: the average markdowns are effectively eliminated

                                                      27
for firms within close proximity to the highway. These lower markdowns have raised labor's
share by about 2 percentage points.
    The causes of the lower markdowns for connected firms remain a puzzle. We show that
the impact of highway on markdowns cannot be explained by a decrease in markups. We also
find no evidence that labor supply elasticities increase when districts are connected to the
highway. This brings into question whether the decrease in markdown is driven by increased
integration across labor markets.
    We must leave to future research the goal of identifying clear mechanisms. Nevertheless,
the results in this paper are important in showing highway infrastructure investment reduces
monopsony power and promotes competition in the marketplace.




                                            28
References
Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, "Structural identification of
 production functions," Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411­2415.

Alder, Simon, "Chinese Roads in India: The Effect of Transport Infrastructure on Eco-
 nomic Development," Working Paper, 2016.

   and Illenin Kondo, "Political Distortions and Infrastructure Networks in China: A
  Quantitative Spatial Equilibrium Analysis," Working Paper, 2020.

Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1085­1140.

Asher, Sam and Paul Novosad, "Rural Roads and Local Economic Development," Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 2020, 110 (3), 797­823.

Asturias, Jose, Manuel Garcia-Santana, and Roberto Ramos, "Competition and
 the Welfare Gains from Transportation Infrastructure: Evidence from the Golden Quadri-
 lateral in India," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2019, 17 (6), 1881­1940.

Berger, David, Kyle Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey, "Labor Market Power," Society
 for Economic Dynamics, 2018. Meeting Papers 170.

Binswanger, Hans P. and eds. Mark R. Rosenzweig, Contractual Arrangements,
  Employment, and Wages in Rural Labor Markets in Asia., New Haven: Yale University
  Press, 1984.

Braverman, Avishay and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Sharecropping and the Interlinking of
 Agrarian Markets.," American Economic Review, 1982, 72 (4), 695­715.

   and , "Landlords, Tenants, and Technological Innovations.," Journal of Development
  Economics, 1986, 23, 313­332.

Brooks, Wyatt and Kevin Donovan, "Eliminating Uncertainty in Market Access: The
 Impact of New Bridges in Rural Nicaragua," Econometrica, 2020, 88 (5), 1965­1997.

Brooks, Wyatt J, Joseph P Kaboski, Yao Amber Li, and Wei Qian, "Exploita-
 tion of Labor? Classical Monopsony Power and Labor's Share," Journal of Development
 Economics, 2021. Forthcoming.




                                           29
Brooks, Wyatt, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Amber Yao Li, "Agglomeration, Misallo-
 cation, and (the Lack of) Competition," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 2020. Forthcoming.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, "Trade and Labor
 Market Dynamics: General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Economet-
 rica, 2019, 87 (3), 741­835.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline, "Firms and
 Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018,
 36 (S1), S13­S70.

de Loecker, Jan and Frederic Warzynski, "Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,"
  American Economic Review, October 2012, 102 (6), 2437­71.

  , Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik, "Prices,
  Markups and Trade Reform," Econometrica, March 2016, 84 (10), 445­510.

Donaldson, Dave, "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infras-
 tructure," American Economic Review, April 2018, 108 (4­5), 899­934.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Xu, "Competition, Markups and the
 Gains from International Trade," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (10), 3183­3221.

Faber, Benjamin, "Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from
  China's National Trunk Highway System," Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (3),
  1046­1070.

Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers, "On the Identification of Gross
 Output Production Functions," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (8), 2973­3016.

Gouin-Bonenfant, Emilien, "Productivity Dispersion, Between-firm Competition and the
 Labor Share," Society for Economic Dynamics., 2018. Meeting Papers 1171.

Hershbein, Brad, Claudia Macaluso, and Chen Yeh, "Monopsony in the U.S. Labor
 Market," Working Paper, 2020.

Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler, "Imperfect Competition,
  Compensating Differentials and Rent Sharing in the U.S. Labor Market," Technical Report
  w25954, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.



                                           30
Lu, Will Jianyu, "Transport, Infrastructure and Growth: Evidence from Chinese Firms,"
 Working Paper, 2020.

Morlacco, Monica, "Market Power in Input Markets: Theory and Evidence from French
 Manufacturing," Working paper, 2019.

World Bank, "India's Transport Sector: The Challenges Ahead," World Bank Reports
 Series, 2002, 1, 1­65.




                                         31
Appendix

Table A.1: Impact of Highway on Markdown Controlling for State-specific Secular Trends

                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                     Markdown (DLW)           Markdown (CD)          Markdown (CRS)

 1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}                 -0.095***                -0.093**                -0.086**
                                           (0.033)                  (0.037)                 (0.035)
 1{tercile=2} × 1{t>2006}                 -0.110***               -0.111***               -0.104***
                                           (0.032)                  (0.036)                 (0.034)

 log(output)                               0.369***                0.365***                0.320***
                                            (0.014)                 (0.015)                 (0.013)

 Firm FE                                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes
 State×Year FE                               Yes                      Yes                    Yes
 Observations                              238,456                  238,456                238,456
 Adjusted R-squared                         0.846                    0.851                  0.848
 Notes: Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Stan-
 dard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant
 at 5%. * significant at 10%.




                                                    32
Table A.2: Impact of Highway on Markdown Controlling for Secular Trends in Coastal Areas

                                                 (1)                      (2)                     (3)
                                           Markdown (DLW)            Markdown (CD)          Markdown (CRS)

 1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}                        -0.076***               -0.074***               -0.071***
                                                  (0.020)                 (0.021)                 (0.019)
 1{tercile=2} × 1{t>2006}                        -0.087***               -0.086***               -0.082***
                                                  (0.024)                 (0.024)                 (0.023)

 log(output)                                     0.369***                0.365***                0.320***
                                                  (0.014)                 (0.015)                 (0.014)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2000}                   -0.048                  -0.047                  -0.046
                                                  (0.035)                 (0.037)                 (0.035)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2001}                   -0.022                  -0.018                  -0.021
                                                  (0.030)                 (0.032)                 (0.030)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2002}                   -0.037                  -0.035                  -0.038
                                                  (0.031)                 (0.034)                 (0.032)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2003}                   -0.025                  -0.025                  -0.031
                                                  (0.033)                 (0.035)                 (0.033)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2004}                  -0.058*                 -0.064*                 -0.065*
                                                  (0.034)                 (0.037)                 (0.034)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2005}                   -0.054                  -0.058                  -0.062
                                                  (0.039)                 (0.041)                 (0.038)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2006}                   -0.019                  -0.027                  -0.032
                                                  (0.037)                 (0.040)                 (0.037)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2007}                   -0.023                  -0.029                  -0.036
                                                  (0.038)                 (0.041)                 (0.038)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2008}                   -0.005                  -0.011                  -0.017
                                                  (0.045)                 (0.047)                 (0.044)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2009}                   -0.024                  -0.037                  -0.043
                                                  (0.046)                 (0.049)                 (0.046)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2010}                   -0.028                  -0.036                  -0.042
                                                  (0.042)                 (0.045)                 (0.043)
 1{coastal district} × 1{t=2011}                   -0.033                  -0.038                  -0.042
                                                  (0.047)                 (0.050)                 (0.047)

 Firm FE                                            Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 1{coastal district}×Year FE                        Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Observations                                     238,456                 238,456                 238,456
 Adjusted R-squared                                0.845                   0.850                   0.848
 Notes: The name of the coastal districts in India comes from the Centre for Coastal Zone Manage-
 ment and Coastal Shelter Belt, hosted by Institute for Ocean Management, Anna University Chen-
 nai (http://iomenvis.nic.in/index2.aspx?slid=3680&sublinkid=259&langid=1&mid=1). Obser-
 vations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clus-
 tered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant
 at 10%.



                                                       33
      Table A.3: Impact of Highway on Markdown Controlling for NREGA Impact

                                         (1)                      (2)                     (3)
                                   Markdown (DLW)            Markdown (CD)          Markdown (CRS)

1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}                 -0.081***               -0.080***               -0.077***
                                          (0.021)                 (0.021)                 (0.019)
1{tercile=2} × 1{t>2006}                 -0.095***               -0.096***               -0.091***
                                          (0.025)                 (0.026)                 (0.024)

log(output)                              0.370***                0.365***                0.321***
                                          (0.015)                 (0.016)                 (0.014)
nrega-job card                             0.324*                 0.384**                 0.365**
                                          (0.187)                 (0.194)                 (0.184)
nrega-labor expenditure                   -6.414*                  -6.454                 -6.659*
                                          (3.876)                 (3.990)                 (3.826)

Firm FE                                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
State×Year FE                               Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Observations                              225,185                 225,185                 225,185
Adjusted R-squared                         0.846                   0.851                   0.849
Notes: Information about district-level job cards and labor expenditure distributed by NREGA
comes from the Ministry of Rural Development (https://nregarep2.nic.in/netnrega/dynamic2/
dynamicreport_MPR.aspx). We scale the number of job cards and labor expenditure by the total pop-
ulation in each district. We take the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the series and assign zero
to years before the program starts. Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided
sampling weights. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at
1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant at 10%.




                                                   34
   Table A.4: Impact of Highway on Markdown Using Alternative Distance Measure

                                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                   Markdown (DLW)           Markdown (CD)          Markdown (CRS)

1{tercile=1} × 1{t>2006}                 -0.062***               -0.063***              -0.060***
                                           (0.022)                 (0.023)                (0.022)
1{tercile=2} × 1{t>2006}                  -0.052**                -0.059**               -0.058**
                                           (0.024)                 (0.024)                (0.023)

log(output)                              0.369***                0.365***                0.320***
                                          (0.015)                 (0.015)                 (0.014)

Firm FE                                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
State×Year FE                               Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Observations                              238,456                 238,456                 238,456
Adjusted R-squared                         0.845                   0.850                   0.848
Notes: The grouping of highway proximity in this table is based on the distance to the straight line
connecting the four and five vertices of the GQ provided by Asturias et al. (2019). Observations
in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clustered
at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant
at 10%.




                                                  35
   Table A.5: Relationship between Markdown and Labor Market Share - First Stage

                                                                        (1)                       (2)
                                                              Dependent Variable = Firm's Labor Market Share
                                                            State-level Labor Market District-level Labor Market

Output Share                                                           0.718***                            0.834***
                                                                        (0.013)                             (0.012)
Output Share × 1{t>2006}                                              0.102***                            0.042***
                                                                        (0.013)                             (0.009)
Output Share × 1{tercile=1,2}                                          0.036**                               0.012
                                                                        (0.016)                             (0.013)
Output Share × 1{tercile=1,2} × 1{t>2006}                             -0.056***                              -0.009
                                                                        (0.016)                             (0.011)
Lagged Labor Market Share                                             0.136***                            0.058***
                                                                        (0.011)                             (0.009)
Lagged Labor Market Share × 1{t>2006}                                 -0.098***                           -0.039***
                                                                        (0.014)                             (0.009)
Lagged Labor Market Share × 1{tercile=1,2}                            -0.054***                           -0.029***
                                                                        (0.015)                             (0.010)
Lagged Labor Market Share × 1{tercile=1,2}                             0.058***                              0.009
× 1{t>2006}                                                             (0.017)                             (0.011)

1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                                               0.001                               -0.001
                                                                       (0.001)                             (0.001)

Firm FE                                                                  Yes                                 Yes
Year FE                                                                  Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                                           104,813                             104,813
Adjusted R-squared                                                      0.962                               0.971
Notes: We define labor markets as industry and location specific. We choose 4-digit industry level. The location
level is chosen as state (in specification 1) or district (in specification 2). In all regressions, we use firm's share in the
local product market as an instrument for its labor market share. Observations in these regressions are weighted by
survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at
1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant at 10%.




                                                              36
Table A.6: Relationship between Markdown and Labor Market Share Controlling for Inter-
mediate Input Price

                                                               (1)          (2)         (1)            (2)
                                                                    Dependent Variable = Markdown (CD)
                                                            State-level Labor Market District-level Labor Market

 Firm's Share                             0.311***                           2.303***          0.093***           1.180***
                                           (0.048)                             (0.153)          (0.035)            (0.092)
 Firm's Share × 1{t>2006}                   -0.019                              -0.037           -0.004             -0.002
                                           (0.037)                             (0.037)          (0.025)            (0.025)
 Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}              -0.013                              -0.072           0.000              0.009
                                           (0.066)                             (0.073)          (0.043)            (0.045)
 Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}   0.057                               0.059           0.058*               0.055
                                           (0.061)                             (0.065)          (0.033)            (0.034)
 1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                -0.047**                            -0.046**         -0.058**           -0.055**
                                           (0.021)                             (0.021)          (0.024)            (0.024)
 log(input price)                         0.007***                           0.040***          0.007***           0.050***
                                           (0.002)                             (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.004)
 log(input price) * Firm's share                                             -0.228***                           -0.128***
                                                                               (0.015)                             (0.008)

 Firm FE                                                      Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
 Year FE                                                      Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
 Observations                                                99,897            99,897           99,897             99,897
 First Stage F-statistics                                     1353             153.5             5021               445
 Notes: We define labor markets as industry and location specific. We choose 4-digit industry level. The location level
 is chosen as state (in specification 1 and 2) or district (in specification 3 and 4). In all regressions, we use firm's share in
 the local product market as an instrument for its labor market share. A firm's intermediate input price is measured as
 the average of all input prices weighted by the total value of each input. Observations in these regressions are weighted
 by survey-provided sampling weights. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant
 at 1%. ** significant at 5%. * significant at 10%.




                                                               37
Table A.7: Relationship between Markdown and Labor Market Share Dropping Small Firms

                                                                      (1)                       (2)
                                                                  Dependent Variable = Markdown (CD)
                                                          State-level Labor Market District-level Labor Market

 Firm's Share                                                        0.307***                            0.094***
                                                                      (0.049)                             (0.036)
 Firm's Share × 1{t>2006}                                              -0.016                              -0.013
                                                                      (0.036)                             (0.028)
 Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}                                         0.012                               0.004
                                                                      (0.062)                             (0.043)
 Firm's Share × 1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                              0.062                              0.068*
                                                                      (0.060)                             (0.035)
 1{tercile=1,2}× 1{t>2006}                                           -0.049**                           -0.066***
                                                                      (0.020)                             (0.026)

 Firm FE                                                               Yes                                 Yes
 Year FE                                                               Yes                                 Yes
 Observations                                                        103,482                             102,527
 First Stage F-statistics                                             1423                                4782

  before highway
  L                                                                  3.14***                            10.28***
                                                                      (0.38)                             (2.54)
  after highway
  L                                                                  2.74***                            6.56***
                                                                      (0.42)                             (0.94)
 Notes: This table excludes small firms in the bottom 10 percent of the distribution of labor market shares. We define
 labor markets as industry and location specific. We choose 4-digit industry level. The location level is chosen as state
 (in specification 1) or district (in specification 2). In all regressions, we use firm's share in the local product market as
 an instrument for its labor market share. Observations in these regressions are weighted by survey-provided sampling
 weights. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *** significant at 1%. ** significant at 5%.
 * significant at 10%.




                                                             38
