                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DELAYED CREATIVE DESTRUCTION:
                  HOW UNCERTAINTY SHAPES CORPORATE ASSETS

                                       Murillo Campello
                                      Gaurav Kankanhalli
                                        Hyunseob Kim

                                      Working Paper 28971
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28971


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2021




We are grateful to Kevin Aretz, Nick Bloom, Alex Fakos, Huseyin Gulen (discussant), Charlie
Hadlock, Candace Jens, Andrea Lanteri (discussant), Howard Kung, Roni Michaely, Roberto
Pinto (discussant), Frederik Schlingemann as well as conference and seminar participants at the
2020 ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, Auburn University, Baylor University, 2019
Bristol Corporate Finance Conference, Cornell University, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
2020 ITAM Finance Conference, Michigan State University, Seoul National University,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Notre Dame, and 2020 WFA for
helpful comments, David Jordan and Darren Liew at Clarksons Research for data support,
Byung-Ryul Ahn at Hyundai Samho Heavy Industries for helpful discussions on the shipping
industry. This research was funded in part by the Cornell Center for the Social Sciences and
Smith Family Business Initiative at Cornell University. Heewon Ahn, Ikchan An, Penghao Chen,
Eric Kim, Jason Lee, Phillip Lee, Boyao Li, Youngjun Song, and George Sun provided excellent
research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Murillo Campello, Gaurav Kankanhalli, and Hyunseob Kim. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Delayed Creative Destruction: How Uncertainty Shapes Corporate Assets
Murillo Campello, Gaurav Kankanhalli, and Hyunseob Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 28971
June 2021
JEL No. D22,D25,G31

                                          ABSTRACT

We show how uncertainty shapes the asset allocation, composition, productivity, and value of
capital-intensive firms. We do so using detailed, near-universal data on shipping firms' new
orders, secondary-market transactions, and demolition of ships. Firms curtail both the acquisition
and disposal of vessels in response to heightened uncertainty. The mechanism operates primarily
through cuts in new ship orders and demolition of older ships -- decisions that are costlier to
reverse vis-à-vis deals in the used ship market. These dynamics are more pronounced when
secondary ship markets are illiquid, as firms face stronger incentives to delay their decisions. The
rise of Somali pirate attacks in 2009­2011 is used as a shock to well-defined shipping sectors to
corroborate our findings. Critically, uncertainty prompts firms to concentrate their fleets into
narrower, less productive portfolios, leading to value losses. Our work is novel in showing that
uncertainty hampers "creative destruction," slowing both the adoption of innovation embodied in
new capital and the disposal of old capital.

Murillo Campello                                 Hyunseob Kim
Johnson Graduate School of Management            Cornell University
Cornell University                               Johnson Graduate School of Management
114 East Avenue                                  325 Sage Hall
369 Sage Hall                                    114 East Avenue
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201                            Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER                                         United States
campello@cornell.edu                             hk722@cornell.edu

Gaurav Kankanhalli
Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
226 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
gkankanhalli@katz.pitt.edu
1       Introduction
Recent macroeconomic models emphasize the role of asset allocation in shaping the effect of un-
certainty on aggregate productivity and economic growth (see, e.g., Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al.
(2018)). This body of research stresses that investigating the link between uncertainty and firms'
capital adjustment decisions at a micro-level is key to identifying the dynamics at work. In a similar
fashion, vintage capital models emphasize the importance of firm investment in new, efficient assets
in fostering productivity (Solow (1960) and Hsieh (2001)). In this paper, we show how uncertainty
affects corporate asset allocation, composition, productivity, and value through the lens of firms' de-
cisions to invest and disinvest. We do so in the context of the shipping industry, which accounts for
over 80% of the global trade volume. In this industry, investment and disinvestment decisions (buy-
ing, selling, and demolishing ships) are discrete, well-defined, and fully documented. The industry's
singularly most important capital input, the ship vessel, is actively traded in worldwide markets.
    Our study uses ship-level data over the 2006­2019 period from Clarksons Research (the "Clark-
sons data"), a leading maritime research firm. The Clarksons data cover the near-universe of ship-
ping vessels in the global market, encompassing both public and private firms across one hundred
countries. The data are unique in allowing us to measure three distinct, but related, concepts: asset
allocation, asset composition, and asset productivity. On the dimension of firm-level "asset alloca-
tion," the Clarksons data contain detailed information on the four key margins along which shipping
firms can alter their asset base; namely, new ship orders, secondary market purchases and sales
(including data on resale prices), and demolition (including data on scrap values). Regarding "asset
composition," the database records individual ships with identifiers linked to owner firms, allowing
us to track the evolution of shipping firms' asset portfolios (fleets) over time. The data also contain
measures of "asset productivity," such as ship age, dead-weight tonnage, and engine revolutions per
minute. Using the ownership and transactions data, we can measure the liquidity of the secondary
market for ships at a detailed level, which we demonstrate is a key factor modulating the effects
of uncertainty on firms' asset-level decisions. The database further allows us to infer the specific
maritime routes that different ships cover, enabling us to develop well-identified test strategies.
    To guide our analysis, we develop a simple real-options framework delineating the link between
uncertainty and firms' decisions to alter their asset portfolio through investment in and disinvest-
ment of ships. We do so considering the liquidity of ships in the secondary market. As is standard, the
model predicts a negative relation between uncertainty and both investment and disinvestment ac-
tivities. The model additionally shows that these dynamics are stronger when decisions are costlier to
reverse.1 In particular, it shows how a liquid secondary market modulates the negative uncertainty­
    1
     The costly reversibility arises from two primary sources: secondary asset market illiquidity (Gavazza (2011)) and
the sunk costs of investing or disinvesting (Hackbarth and Johnson (2015)).



                                                          1
investment (­disinvestment) relation, as liquidity makes it easier for firms to undo their investment
(disinvestment) decisions by selling (buying) used ships. Importantly, because new ship orders and
demolitions entail high fixed costs, our model predicts that firms will exhibit a more pronounced
response to uncertainty along these two decision margins, relative to decisions involving the straight
up purchase or sale of ships in secondary markets.2 This asset misallocation problem highlighted by
our model is new to the literature. It implies that uncertainty hinders "creative destruction:" it retards
firms' acquisition of new, technologically-advanced capital and disposal of old, obsolete capital.
    We begin our empirical analysis by showing how uncertainty broadly shapes shipping firms'
investment (disinvestment) decisions. We first measure investment (disinvestment) using the total
number of ships a firm purchases (sells) in the secondary market and orders new (demolishes).
Our specifications incorporate forward-looking measures of a shipping firm's expected investment
opportunities in each of the subsectors in which it operates using forward freight agreement prices
("first moment").3 We operationalize the concept of business uncertainty faced by a shipping firm
("second moment") using the average equity option-implied volatility of firms in each of the sub-
sectors the firm operates in. Our empirical results show a negative relation between uncertainty
and both investment and disinvestment. The economic magnitudes are significant: for the average
firm, a one-standard-deviation increase in our measure of subsector uncertainty is associated with
a decline in investment rates that is 15% of the baseline average.4 This magnitude is comparable to
that of the first moment effect: a one-standard-deviation increase in returns to subsectoral forward
freight agreements is associated with an increase in investment of 9% relative to the baseline.
    Critically, we show that asset liquidity plays a central role in modulating the impact of uncer-
tainty on investment. Our estimates imply that when secondary markets are at the 5th percentile
of liquidity, investment declines by 97% of the baseline in response to a one-standard-deviation
increase in uncertainty -- investment comes to a halt. Conversely, when resale markets are at the
95th percentile of liquidity, uncertainty does not affect investment. Also new to the literature, we
show that the negative effect of uncertainty on disinvestment is large: a one-standard-deviation
increase in uncertainty is associated with a decline in disinvestment of the order of 36% of the
baseline rate; that magnitude rises to 57% when asset liquidity is at the 5th percentile.
    To shed granular, new light on the role that uncertainty plays in capital allocation, we then
decompose investment and disinvestment into new ship orders, used ship purchases, ship demoli-
    2
       Relative to used ship purchase, new ship orders incur additional fixed costs due to time-to-build, customization,
and financing frictions. Demolition incurs several added costs relative to straight sale, including search costs when
replacing a demolished ship (the same ship cannot be later reacquired and reintegrated into the fleet) and the value loss
through disassembling a ship. Very few components of demolished ships find alternative end-uses (Stopford (2009)).
     3
       Derivatives on shipping rate indexes, such as the Baltic Dry Index (BDI), trade on the Baltic Exchange, and we obtain
their prices from Bloomberg. Kellogg (2014) uses a similar proxy for expected investment opportunities in the oil industry.
     4
       A back-of-the-envelope calculation implies that this decline translates into 268 fewer ship purchases (new and used)
in aggregate per year (= 15% × 1787 ships invested in a year), or a $12 billion drop in investment measured in dollar terms.



                                                             2
tions, and used ship sales; alternatives that, as we discuss below, entail different sunk costs and thus
different degrees of irreversibility. In this analysis, it is particularly important to focus on the dimen-
sion of ship age as it serves as a convenient proxy for a wide range of technological advances in the
shipping industry.5 Consistent with irreversibility being higher for new-vintage capital investments,
we find that the negative relation between uncertainty and investment is almost entirely driven
by new ship orders. In stark contrast, used ship purchases are largely unaffected by uncertainty.
Analogously, among the two margins of disinvestment, the negative effect of uncertainty is driven
in large part by ship demolitions, with ship sales playing a marginal role.
    We provide more causal evidence for the link between uncertainty and firm investment and
disinvestment using a quasi-experimental test design. In particular, we examine shipping firms'
responses to a measurable increase in uncertainty caused by the escalation in Somali pirate attacks
between 2009 and 2011. As we discuss below, that local piracy activity introduced uncertainty in
certain shipping routes by increasing the likelihood of both very negative (being attacked) and very
positive (higher profits given reduced competition) outcomes. Our discontinuity-based strategy
relies on pre-determined size limitations on vessels that can physically pass through the Suez Canal
to identify ships that are likely to be exposed to the heightened risk of Somali pirates and others
that are similar in size and type of service (e.g., tankers) but unlikely affected.6 In a matched-sample
difference-in-differences test, we find that firms significantly reduced both their investment in ships
(particularly new orders) and disinvestment of ships (particularly demolitions) belonging to the
affected group, relative to the control group, during that period of heightened uncertainty.
    We next study the implications of the impact of uncertainty on firms' asset allocation for their pro-
ductivity. We show that the negative effect of uncertainty on investment is more pronounced for the
purchase of high-productivity ships (those that are newer, carry bigger loads, and have more efficient
engines). At the same time, firms cut back more on demolishing their less productive ships (older,
smaller, with less efficient engines). Our analysis demonstrates that uncertainty adversely affects the
overall productivity of shipping firms' asset base by disproportionately reducing investment in new
technology and more productive equipment, as well as the disposal of outdated, unproductive assets.
    We supplement our base (firm-by-subsector level) analyses with a host of firm-level tests in
order to characterize the economic implications of the decisions documented above for firms' asset
base composition and value. We first show that firms reduce their exposure across different markets
when uncertainty is high: they consolidate their ship holdings into fewer subsectors in response to
     5
       Regulatory standards in the shipping industry, notably regarding safety, efficiency, and environmental impact,
have evolved rapidly in recent years (see Stopford (2009) for a detailed timeline). Accordingly, the technological frontier
in the industry has advanced to keep pace with these shifts in standards. New-vintage ships must conform to evolving
standards, hence must embody the latest technological innovations.
     6
       Evidence of the importance of this route for the global economy as well as its fragility to extraneous factors were
made explicit by the large-scale disruption caused by an incident involving a single ship, the Ever Given. See The Wall
Street Journal, March 24, 2021, "Suez Canal Is Blocked by Container Ship Causing Huge Traffic Jam."


                                                            3
increased uncertainty; and the average productivity of assets kept in their portfolios is reduced. Fi-
nally, we show that increases in uncertainty trigger lower equity valuations for firms operating in less
liquid ship resale markets. This reduction in firm value stems from the fact that those firms' capital
allocation decisions are most affected by higher uncertainty -- they show the greatest reductions
in investment (particularly in new and highly-productive assets) and disinvestment (particularly
the demolition of least-productive assets) rates. In other words, the capital misallocation problem
we identify in this paper has measurable value consequences for firms. Altogether, our results show
that high uncertainty, combined with low asset liquidity, has a particularly deleterious effect on
the efficiency of firms' asset mix.
   Our paper contributes to the literature on the effect of uncertainty on economic activity on
several fronts. Despite a growing theoretical literature that emphasizes the importance of capital
reallocation in shaping the effect of uncertainty on economic efficiency (Bloom (2009) and Bloom
et al. (2018)), existing empirical papers have primarily looked at overall effects of uncertainty on out-
put growth (Baker and Bloom (2013)) and firm investment levels (Julio and Yook (2012), Gulen and
Ion (2015), Jens (2017), and Campello et al. (2021)). Relatively little attention has been paid to testing
predictions regarding the allocation and composition of capital at a micro (asset) level. This is partly
due to the lack of information on asset ownership, transactions, valuation, vintage, and productivity
from standard data sources. Our paper is the first to study how uncertainty simultaneously affects
a number of connected issues, including firm asset allocation, composition, productivity, and value.
We do so along separate, well-identified margins of corporate investment and disinvestment. On
this front, our paper's new findings highlight the negative effect of uncertainty on disinvestment,
a key aspect of capital allocation and productivity that has been neglected by previous research. We
also contribute to research in the area by developing measures of asset liquidity that vary across asset
types and over time, contemplating it as a key mechanism underlying the effects we document.7
   Our paper is also related to the theoretical (e.g., Benhabib and Rustichini (1991) and Hsieh
(2001)) and empirical (Benmelech and Bergman (2011) and Ma et al. (2020)) literature on vintage
capital. Prior theoretical work posits that investing in new capital while scrapping old one ("creative
destruction") leads to higher productivity and economic growth. Our paper is the first to show
micro-level evidence that uncertainty adversely affects productivity by hampering the adoption
of technological progress embodied in newer-vintage capital. In doing so, we shed light on a novel
dimension of uncertainty's deleterious impacts not only on the quantity of investment, but also
on the nature of assets firms invest in and dispose of.
   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our conceptual framework
and associated testable implications. Section 3 describes our data, variable construction, and
empirical testing approach. Section 4 presents the results from our main analysis on the relation
   7
       Kim and Kung (2017) show additional evidence on liquidity modulating the uncertainty­investment relation.


                                                         4
between uncertainty, asset liquidity, and firms' capital allocation decisions. Section 5 discusses
the implications of uncertainty for firm asset productivity. Section 6 presents firm-level analysis
of asset composition, while Section 7 considers firm value implications. Section 8 presents a series
of robustness checks of our findings. Section 9 concludes.


2       Conceptual Framework
We develop a simple theoretical framework to guide our empirical analysis of the impact of un-
certainty on the capital allocation decisions of shipping firms. The model is particularly useful for
framing our contribution to the literature as it considers the moderating influence of liquidity in
the secondary market for ships. In it, we characterize increases in uncertainty using the concept
of mean-preserving spread (MPS).8


2.1     Set Up

2.1.1    The Firm and the Ship Market

The firm is endowed with ships t            8
                                            +
                                                across eight "subsectors" at time t . Subsectors correspond
to four size categories of the two largest sectors of the shipping industry: dry bulk carrier ships
("bulkers") and tanker ships ("tankers").9 The representative firm is a price-taker in the market for
ships. We begin by characterizing three price processes corresponding to the three sets of capital
allocation decisions the firm can take: (1) trade (buy or sell) a used ship in the secondary market,
(2) order a new ship in the primary market, and (3) demolish a ship.

Trading Used Ships

Let pt be the vector of the secondary market prices of ships in each subsector, with pt = p1t , . . . , p8t ,
where:
                                                                           
                                         pi t = i (Ni t ) × Seller i t + i ti ,                                (1)

i = 1, ..., 8 indexes the shipping subsectors, Ni t represents the number of ships in subsector i at time
t , and i t captures productivity, or the cash flow generated by a ship in subsector i at time t (defined
shortly in Section 2.1.2). The elasticity parameter, i , is positive. The function (·) is increasing in
N and can be interpreted as the probability of successfully finding a trading counterparty.10 Seller i t
takes the value of 1 (-1) if the transacting party is a seller (buyer).
    8
      An uncertainty-increasing MPS only requires that a zero-mean, non-degenerate random variable is added to the
outcome distribution. This approach allows us to derive results that hold with generality, while remaining agnostic
about the functional forms governing the distribution and moments of the outcomes (see also Lee and Shin (2000)).
    9
      See Section 3.1 for more details on the classification of ships into industry sectors and subsectors.
   10
      We assume that (·) is differentiable for N > 0 and  (·) > 0.



                                                           5
                                                                      2000                                                               30




                                 Number of Oil Tankers in Operation
                                                                      1800




                                                                                                                                               Price Premium and Dispersion (%)
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                      1600

                                                                      1400
                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                      1200

                                                                      1000                                                               0

                                                                      800
                                                                                                                                         -10
                                                                      600

                                                                      400
                                                                                                                                         -20
                                                                      200

                                                                        0                                                                -30
                                                                             Medium            Long          Long      Very Large
                                                                              Range           Range 1       Range 2   Crude Carrier
                                                                             Liquidity (# Ships)    Price Premium     Price Dispersion

Figure 1. Asset Liquidity, Resale Price Premium, and Price Dispersion. This figure shows the average liquidity of
secondary ship market, measured by the number of ships in each subsector of Oil Tankers (blue vertical bars, primary
Y-axis), average percentage resale price premium (red connected squares, secondary Y-axis), and resale price dispersion
(green connected triangles, secondary Y-axis). Resale price dispersion is defined as the mean absolute deviation of
resale prices divided by the mean resale price.


    The intuition for modeling the price is straightforward and found in prior literature (see, e.g.,
Gavazza (2011)). As N increases, the ship's secondary market price increases from a seller's per-
spective (decreases from a buyer's perspective) due to improvement in liquidity driven by reduced
search costs, holding  constant. The use of N , or the stock of ships, as a measure of secondary
market liquidity is motivated by the idea that search frictions between buyers and sellers are smaller
in "thicker" (more populated) asset resale markets. Likewise, holding liquidity N constant, higher
productivity  is associated with higher resale prices. A plausible micro-foundation for Eq. (1) is
that the "premium" charged by a market maker (e.g., a ship broker) is proportional to the likelihood
of finding a match between a potential buyer and seller in a given time window, assuming buyer and
seller arrivals are driven by a Poisson process whose arrival rate increases with N . The pricing equa-
tion thus captures both the "fundamental" value of the ship and a "liquidity" premium associated
with the ease with which the transacting party successfully finds a potential counterparty.
    In Figure 1 we provide evidence supporting our choice of N as a proxy for liquidity in Eq. (1)
using data on the resale market for tankers. The figure shows a positive cross-sectional association
between the number of ships N (blue vertical bars) and resale price premium (red solid line), de-
fined as the difference between the resale and purchase prices of a ship, divided by the purchase
price. This positive relation is consistent with our model in that the theoretical counterpart to the
resale price premium from a seller's perspective, p - q /q , is increasing in N due to reduced search
costs.11 Figure 1 also reveals a negative association between N and the dispersion of resale prices
    11
       From a buyer's perspective, high N reduces the price paid by reducing search costs, such as the time to find a
seller. In the above expression, q is the new ship purchase price, which we define next in Eq. (2).




                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                       140
                                      15
                                      14




                                                                                                                                                       130
                              10 11 12 13




                                                                                                                                                       120
                                Speed (Knots)




                                                                                                                                                             RPM
                                                                                                                                                       110
                                                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                       90
                                      9




                                                                                                                                                       80
                                      8
                                                2006

                                                       2007

                                                              2008

                                                                     2009

                                                                            2010

                                                                                    2011

                                                                                           2012

                                                                                                      2013

                                                                                                             2014

                                                                                                                    2015

                                                                                                                           2016

                                                                                                                                  2017

                                                                                                                                         2018

                                                                                                                                                2019
                                                                            New Ship Speed (Knots, Median)
                                                                            New Ship RPM (Median)

Figure 2. Speed and RPM of New Ships. This figure shows the median speed (in knots, primary Y-axis) and engine
revolutions per minute (secondary Y-axis) for new ships ordered in each year in our sample period.


(green dashed line), implying that improved liquidity that arises from lower search costs reduces
variability in resale prices (see also Gavazza (2011)).

Ordering New Ships

If the firm orders a new ship, the primary market price is denoted by qt = q1t , . . . , q8t , where:

                                                                                                              
                                                                                   qi t = F + i ti .                                                               (2)


The price at which a firm may order a new ship differs from the price at which it buys a ship in the
secondary market along three dimensions.12 First, the new ship order price may be independent of
N , the stock of existing ships. Second, the firm incurs fixed costs, F > 0, when ordering a new ship.
The fixed costs arise from time-to-build (often up to three years), customization, and financing
frictions, among others.13 Third, new ships are likely more productive than ships purchased in the
secondary market (i.e., i t = i i t , i  1). Our model allows the price of a new ship to be higher or
lower than the price of a used ship according to the relative magnitudes of fixed costs (F ), secondary
market liquidity (N ), and productivity differential ().
    We utilize our data to show evidence of the notion that newly ordered ships embody significant
technological advances in Figure 2. The figure shows that while the speed of new ships ordered in
each year has remained constant between 2006 and 2019, the engine RPM has declined by over 20%
over the same period. Our data encapsulate information about the ongoing trend towards more
   12
      Our modeling of the new ship price assumes a competitive shipbuilding sector (i.e., aggregate supply is elastic).
Naturally, this assumption may not hold in some subsectors due to capacity adjustment costs at shipyards.
   13
      See Chapter 15 of Stopford (2009) for discussion on the fixed costs associated with ordering new ships, as well as
demolishing existing ships. Rampini (2019) provides theoretical and empirical support for financing frictions affecting
the decision to purchase new (relative to used) durable assets. When uncertainty is high, the fixed costs of new orders
may be higher because high uncertainty leads shipyards to delay capacity expansion, increasing time-to-build.



                                                                                                  7
fuel-efficient -- thus, more productive -- engines, a key technological development in the field of
maritime engineering.14


Demolishing Ships

The final course of action the firm can implement is to demolish a ship in its fleet, receiving the
scrap value in return. Scrap values are given by rt = (r1t , . . . , r8t ) , where:

                                                                  
                                                     ri t = G + i ti .                                                (3)


The scrap value a firm receives when demolishing a ship differs from the price at which it sells a ship
in the secondary market along three dimensions. First, the demolition value is independent of N , but
instead determined by supply and demand in the broader scrap metal market (which encompasses
assets other than ships).15 Second, the firm incurs fixed costs G < 0 when demolishing a ship. The
fixed costs arise from environmental costs and legal exposures, as well as the loss in value from disas-
sembling a ship into its raw materials.16 Third, demolished ships are likely less productive than ships
sold in the secondary market (i.e., i t = i i t , i  1). The scrap value of a used ship may be higher or
lower than the secondary market price of a comparable used ship depending on the relative magni-
tudes of associated fixed costs (G ), secondary market liquidity (N ), and productivity differential ().

2.1.2    The Firm Investment Problem

The firm operates for three periods, t = 0, 1, and 2. The cash flow from each ship at each time t is
given by t  t , where i t = i Vt + i t . The source of sectoral uncertainty is represented by Vt , whose
distribution can be characterized as an MPS with degree x ; i.e., Vt  H (·, x ). Thus, the total cash flow
of the firm is t · t . The firm's endowment vector, t , evolves over time. At t = 2, its endowment is
2 = 1 + i1 - d1 , where i1 = n1 + u1 is the vector of new and used ships purchased (investment), and
d1 = s1 +de1 is the vector of ships sold and demolished (disinvestment) at t = 1. The firm's investment
set is limited at I = N + U. Its disinvestment set is naturally limited by its endowment of ships.17
    The firm makes investment and disinvestment decisions as follows. If the firm makes no new in-
vestment at t -1, then its income is t ·t in t . If it invests, then its income is -nt-1 ·qt -ut-1 ·pt +t ·(t +
it-1 ). The first term, -nt-1 · qt , is the cost of the new ships it orders, while the second term, -ut-1 · pt , is
   14
      Other examples of recent productivity-enhancing technological advances include the adoption of Exhaust Gas
Cleaning Systems (known as scrubbers), engines compatible with alternative fuels, battery technology, lighter materials,
and geo-tracking and navigational technology. See Wang and Lutsey (2013) and Bouman et al. (2017) for more details.
   15
      The aggregate rate of ship demolitions in our sample displays a high, statistically significant correlation of 0.8
with the global price of scrap steel.
   16
      Stopford (2009) describes the significant environmental and regulatory costs associated with shipbreaking.
   17
      We assume an arbitrary 0 . The constraint on the investment set implies that i0 + i1  I, n0 + n1  N, and u0 + u1  U.




                                                            8
the cost of the used ships it purchases in secondary markets. The third term, t · (t + it-1 ), is the oper-
ating cash flow the firm earns from its stock of ships, consisting of existing and newly invested ones.
   If the firm disinvests in t - 1, then its income is st-1 · pt + det-1 · rt + t · (t - dt-1 ) at t. The first term,
st-1 · pt , is the amount the firm receives from selling its ships in the secondary market. The second
term, det-1 ·rt , is the amount it receives from demolishing its ships. The third term, t ·(t -dt-1 ), is the
cash flow the firm earns from its stock of ships, consisting of existing ships minus disinvested ones.

2.2    Analysis

We first analyze the firm's investment problem building on standard real-options arguments relating
uncertainty and investment. We do so in order to frame the economic environment in which we
advance our new results. The firm chooses its investment levels i0 (invest now) and i1 (invest later)
based on Eq. (4). It prefers to invest now if the expected cash flow from doing so exceeds the ex-
pected cash flow from waiting to invest later, contingent on demand conditions evolving favorably.
We state this condition via the following inequality:


                    [1 + 2 ] · i0 - n0 · q1 - u0 · p1  [max (2 · i1 - n1 · q2 - u1 · p2 , 0)] .                  (4)
                             Invest Now                                Invest Later

The breakeven levels of investment, i0
                                       = n0
                                            + u0
                                                 and i1
                                                        = n1
                                                             + u1
                                                                  , are such that:


                    [1 + 2 ] · i0
                                  - n0
                                       · q1 - u0
                                                 · p1 =       max 2 · i1
                                                                         - n1
                                                                              · q2 - u1
                                                                                        · p2 , 0 .               (5)


   We first establish the existence of i0
                                          and i1
                                                 in Lemma 1. All proofs are in Appendix A.

Lemma 1. The optimal investment levels i0
                                          and i1
                                                 are given by Eq. (5).

   Analogously, the firm chooses its disinvestment levels d0 (disinvest now) and d1 (disinvest later)
based on Eq. (6). It prefers to disinvest now if the expected cash flow from doing so exceeds the
expected cash flow from disinvesting later only upon observing that demand conditions have
evolved unfavorably. Formally:


                 [-1 - 2 ] · d0 + s0 · p1 + de0 · r1  [max (-2 · d1 + s1 · p2 + de1 · r2 , 0)] .                 (6)
                         Disinvest Now                                Disinvest Later

The breakeven levels of disinvestment, d0
                                          = s0
                                               + de0
                                                     and d1
                                                            = s1
                                                                 + de1
                                                                       , are such that:
                 [-1 - 2 ] · d0
                                + s0
                                     · p1 + de0
                                                · r1 =        max -2 · d1
                                                                          + s1
                                                                               · p2 + de1
                                                                                          · r2 , 0 .             (7)


   As with the case of investment, the existence of d0
                                                       and d1
                                                              is established in Lemma 2.

Lemma 2. The optimal disinvestment levels d0
                                             and d1
                                                    are given by Eq. (7).

                                                          9
    Explicitly writing the breakeven conditions in terms of Vt , and therefore, as a function of x (the
mean-preserving spread parameter), we can show that Dx i0
                                                          < 0 and Dx d0
                                                                        < 0.

Proposition 1. Increased uncertainty leads to less investment and disinvestment. For x > x , namely
when H (., x ) is obtained by a mean-preserving spread of H (., x ), i0
                                                                        ( x ) < i0
                                                                                   ( x ) and d0
                                                                                                ( x ) < d0
                                                                                                           ( x ).

    The economic intuition for Proposition 1 relies on the optionality inherent to the firm's invest-
ment and disinvestment decisions when they are costly to reverse. The option to delay investment
(disinvestment) represents a call (put) option from the firm's perspective. In the case of investment,
by waiting the firm can invest only if it observes that the cash flow from operating the ships it intends
to purchase exceeds the price it must pay for them. By investing now, the firm foregoes this option.
Likewise, in the case of disinvestment, by waiting the firm can disinvest only if it observes that
the proceeds from disinvesting exceed the cash flows from continuing to operate these ships. By
disinvesting now, the firm foregoes this option. The value of this call (put) option to "wait-and-see"
increases in uncertainty. We next characterize the effect of uncertainty on various margins of the
investment and disinvestment action space.

Proposition 2. The negative effect of uncertainty on investment is more pronounced for purchases of
new ships relative to used ships, and the effect of uncertainty on disinvestment is more pronounced
for demolition of ships than for ship sales; namely, Dx n0
                                                           < D x u0
                                                                    and Dx de0
                                                                               < Dx s0
                                                                                       .

    The option value of investment (disinvestment) decisions arises from the fact that these deci-
sions are partially irreversible. Accordingly, the effect of uncertainty on investment in new ships
and demolition is stronger than that on the purchase and sale of used ships, due to the additional
fixed costs involved (represented by F and G ). Next, we show the moderating role of asset liquidity
on the effects of uncertainty.

Proposition 3. The effect of uncertainty on investment and disinvestment is mitigated in more liquid
markets (higher N); namely, Dx N i0
                                    > 0 and Dx N d0
                                                    > 0.

    The intuition behind this result is that investment and disinvestment decisions are easier to
reverse in more liquid secondary markets. The probability of successfully finding a trading coun-
terparty is higher in more liquid markets. Accordingly, the option to "wait-and-see" is less valuable
in more liquid markets, as investment (disinvestment) decisions taken now are less costly to reverse
in the future, should shipping demand be lower (higher) than expected.

2.3    Testable Implications

Our model implies that there is a negative relation between uncertainty and both firm investment
and disinvestment. We will take this more standard prediction to the data noting that the existing

                                                        10
empirical literature has not investigated the impact of uncertainty on disinvestment, nor on capital
composition -- decisions that are critical for the replacement of outdated assets by assets that
embed new technology. We state our first testable prediction.

Prediction 1. Shipping firms will reduce their investment and disinvestment in response to increases
in uncertainty.

    Our model also implies that because fixed costs are higher for new ship purchases and ship
demolitions (relative to used ship purchases and sales), the negative effects of uncertainty should be
more pronounced along these action margins. This leads to our second prediction, which is novel
to the literature in illuminating the link between uncertainty and various dimensions of investment
and disinvestment.

Prediction 2. Shipping firms will reduce their irreversible investment and disinvestment (new ship
purchases and ship demolition) more than they will reduce their reversible investment and disin-
vestment (used ship purchases and sales) in response to increases in uncertainty.

    Our analysis further implies that the negative relationship between uncertainty and investment
and disinvestment is modulated by asset liquidity, as the incentive to "wait-and-see" before investing
and disinvesting is reduced in thicker secondary asset markets. We state our third prediction.

Prediction 3. Shipping firms will reduce their investment and disinvestment in response to increases
in uncertainty by a larger degree when the secondary ship market liquidity is lower.

    Finally, because investing in more productive assets or disinvesting less productive assets is
associated with a greater degree of irreversibility, our model implies that the effects of uncertainty
increases will differ along the lines of asset productivity. This leads to our fourth prediction.

Prediction 4. Shipping firms will reduce their investment (disinvestment) in more (less) productive
ships by a larger degree in response to increases in uncertainty.

    We set out to test each of these empirical predictions in the remainder of our paper.



3     Data and Empirical Methodology

3.1   Ship-Level Data

We obtain near-universal data on shipping firms' ownership and transactions of ships over the
2006­2019 period from Clarksons Research. We use four databases compiled by Clarksons. The first


                                                  11
is a panel dataset on ship ownership. This dataset allows us to observe characteristics of each ship,
including unique ship identifiers (e.g., the International Maritime Organization, or IMO, number),
the date the ship was built, the identity and country of its builder, its dead-weight tonnage (DWT),18
and engine characteristics such as speed (nautical miles per hour) and revolutions per minute
(RPM). The dataset also contains point-in-time information on the identity of a ship's owning firm,
allowing us to construct a firm-quarter panel of ship holdings. The Clarksons dataset covers 3,966
unique firms, both public and private, domiciled in 109 countries.19 These firms own, on average,
7 ships in a given quarter, which are worth $412 million (in average purchase price terms). The
average aggregate value of the ship holdings across our sample firms in a given year is $378 billion.
    The second dataset provides information on new vessel orders and allows us to observe firms'
investment in new ships. The third dataset contains records on secondary market ship transactions;
i.e., purchases and sales of used ships. We observe the transaction date, ship identifiers, resale price,
and buyer and seller identities, and calculate firms' investment in used ships and disinvestment
of existing ships through sales. The final dataset contains information on ship demolition activity,
including the demolition date, ship identifiers, owner identity, and scrap value.
    Following the industry standard, we classify ships into two sectors, dry bulkers and tankers,
and eight size-based subsectors (four within each sector).20 The four subsectors within dry bulkers
are: Handysize (DWT less than 40,000), Handymax (DWT 40,000­60,000), Panamax (DWT 60,000­
110,000), and Capesize (DWT exceeding 110,000). The four subsectors within tankers are: Medium
Range (DWT less than 45,000), Long Range 1 (DWT 45,000­80,000), Long Range 2 (DWT 80,000­
160,000), and Very Large Crude Carriers (or VLCC, DWT exceeding 160,000). Ships within each of
these eight subsectors are operated for highly specialized purposes and routes due to physical size
limitations and economic viability. Dry bulker ships, by design, hold dry cargo such as iron ore,
coal, other minerals and grains. Tankers, on the other hand, hold liquid cargo, primarily crude
oil and its refined derivatives. These sectors further divide into subsectors as ships of different
sizes operate different routes and carry different subsets of dry or wet cargo. For instance, within
tankers, the largest ships (VLCC) tend to exclusively carry crude oil, whereas the smaller ships carry
a wider variety of refined products (e.g., propane, automobile fuel, and jet fuel). In addition, ships
are limited in the routes they can navigate due to their size. For example, Panamax ships are so
named because they are the largest bulkers that are able to traverse the Panama Canal. Capesize
ships must navigate around the Cape of Good Hope as they are too large to transit through the Suez
or Panama Canals. As a result, markets for shipping services and used ships are segmented between
   18
      A ship's DWT specifies how much weight the ship can carry, including primarily cargo, but also fuel, crew, passen-
gers, food, and water. DWT is expressed in long tons and is customarily used in the industry to define ship size.
   19
      Ship-owning firms consist of primarily shipping firms -- more than 93% of owning firms for whom we observe the
SIC codes operate in SIC codes 44 (water transportation) or 47 (transportation services).
   20
      We omit containers from our analysis due to the high rate of chartering, as opposed to ownership, prevalent in that
sector. Our study focuses on firms' owned ships and fleets, and we are unable to observe leasing or chartering activity.


                                                          12
          600




                                                                                                                       30
          500




                                                                                                                       25
                400




                                                                                                             Fraction of Firms (%)
  Number of Firms




                                                                                                                               20
      300




                                                                                                                     15
 200




                                                                                                            10
          100




                                                                                                                       5
          0




                                                                                                                       0
                       Bulkers   Bulkers  Bulkers   Bulkers    Tankers   Tankers   Tankers   Tankers
                      Handysize Handymax Panamax    Capesize     MR        LR1       LR2      VLCC                                   1      2     3     4     5    6     7   8


                              (A) Number of Firms per Subsector                                                                          (B) Number of Subsectors per Firm

Figure 3. Shipping Firms' Operating Activities by Subsector. Panel A plots the number of firms operating ships in
each of the 8 subsectors we analyze. Panel B plots the share of firms operating ships in one or more subsectors.


these subsectors. We define the unit of our analysis at the firm-subsector-quarter level. Our final
panel of ship holdings consists of approximately 100,000 observations.
               The aforementioned features of the shipping market lead to segmentation in the types of ships
a firm operates. We show this by plotting our sample firms' ship ownership by subsector in Figure 3.
Panel A plots the number of firms operating in each subsector, with subsectors within the bulker or
tanker sectors shown in ascending order of ship size. The panel indicates that there are a relatively
large number of firms that operate smaller ships. Panel B plots the distribution of firms by the
number of subsectors in which they operate ships. The vast majority of firms operate ships in one
to four subsectors. Most shipping firms operate ships within just the bulker or tanker sector. Twenty
four percent of firms operate ships across both of those two sectors.


3.2                     Variable Construction and Measurement

3.2.1                     Ship Investment and Disinvestment

We construct three measures of investment at the firm-subsector-quarter level. First, we compute
the new ship investment rate as the number of new ships a given firm orders in a given subsector in
a given quarter, scaled by the number of ships the firm owns in that same subsector in the previous
quarter.21 We calculate the used ship investment rate in a similar fashion, by summing the number
of used ships a given firm-subsector-quarter purchases in the secondary market, scaled by the
          21
     Consider an example of the large shipping firm A.P  . Moller ­ Maersk, which owned 13 Long Range 2 (LR2) tanker
ships in the second quarter of 2006, and purchased two new LR2 tankers in the third quarter of 2006. The new ship
investment rate for Maersk in the third quarter of 2006 for LR2 tankers was 15.4% (= 2/13).




                                                                                                       13
number of ships the firm-subsector owns in the previous quarter. We calculate the total investment
rate as the sum of the new and used ship investment rates in a given firm-subsector-quarter.
    We construct measures of firm disinvestment in an analogous fashion. The first is the demolition
rate, defined as the number of existing ships a given firm-subsector-quarter demolishes, scaled by
the number of ships the firm-subsector owns in the previous quarter. Firms can also disinvest a
ship through sales in the secondary market. We calculate the used ship sale rate as the number of
existing ships a given firm-subsector-quarter sells, scaled by the number of ships the firm-subsector
owns in the previous quarter. We calculate the total disinvestment rate as the sum of the demolition
and used ship sale rates in a given firm-subsector-quarter.22


3.2.2   Uncertainty in the Shipping Industry

We construct an ex-ante measure of uncertainty in shipping, which we denote Uncertainty, at the
subsector-quarter level. We do so using implied volatilities from publicly-traded options for ship-
ping firms' stocks taken from OptionMetrics. Uncertainty is the quarterly average implied equity
volatility from nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter.
The average is taken across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of
ships each firm operates in the subsector.23 In robustness tests, we employ the realized volatility
of the subsectoral forward freight agreement price changes as an alternate proxy for uncertainty in
the shipping sector, which we label Volatility (Subsectoral BDI ). We replicate our baseline results
under various alternative option maturities in Appendix D.


3.2.3   Secondary Ship Market Liquidity

We construct three measures of liquidity in the secondary ship market capturing search frictions.
The first (# Ships) is the log total stock of ships in each subsector-quarter. This proxy, motivated by
our model and Gavazza (2011), captures the thickness of the used ship market. The second measure
(# Firms) is the log total number of firms in each subsector-quarter. It captures the number of po-
tential buyers in the secondary market (as in Benmelech (2009)). The third measure (# Transactions)
is the number of secondary market transactions completed in a given subsector-quarter divided
by the lagged stock of ships in that subsector-quarter. This last measure captures ex post liquidity
in the used ship market (see also Schlingemann et al. (2002)).
    22
       In robustness checks, we construct similar investment and disinvestment measures by summing the dead-weight
tonnage, instead of the number of ships, at the firm-subsector-quarter level (see Table 13). Our results are independent
of our choice of the scaling factor used in constructing these measures.
    23
       We also consider an alternative weighting that decomposes each firm's implied volatility across subsectors based
on the share of its fleet belonging to the respective subsectors (see Appendix C).




                                                          14
3.2.4   Control Variables

We control for a number of variables that are likely to influence shipping firms' demand for capital.
First, we proxy for the expected shipping demand using a forward-looking measure of shipping
rates at the subsector level. Specifically, Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly return on the shipping
rate indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for commonly-served routes in a given
subsector.24 We obtain the forward rates quoted on the Baltic Exchange from Bloomberg. Second,
Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization
divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by
the number of ships they operate in the subsector. To construct this variable, we manually match
firms in the Clarksons data to public and private firms in Compustat and Orbis. We also construct
controls for lagged fleet characteristics at the firm-subsector-quarter level. Specifically, we calculate
the average log of age, DWT, and RPM, across all ships that a firm holds in a given subsector-quarter.


3.2.5   Frictions in Secondary Ship Markets and Irreversibility

We compute two measures of investment irreversibility to gauge how search frictions in the resale
market for ships (captured by our liquidity measures) affect transaction prices (see also Gavazza
(2011)). Using the notion that the degree of capital irreversibility is reflected in the difference be-
tween the purchase and resale prices of capital (cf. Arrow (1968)), we compute Price Premium as the
resale price minus the purchase price divided by the purchase price. In addition, we compute Price
Dispersion as the quarterly mean absolute deviation of resale prices divided by the mean resale
price of all transactions in a given subsector.
    We validate our secondary ship market liquidity metrics by verifying that they are negatively
associated with the above irreversibility measures. Doing so is important for two reasons. First,
building on the conceptual link between trading frictions and investment irreversibility, our analysis
uses asset market liquidity as a proxy for irreversibility. Second, our model implies that the incentive
to "wait-and-see" before investing or disinvesting under uncertainty is heightened when these
decisions are costlier to reverse. For this validation analysis, we regress each of our two irreversibility
measures, Price Premium and Price Dispersion, on each of our three liquidity measures, # Ships,
# Firms, and # Transactions, with a number of added controls. The results, reported in Appendix
E. In each run, we find evidence consistent with the argument that investment and disinvestment
decisions are indeed less costly to reverse when secondary markets are more liquid.
   24
     Forward freight agreements (FFA) are derivatives that allow to lock in a price for a given freight shipping route
at some future date. The Baltic Dry Index (BDI) is an example of a shipping index constructed from FFA prices that
is widely used as a proxy for business prospects in the shipping industry.




                                                         15
3.3       Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our investment and disinvestment measures as well as
other variables described above. The average total quarterly investment rate for our sample of
shipping firms is around 1.4%, whether calculated using number of ships acquired or their DWT.
New ship orders account for approximately 82% of the average firm's total investment, used ship
purchases account for the rest. Unlike standard data sources, our data also provide information on
disinvestment. Firms in our sample have average quarterly total disinvestment rates of 1.3%. About
51% of disinvestment occurs through ship sales in the secondary market, the rest is via demolition.
Translating these rates into numbers of ships per firm-year implies that the average firm invests in
5.5 ships per year, out of which new ship orders account for 4.5. The average firm disinvests around
5.1 ships a year, out of which 2.5 ships are demolished. The annualized implied equity volatility,
our base measure of uncertainty in a subsector, has a mean of 9% and standard deviation of 2.9%.

                                                   TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE.


3.4       Empirical Specification

We use a model that relates firms' capital allocation decisions with uncertainty and asset liquidity to
test the predictions outlined in Section 2.3. We do so controlling for other drivers of firm investment
and disinvestment, including proxies for expected shipping demand and cash flows. Our base
specification takes the form:


                   Yi , j ,t = 1 Uncertainty j ,t + 2 Liquidity j ,t + 3 Uncertainty j ,t × Liquidity j ,t                 (8)
                           +  Controlsi , j ,t + F E s + i , j ,t ,


where Yi , j ,t refers to the investment and disinvestment measures described in Section 3.2.1 for
firm i , in subsector j , and year-quarter t . Uncertainty j ,t is subsectoral uncertainty measured by
average implied equity volatility, and Liquidity j ,t is one of the three subsectoral ship market liq-
uidity measures (# Ships, # Firms, and # Transactions). The vector Controlsi , j ,t contains proxies for
the first moment of investment opportunities, Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow at the subsector-
quarter level, as well as lagged fleet characteristics, including the average log age, log DWT, and log
RPM in the firm-subsector-quarter. We estimate several variants of Eq. (8) controlling for unob-
servables at multiple levels by including fixed effects for: firm, subsector, (headquarter) country,
year-quarter, country×year-quarter, and firm×subsector. Standard errors are double-clustered at
the firm-subsector and year-quarter levels.25
   25
        Our results are robust to clustering at the firm and year-quarter, as well as subsector and year-quarter levels.



                                                               16
4        Uncertainty, Investment, and Disinvestment

4.1      Total Investment, New Ship Orders, and Used Ship Purchase

We estimate Eq. (8) first using total investment and then its disaggregated components (new ship
orders and used ship purchases) as dependent variables. Table 2 reports the results.

                                             TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.

     In column (1) we estimate a standard investment equation. Expectedly, investment in ships is
positively associated with Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. However, only the former variable is
statistically significant, suggesting that the industry-specific, forward-looking measure of shipping
rates better captures first-moment expectations for shipping firms' investment opportunities. Im-
portantly, this specification includes the subsector-level uncertainty measure, Uncertainty. In line
with our model (Prediction 1), the coefficient estimate on Uncertainty shows that ship investment
is negatively related to uncertainty in a given industry subsector. The estimates reported allow us
to compare the effects of first- and second-moment expectations on investment. A one-standard-
deviation increase in Subsectoral BDI (0.249) is associated with a 0.12-percentage-point increase in
total investment rates (0.249 × 0.494 = 0.123), which represents 9% of the mean quarterly investment
rate. By comparison, a one-standard-deviation increase in Uncertainty (2.893) is associated with
a 0.20-percentage-point decrease in total investment rates (2.893 × -0.069 = -0.200), or 15% of the
baseline investment rate. In economic terms, these estimates imply that a one-standard-deviation
increase in uncertainty is associated with 0.83 fewer ships invested per year for the average firm.26
     In column (2) we estimate the full specification in Eq. (8), including both Uncertainty and
Liquidity, and their interaction.27 Using the number of ships in a subsector as a proxy for liquidity,
we find that the negative relation between uncertainty and investment is significantly mitigated by
secondary market liquidity. To gauge the economic magnitude of the modulating effect of liquidity,
we calculate the marginal effects of uncertainty on investment at the 5th and 95th percentiles of
resale market liquidity. When liquidity measured by the number of ships is at its 5th percentile, a
one-standard-deviation increase in Uncertainty decreases investment by up to 97% relative to base-
line rates, or 5.3 fewer ships invested per year. At the other end of the spectrum, when asset liquidity
is at its 95th percentile, a one-standard-deviation increase in Uncertainty has a close to zero effect
    26
       This economic magnitude is calculated by annualizing the mean quarterly investment rate per subsector and
translating it across all subsectors, then multiplying it by the average number of ships owned by a firm across all
subsectors. This calculation gives the average investment per firm-year of 5.5 ships. A 15% decline in the number
of ships invested, thus, amounts to 0.83 fewer ships invested.
    27
       We note that the differences in magnitudes between the coefficients on Uncertainty in columns (1) and (2) is
due to the addition of the interactive Liquidity term in column (2), which has a mean value of 7.5 (see Table 1), and
whose effect on the dependent variable is inversely correlated with the main Uncertainty effect.



                                                         17
  Investment (% of Lagged Stock, Fitted)




                                                                                                    Investment (% of Lagged Stock, Fitted)
                                      1




                                                                                                                                        1
                         0




                                                                                                                           0
              -1




                                                                                                                -1
    -2




                                                                                                    -2
                                           0   20        40           60          80         100                                             0   20         40            60         80         100
                                                      Uncertainty Percentiles                                                                            Uncertainty Percentiles
                                               New Investment              Used Investment                                                       New Investment               Used Investment


                                                    (A) Low-Liquidity                                                                                 (B) High-Liquidity

Figure 4. Relationship between Uncertainty and Investment for Low- and High-Secondary Market Liquidity. Each
panel depicts the fitted investment rate from the specification in Eq. (8) estimated at the 5th ("Low") and 95th ("High")
percentiles of Liquidity measured as the log total number of ships in a given subsector-quarter.


on investment (investment rates reduce by only 2% of their mean).28 These results verify our model
prediction that heightened uncertainty increases firms' incentives to delay investment, particularly
when investment decisions are costly to reverse due to low asset market liquidity (Prediction 3).29
                     Our real-options framework also predicts that the effect of uncertainty on investment should
be particularly strong for the ordering new ships -- as opposed to buying used ships -- given sunk
costs stemming from customization and time-to-build (Prediction 2). We test this prediction by
estimating Eq. (8) with investment rates in new and used ships as separate dependent variables.
The results are reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2. They show that the effect of uncertainty
on total investment in columns (1) and (2) are driven almost entirely by new ship investments (see
column (3)), rather than buying used ships (column (4)).
                     Figure 4 provides a graphical illustration of our findings. We plot the fitted investment rates,
disaggregated across new and used ship purchases, against percentiles of Uncertainty at low (5th per-
centile, Panel A) and high (95th percentile, Panel B) levels of Liquidity. The figure shows that new ship
orders (see blue solid line) respond more pronouncedly to variation in uncertainty than used ship
purchases (red dashed line). A comparison of the two panels shows that the response is significantly
stronger when asset market liquidity is low (Panel A). The figure also shows a non-linear effect of
uncertainty on new investment: the effect is particularly strong at the highest levels of uncertainty.
            28
       These magnitudes are calculated using the marginal effect of Uncertainty assuming liquidity measured by the log
number of ships is at its 5th and 95th percentiles, 6.66 and 8.02 respectively. The marginal effects of Uncertainty at these
percentiles are -2.642 + 0.328 × 6.66 = -0.458 and -2.642 + 0.328 × 8.02 = -0.011 respectively. Multiplying these marginal
effects with the standard deviation of Uncertainty (2.893), we obtain -0.458 × 2.893 = -1.32 and -0.011 × 2.893 = -0.03.
Finally, dividing by the average investment rate of 1.36%, we get -1.32/1.36 = -97% and -0.03/1.36 = -2%.
    29
       Our inferences are robust to using alternative measures of liquidity based on the volume of secondary market
transactions and the log number of firms in a given subsector-quarter (please see Appendix B).


                                                                                               18
4.2   Total Disinvestment, Demolition, and Used Ship Sales

We next examine the effects of uncertainty on disinvestment; both total, as well as disaggregated into
its components (demolition and sales). Our real-options model predicts that when disinvestment
decisions are costly to reverse, uncertainty increases firms' incentive to delay disinvestment and that
this effect is mitigated by asset market liquidity. The estimates in Table 3 confirm this prediction.

                                        TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE.

   The results in columns (1) and (2) indicate that uncertainty is negatively associated with disin-
vestment, consistent with Prediction 1 of the model. They also show that the first-moment proxies
are generally negatively associated with disinvestment. Critically, and in accordance to our model,
the negative uncertainty­disinvestment relation is mitigated by asset market liquidity, indicating
that when disinvestment decisions are less costly to reverse, uncertainty has only a limited impact
on disinvestment (Prediction 3). The associated economic magnitudes are large. First, estimates in
column (1) indicate that a one-standard-deviation increase in sectoral uncertainty is associated with
a 36% decline in disinvestment rates relative to the average disinvestment rate of 1.26%. Second,
when asset liquidity is at its 5th percentile, a one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty is
associated with a 57% decline in disinvestment rates relative to the average (column (2)). In contrast,
when liquidity is at its 95th percentile, a one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty is associated
with a modest 4% decline from the baseline rate.
   Our theoretical framework implies that the impact of uncertainty on disinvestment is partic-
ularly high for irreversible decisions such as ship demolition (Prediction 2). Irreversibility costs for
demolition arise from the loss in value from disassembling the ship into components and regulatory
costs due to the adverse environmental impact of ship breaking, among other reasons. We examine
disinvestment in the form of demolition and sales separately in columns (3) and (4), and find the
negative effect of uncertainty is far more pronounced for demolition: the magnitude of the effect on
demolition is 64% of the total disinvestment effect, with sales making up the balance. These results
are consistent with greater sunk costs making firms more cautious about demolishing relative to
selling ships when uncertainty is high in the industry subsector.
   The results in Tables 2 and 3 confirm a number of our model's predictions. They also provide
early insight into an important result. Specifically, uncertainty bears a compositional effect on
shipping firms' asset base: when uncertainty rises, firms invest less in new vessels (which embody
new technology) and dispose less of ships intended for demolition (low quality technology). We
study this effect in further depth in Section 5.




                                                   19
            200




                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                            "Second Moment"




                                                                                     Percentage
                                                                                              5
                  150
 Number of Attacks




                                                                                     0
      100




                                                                                                                                                                                                      "First Moment"




                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                  2006-Q1
                                                                                                            2006-Q3
                                                                                                                      2007-Q1
                                                                                                                                2007-Q3
                                                                                                                                          2008-Q1
                                                                                                                                                    2008-Q3
                                                                                                                                                              2009-Q1
                                                                                                                                                                        2009-Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                  2010-Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                            2010-Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011-Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011-Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012-Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012-Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2013-Q1
            50




                                                                                                                       Subsectoral BDI (Treated minus Control)
            0




                        2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013                                          Volatility(Subsectoral BDI) (Treated minus Control)


                               (A) Number of Attacks per Year                                       (B) Subsectoral BDI Levels and Volatilities

Figure 5. Frequency of Somali Attacks, Shipping Demand Levels and Volatility. Panel A depicts the number of
Somali pirate attacks per year based on statistics compiled by the International Maritime Bureau. Panel B shows the
differences in the levels and volatilities of Subsectoral BDI between treated and control subsectors. Treated subsectors
consist of Panamax bulkers and LR2 tankers. Control subsectors consist of Capesize bulkers and VLCC tankers.


4.3                     A Quasi-Natural Experiment: The Somali Piracy Wave

The evidence so far is consistent with shipping firms delaying their capital allocation decisions in the
face of heightened uncertainty in their subsectors. In this section, we look for a more well-identified
test strategy to support that assertion. We do so using the escalation of piracy off the coast of Somalia
between 2009 and 2011 as a quasi-natural experiment that increases uncertainty in shipping. As
we explain below, an important aspect of this geopolitical event is that the increase in piracy was
sharp and affected a subset of vessel types based on a discontinuity generated by pre-determined
size limitation on ships that are permitted to pass through the Suez Canal. Somalia is situated just
south of the Gulf of Aden. Its territorial waters constitute a critical international shipping corridor,
which ships entering and exiting the Suez Canal must pass through. The Somali civil war, and the
poor economic and law-and-order situation that accompanied it, contributed to attacks by Somali
pirates in recent decades.
               We exploit the sudden increase in pirate attacks that occurred between 2009 and 2011 as a shock
to uncertainty in shipping for two reasons. First, there was a clear period of heightened risk of pirate
attacks, providing a discrete, identifiable shock to uncertainty in the industry. Panel A of Figure 5
shows that the number of attacks increased from 24 in 2008 to 163 in 2009, and remained at 174
and 176 in 2010 and 2011, respectively. The heightened risk of pirate attacks led to an increase in
internationally-coordinated law enforcement activities in the area, which virtually ended the pirate
attacks by 2012.30
           30
                   See The Economist, May 20, 2013, "What Happened to Somalia's Pirates?"




                                                                                20
    Second, the increase in uncertainty affected some subsectors of ships, while leaving others
largely unaffected, generating plausible "treated" and "control" groups of interest. To wit, the wa-
ters surrounding Somalia are traversed primarily by ships entering and exiting the Suez Canal,
whose physical features limit the size of ships that can pass through it. Accordingly, the increase
in uncertainty only affected ships that could pass through the Canal, whereas larger ships whose
physical dimensions exceed the size limit were largely unaffected. Using this discontinuity, we
define "treated subsectors" as those falling immediately below the size thresholds for using the Suez
Canal (Panamax bulkers and LR2 tankers). The control group is defined as subsectors immediately
above the size threshold for traversing the Canal (Capesize bulkers and VLCC tankers).
    To verify that the escalation in Somali piracy represents a differential shock to uncertainty in ship-
ping demand for the treated versus control subsectors, we examine changes in shipping rate volatility
around the event period. Panel B of Figure 5 shows a marked increase in the difference in the volatility
of Subsectoral BDI for treated relative to control subsectors during the 2009­2011 period. We also
plot the difference in the levels of Subsectoral BDI between treated and control subsectors to ensure
that the escalation in piracy threat did not embed a concurrent first-moment shock for treated sub-
sectors. The level of Subsectoral BDI is largely similar across the treated and control groups. The
overall evidence is consistent with the escalation in piracy increasing the downside risk (e.g., costs
from being attacked) as well as the potential upside from passing through successfully (e.g., due to a
supply side contraction in an imperfectly competitive industry), acting as a mean-preserving spread.
    We analyze the effect of the increase in uncertainty due to the rise in piracy by comparing the
investment and disinvestment rates of firms operating ships in treated and control subsectors. In
particular, for each treated firm-subsector, we assign a matched control firm-subsector as its nearest
neighbor in terms of treatment propensity. We estimate the propensity score as a function of firm-
subsector fleet characteristics, including the average log age, log DWT, and log RPM, in a subsector-
quarter. Using the matched sample, we estimate the following difference-in-differences model:


                             Yi , j ,t =1 Treat j × Piracy t +  Controlsi , j ,t + F E s + i , j ,t ,   (9)


where Yi , j ,t refers to the investment and disinvestment measures for firm i , in subsector j , and
year-quarter t . Treat j is an indicator that is equal to one for the Panamax bulker and LR2 tanker
subsectors, and zero for the Capesize bulker and VLCC tanker subsectors. Piracy t is an indicator that
is equal to one during 2009­2011, and zero for all other years from 2006 through 2013. The vector
Controlsi , j ,t is defined as in Eq. (8). We include fixed effects for the firm's headquarter country-year-
quarter as well as firm-subsector.31 Standard errors are clustered at the match level (cf. Abadie and
Spiess (2020)). The coefficient of interest is 1 , which represents the difference in investment (or
   31
        These fixed effects naturally subsume the main effects of Treat j and Piracy t .



                                                               21
   1.50                                                           1.50

   1.00                                                           1.00

   0.50                                                           0.50

   0.00                                                           0.00

   -0.50                                                          -0.50

   -1.00                                                          -1.00

   -1.50                                                          -1.50
           2006   2007   2009   2010    2011   2012   2013                2006     2007   2009   2010      2011   2012   2013
                           Investment                                                      Disinvestment



                  (A) Investment Dynamics                                        (B) Disinvestment Dynamics

Figure 6. Investment and Disinvestment Dynamics around the Escalation in Somali Piracy. This figure displays
coefficient estimates and 95% confidence bands for Treat j interacted with yearly dummies estimated from a modified
version of the specification in Eq. (9). The dependent variables are investment (Panel A) and disinvestment (Panel
B). The year immediately prior to the event window (2008) is omitted as the baseline.


disinvestment) rates between affected and control firm-subsectors during the period of heightened
uncertainty due to Somali piracy relative to all other years between 2006 and 2013.
    Panel A of Table 4 reports the results from estimating Eq. (9). During the period of heightened risk
of pirate attacks, treated firms cut both their investment and disinvestment in subsectors exposed to
the risk, relative to the unaffected subsectors. The economic magnitude of the investment reduction
is significant. In the three years of heightened uncertainty, the cut in quarterly investment rates
implied by the estimate in column (1) is 1.30 percentage points, which represents 38% of the mean
investment rate of 3.43% for treated firm-subsectors during the pre-event period (2006­2008). Like-
wise, treated firms cut their disinvestment rates by 18% of the comparable baseline disinvestment
rate. The investment and disinvestment cuts are more pronounced among new ship purchases and
ship demolition, where the degree of irreversibility is likely to be highest (as seen in Tables 2 and
3). Figure 6 shows the dynamic effects of the escalation in piracy on investment and disinvestment
by plotting coefficient estimates corresponding to the year-by-year difference in outcomes between
the treated and control groups. The figure further provides statistical evidence of parallel pre-trends
in investment and disinvestment and illustrates their significant drops during the event window.

                                                  TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE.

    In Panel B of Table 4, we report second-stage estimates from an instrumental variables (IV)
estimation of Eq. (8), in which we use Treat j × Piracy t as an instrument for Uncertainty j ,t . Doing so
allows us to compare the magnitude of the effect of uncertainty on investment and disinvestment
in the quasi-natural experiment with our baseline estimates. Comparing columns (1) and (4) of

                                                             22
Panel B in Table 4 with column (1) of Tables 2 and 3, we find magnitudes in the IV specification on
similar orders of magnitudes with the baseline estimates. Our quasi-natural experiment provides
for a more causal-based claim that uncertainty dampens corporate capital allocation across both
the investment and disinvestment margins.



5    Uncertainty and Asset Productivity
In this section, we test our model's prediction that firms' investment (disinvestment) in more (less)
productive assets are particularly more affected by uncertainty (Prediction 4). The tests performed
consider attributes that capture the productivity of each of the assets (vessels) a firm operates. The
analysis provides insight into the impact of uncertainty on the productivity of firms' entire asset
base (fleets) by examining its dual effects on the rate at which firms invest in more productive assets
and dispose of less productive ones. These composition dynamics are studied in further detail in
the next section.
    We observe a number of individual ship characteristics that, based on industry standards, serve
as proxies for asset productivity. Building on that information, we estimate a battery of hedonic
pricing regressions in order to identify which ship attributes attract higher prices, reflecting greater
productivity (see Appendix Table E.1). These in-ship-class attributes are: DWT (larger ships carry
a greater volume of goods per trip), RPM (ships with lower RPM are more fuel-efficient), and Age
(new ships incorporate an array of technological advancements, ranging from safety to automation,
to navigational and docking capabilities). We subsequently employ two approaches to gauge the
productivity of individual ships firms invest in. First, we identify whether a given ship's specs are
above or below its subsector-median numbers for two metrics: (1) DWT and (2) ­1×RPM. A ship
is classified as "high-productivity" if it is above the median on at least one of those two parame-
ters; "low-productivity" otherwise. Second, we look at the ship's Age. We consider this attribute
separately because, as previously discussed, "age" captures a number of finer features associated
with technology adoption in shipping. We then compute investment rates separately for high- and
low-productivity ships based on these two classification schemes. We report results on investment
in ships with differing levels of productivity in Table 5.

                                        TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE.

    The estimates in Panel A of Table 5 show that uncertainty impacts investment in high-productivity
ships, as captured by ship size (DWT ) and engine efficiency (RPM ), in the most negative manner;
specifically, when these ships are new. In contrast, investments in new low-productivity ships and
used ships in general are largely unaffected by uncertainty. These results are consistent with our
model's prediction that firms delay their investment in high-productivity ships more when faced

                                                   23
                                                2.00

                                                1.00                                                                  0.46



               # Ships Invested per Firm-Year
                                                                                                         0.34
                                                                                          0.04           0.27         0.41
                                                0.00
                                                          -0.08        -0.11             -0.22           0.18         0.35
                                                                       -0.72             -0.60
                                                -1.00
                                                                       -1.54
                                                -2.00
                                                          -2.23
                                                -3.00

                                                -4.00

                                                -5.00     -5.09

                                                -6.00
                                                        New       1-5 Years         6-15 Years     16-25 Years   26+ Years
                                                                               Ship Age Categories


Figure 7. Effect of Uncertainty on Investment by Ship Age and Asset Market Liquidity. This figure shows the effects
of a one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty calculated at the 5th , 50th , and 95th percentiles of asset market
liquidity (based on the log number of ships) on investment in various categories of ship ages. The marginal effects
are translated into ships invested per firm-year by annualizing and multiplying the firm-susbsector-quarter estimates
by the average number of ships held in each subsector and the number of subsectors per firm.


with higher uncertainty. They point to a noticeable slowdown in the rate at which firms upgrade
their fleets during periods of heightened uncertainty by acquiring ships that are able to carry greater
cargo and have more fuel-efficient engines.
    We next drill down on the dimension of ship age. The estimates reported in Panel B of Table
5 show that the negative effect of uncertainty on investment becomes monotonically weaker as ship
age increases. New ship orders and purchases of ships with ages less than 16 years are significantly
negatively affected by increases in uncertainty, while purchases of older ships are not at all impacted.
Simply put, when uncertainty is high, firms reduce investment in ships embodying the newest
technologies the most. Acquisitions of old ships are utterly unaffected by uncertainty.
    Figure 7 illustrates the effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty at various points
of the asset liquidity distribution and across ship age categories based on the estimates in Panel B
of Table 5. It shows that uncertainty reduces investment in newly built ships and those with ages be-
tween one and five years the most. Importantly, this effect is aggravated by low asset market liquidity.
Noticeably from the figure, the negative effect of uncertainty on investment wanes with older age,
eventually becoming insignificant. Our results reveal the deleterious effect of uncertainty on the pro-
ductivity of firms' asset base, which operates through an increased incentive to forgo investment in
larger, more fuel-efficient ships, as well as newer ships containing the latest technological advances.
    We conclude this section by examining whether uncertainty affects the rate at which firms
disinvest ships (either through demolition or secondary market sales) according to asset-level pro-



                                                                                  24
ductivity. For the purposes of these tests, we combine the two schemes used above and classify a
ship as "high-productivity" if it satisfies at least two of the following three criteria in its subsector-
quarter: (1) above median DWT, (2) below median RPM, and (3) below median age. We classify the
rest as "low-productivity" ships. Table 6 reports the relevant results.

                                         TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE.

    Columns (1) and (3) ((2) and (4)) of Table 6 display estimates for demolition (sales) of high-
and low-productivity ships. The estimates in columns (3) and (4) show that the negative effect of
uncertainty on disinvestment, and its interactive effect with asset liquidity, are driven by the demo-
lition and sales of low-productivity ships. Our model would predict this exact relation if the costs of
reversing demolition and sales of low-productivity ships are higher than those of high-productivity
ships. Although we cannot directly test this conjecture, we find evidence that sunk costs are in-
deed comparatively higher for the demolition and sales of low-productivity ships. For demolished
ships, we calculate an analogue to the price premium (see Table E.1) as the scrap value minus the
most recent purchase price scaled by the purchase price. The higher this variable, the higher the
percentage of the price paid that was recovered through demolition (and lower the deadweight
loss). The average is ­67% (­42%) for low- (high-) productivity ships. Similarly, the price premium
conditional on sale is lower for low-productivity ships (around ­5%) than for high-productivity
ships (22%). It appears that firms incur a greater loss from demolishing or selling low- (versus high-)
productivity ships. The sunk costs of demolishing low-productivity ships are likely higher due to
their poorer conditions and environmental and regulatory restrictions on where and how they can
be demolished (see Stopford (2009) for a detailed discussion).



6    Uncertainty and Firm Asset Composition
The firm-subsector level analyses conducted in the previous sections reveal considerable hetero-
geneity in firms' investment and disinvestment responses to uncertainty based on the vintage and
productivity of assets. The differential responses at the individual asset level suggest that uncertainty
may affect firms' overall asset base composition. In this section, we explicitly test how firms alter
their asset portfolios under uncertainty. In the next section, we examine how capital markets value
these uncertainty-induced changes in firm asset composition.
    We first investigate whether firms alter the concentration of their asset holdings (fleets) in
response to heightened uncertainty. Studying the effects of uncertainty on shipping firms' fleet
concentration provides important context to our prior results. Notably, it allows us to disentangle
whether the effects of uncertainty on firms' capital allocation decisions are driven by firms altering
their intensive margin exposures to markets they already operate in or extensive margin exposures

                                                   25
to new markets (cf. Williamson (1975, 1985) and Teece (1980)). Given fixed costs associated with
a shipping firm operating fleets in a larger number of subsectors, decisions on the extensive mar-
gin (increasing exposure to new market subsectors) are more irreversible than intensive margin
decisions. These costs arise from a variety of sources, including informational frictions, imperfect
translation of technical and knowledge capital across subsectors, fleet coordination, as well as
integrating asset specificity of ships designed to carry fixed sets of goods over pre-determined routes.
In line with our theoretical framework featuring fixed costs, this logic implies that a firm's fleet
concentration (in fewer ship subsectors) will increase in the face of increased uncertainty.
   We measure a firm's fleet concentration by calculating the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
of the number of ships a given firm-quarter operates across subsectors, and use it as the dependent
variable in a variant of Eq. (8). The coefficient on uncertainty, therefore, captures the extent to
which firms alter their asset composition when uncertainty increases by concentrating their fleets
into a small number of market subsectors versus maintaining a diversified exposure to a larger
number of subsectors. As a complementary measure, we also use the number of distinct market
subsectors a shipping firm is exposed to (specifically, the logarithm of the number of subsectors
measured at the firm-quarter level). Table 7 reports the results.

                                        TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE.

   Across all columns in Panel A of Table 7, the coefficient on uncertainty is significantly positive
and the coefficient on its interaction with liquidity is significantly negative, indicating that firms'
holdings become more concentrated as uncertainty rises, particularly when asset liquidity is low.
These results are consistent with fixed costs associated with operating ships across multiple market
segments, which lead firms to concentrate their ship portfolios in subsectors with greater impor-
tance when uncertainty rises. Notably, low asset liquidity accentuates this effect as it makes ex-post
reallocation more costly. These dynamics coincide with those under which firms pull back on their
investment (and disinvestment) rates when measured at the individual ship level. The results in
Panel B of Table 7 confirm that the increases in firm fleet concentration (HHI) is driven by firms
reducing their exposures to diverse market subsectors in the face of heightened uncertainty. They
are consistent with such extensive margin allocation decisions (that increase the number of subsec-
tors a firm operates in) having greater irreversibility. Equivalently, they show that firms expand into
new market subsectors during periods of lower uncertainty. When viewed together, these results
confirm that shipping firms' individual asset-level allocation decisions in the face of heightened
uncertainty do not "offset" each other, and instead have implications for their firm-level asset fleet
composition. Uncertainty appears to affect the boundaries of the firm as shipping firms consolidate
the number of market subsectors that they are exposed to during periods of heightened uncertainty.



                                                  26
    We next explore how the productivity metrics of the portfolio of ships a firm holds in its fleet
change during periods of heightened uncertainty. These tests build upon the analysis presented in
Section 5. In particular, we gauge whether the marginal asset allocation decisions along the lines of
productivity that firms take in the face of uncertainty (Tables 5 and 6) translate into meaningful de-
clines in the average productivity of the fleet of ships they retain. We do so by estimating our baseline
specification in Eq. (8) at the firm level, using the logarithm of the average Age, DWT, and RPM of all
ships a firm holds in a given quarter as the dependent variables. The results are reported in Table 8.

                                              TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE.

    The within-firm estimated coefficients point to a significant worsening in the average firm-
level productivity metrics when uncertainty increases, and particularly so when secondary ship
markets are illiquid. Column (1) shows that the average Age of ships that firms hold in their fleets
increases substantially when uncertainty is high. The economic magnitude of this effect is large:
a one-standard-deviation increase in Uncertainty (2.90) is associated with an increase in average
fleet age of 1.01 log points or 2.74 years when liquidity is low (at its 5th percentile of 6.66).32 This
fleet aging represents an increase of 16% relative to the average fleet age of 17.69 years (= e 2.873 ;
see Table 1). Likewise, columns (2) and (3) show that firms hold relatively smaller ships (lower
DWT ) with less fuel-efficient engines (higher RPM ) in the face of higher uncertainty. The results
of this analysis imply that firms' asset portfolios experience a tangible degradation along the lines
of ex-ante productivity attributes when uncertainty increases. Such uncertainty-induced asset
compositional changes are likely to have implications for shipping firms' future performance, a
notion we test explicitly in the subsequent section.
    In our final set of tests, we aggregate our investment and disinvestment measures to the firm-
quarter level across all subsectors in which firms operate in a quarter. We do so to determine whether
the previous micro-level findings on asset allocation within firm-subsector units ultimately translate
into changes to a firm's overall fleet portfolio. Panel A (B) of Table 9 shows that the results from
our firm-level analysis conform with the results we obtain at the firm-subsector level. In particular,
comparing the estimates in columns (4) and (6) shows that firms as a whole predominantly cut
back on new ship orders across subsectors when uncertainty increases, while used ship purchases
are unaffected. Turning to Panel B of Table 9, the firm-level breakdown of the overall effect of
uncertainty on disinvestment (column (2)) between demolition (column (4)) and secondary market
sales (column (6)) closely resembles that reported in Table 3.

                                              TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE.
   32
     This magnitude is calculated by multiplying the marginal effect of Uncertainty when Liquidity = 6.66 with the
standard deviation of Uncertainty, i.e., (0.382 - 6.66 × 0.005) × 2.893 = 1.009 log points (or e 1.009 = 2.742 years).



                                                         27
     Taken together, the results of this section show that when uncertainty is high, firms do not offset
their investment and disinvestment cuts in certain subsectors (e.g., those with low liquidity) with
increases in other subsectors.33 Rather, subsectoral capital misallocation decisions "add up" to
the firm level, negatively affecting the productivity of shipping firms' overall fleet portfolios and
their exposure to new markets. These results are new to the literature and carry aggregate-level
implications. Notably, they point to a further deleterious effect of uncertainty: by increasing shipping
firms' fleet concentration, reducing their exposures to new subsectors, and reducing their average
fleet productivity, uncertainty may lead to diminished competition and innovation incentives
commonly associated with healthy firm entry-exit dynamism (see, e.g., Foster et al. (2019)). In light
of recent evidence of both rising uncertainty (Baker et al. (2014)) and declining business dynamism
(Decker et al. (2016)), our results are the first to provide micro evidence for a potential connection
between these two phenomena. They raise concerns that spells of high uncertainty could dampen
economic growth and efficiency by hindering business dynamism (see also Akcigit and Ates (2019)).



7        Uncertainty and Firm Value
In our final analysis, we look at the equity values of shipping firms around finely-identified high-
uncertainty episodes. We do so using returns on U.S.-listed shipping firms.34 If firms curtail invest-
ment (disinvestment) in the most (least) productive assets when uncertainty is high, one might
expect to see a negative valuation effect on those firms' equities as investors price in expectations
of diminished future cash flows. On the other hand, if firms reallocate their ships across subsectors
without changing their overall asset levels and composition, one would expect to see little change in
expected cash flows and equity valuations. The analysis of this section deepens our understanding
of the net effect of the uncertainty-induced changes to firms' asset allocation, composition, and
productivity through the lens of capital market expectations regarding future firm performance.
     We conduct this examination in the form of an event study. In particular, we identify events over
the 2006­2019 period corresponding to the largest spikes in the daily counterpart to our shipping
sector uncertainty measure.35 The test sample includes 76 shipping firms for which we are able to
    33
       We repeat our main analysis in the subsample of "pure-play" firms that operate ships only in a single subsector.
Such firms, by definition, do not substitute investment or disinvestment across subsectors. The results are similar
to those observed for the full sample (please see Appendix Table F.1).
    34
       This analysis is naturally limited to the subsample of shipping firms with publicly-traded stocks, of which firms
with a U.S. listing comprise the vast majority (78% by market capitalization and 71% by fleet size).
    35
       To identify these episodes, we first disaggregate Uncertainty (which is constructed at the subsector-quarter level) to
the subsector-day level (using daily option implied volatilities from OptionMetrics). We then aggregate the subsector-day
Uncertainty series to the daily level. We do so by taking the average of Uncertainty across all eight subsectors in a given day,
weighted by the number of ships in each subsector. We then compute the day-on-day percentage change in Uncertainty
and identify the dates in which the change was positive and greater than two standard deviations: (1) September 27,
2007; (2) May 2, 2008; (3) October 20, 2008; (4) October 23, 2011; (5) January 13, 2014; (6) January 25, 2016; (7) November



                                                              28
obtain daily returns from CRSP for the one-month window beginning on each of the event dates.
We calculate average annualized buy and hold abnormal returns (ABHAR) by compounding each
stock's daily returns over the relevant event window, and subtracting the compounded daily returns
of a characteristic-matched portfolio (based on size and book-to-market). We compute ABHARs
across firms using both equal and value weights. Table 10 reports the results.

                                                TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE.

    Our event study shows that firms operating in low-liquidity subsectors experience negative
abnormal returns of 7­9% during the month following high shipping sectoral uncertainty episodes.
Firms operating in high-liquidity subsectors, on the other hand, observe insignificant abnormal
returns. Combined with our results on firm-level capital allocation in Tables 7, 8, and 9, these results
provide evidence that the changes in firms' capital allocation induced by high uncertainty and low
asset market illiquidity are value-reducing.



8     Robustness

8.1     Aggregate Uncertainty versus Sectoral Uncertainty

We examine whether the effects of uncertainty that we document are driven by broad, macroe-
conomic uncertainty rather than shipping sector-specific uncertainty. This is important because
macroeconomic uncertainty is often confounded with business-cycle movements (see Storesletten
et al. (2004)). To this end, we augment our main specification in Eq. (8) with the following macroe-
conomic uncertainty measures: (1) the VIX index from the Chicago Board Options Exchange, (2)
the Jurado et al. (2015) measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, (3) the Baker et al. (2016) economic
policy uncertainty (EPU) index, and (4) the dispersion of GDP forecasts from the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia's Survey of Professional Forecasters.
    Table 11 reports results for investment and disinvestment rates. Across both columns, the only
uncertainty measure that attracts statistically significant both main and interaction (with Liquidity )
effects is our shipping sector-specific measure, Uncertainty. The estimates suggest that the source
of uncertainty specific to shipping demand, as opposed to broader macroeconomic uncertainty,
drives our results on shipping firms' investment and disinvestment policies.

                                                TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE.
10, 2016; and (8) May 13, 2019. Reflecting the fact that our measure predominantly captures shipping industry-specific
uncertainty, only two of these dates coincide with major macroeconomic volatility spikes: October 2008 saw the VIX
index reach its peak during the Global Financial Crisis and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election took place on November
8. Other two events coincide with market developments in the dry bulker sector: the Baltic Dry Index reached all-time
highs in September 2007 and May 2008. The remaining dates relate to particular shipping routes: pirate attacks in Somali
waters reached their apex in late 2011, while Gulf of Oman attacks resulted in tanker volatility spiking in the spring of 2019.


                                                             29
8.2   Financing Constraints

We next investigate whether the negative relation between uncertainty and corporate asset allo-
cation could be ascribed to concurrent increases in shipping firms' financing constraints. Prior
work has shown that periods of higher uncertainty are associated with increased credit spreads,
which may lead financially constrained firms to curtail investment (see, e.g., Gilchrist et al. (2014)
and Alfaro et al. (2018)). We account for this channel in our analysis by including two widely avail-
able proxies for firms' financing constraints, together with their interactions with Uncertainty, as
additional controls: (1) the size-age index as in Hadlock and Pierce (2010) and (2) an indicator for
whether the firm is private.

                                       TABLE 12 ABOUT HERE.

   Table 12 shows that our findings continue to hold when accounting for possible tightening of
shipping firms' financing constraints. Columns (1) and (2) show that financing constraints are nega-
tively related to investment, and that constrained firms cut their investment more when uncertainty
increases. Notably, the interactive effect of uncertainty and liquidity remains significant in the
presence of the interactive effect of uncertainty and the financing constraints proxies. Columns (3)
and (4) show that financially constrained firms are more likely to disinvest, both unconditionally and
when uncertainty increases. Once again, the interactive effect of uncertainty and liquidity on dis-
investment remains significant. Our checks suggest that firms' financing constraints alone cannot
explain the observed investment and disinvestment cuts attributed to changes in uncertainty.


8.3   Investment and Disinvestment Tonnage

Our main investment and disinvestment measures are calculated using numbers of ships. To ad-
dress the possibility that these results may be disproportionately influenced by decisions involving
small ships, we rerun our main tests using investment and disinvestment measures computed with
dead-weight tonnage in place of the number of ships. Table 13 shows that our inferences continue
to hold: high uncertainty is associated with both lower total investment and disinvestment, which
is more pronounced when asset market liquidity is low.

                                       TABLE 13 ABOUT HERE.


8.4   Lumpiness of Investment and Disinvestment

We address potential estimation issues arising from the lumpiness of shipping firms' investment
and disinvestment decisions in two ways. First, we re-estimate Eq. (8) at semi-annual and annual


                                                 30
horizons, instead of the quarterly horizon used in our baseline tests. In addition to reducing
investment (and disinvestment) lumpiness by aggregating the measures at a higher frequency, this
test accounts for the possibility that measuring investment and disinvestment at a relatively high
(quarterly) frequency may capture firms' delayed responses to past changes in uncertainty (rather
than to contemporaneous variation). Panel A of Appendix Table G.1 confirms that the associations
between uncertainty, liquidity, and capital allocation that we report in our base tests also hold at
the longer horizons.
    Second, we verify that our main results are not affected by statistical issues that may arise due to
a large fraction of the dependent variable taking zeros. Specifically, we employ the investment and
disinvestment rates (continuous variables) as dependent variables in zero­one inflated beta regres-
sions, which explicitly allow for an inflated rate of zero and one values in the outcome variables (see
also Ospina and Ferrari (2012) and Staub and Winkelmann (2013)). Columns (3) and (6) of Appendix
Table G.1, Panel B show that the results using this specification are similar to the baseline results.
    We also estimate linear probability and conditional logit models using indicator variables equal
to one for firm-subsector-quarters in which the investment (disinvestment) rate is positive, and
zero otherwise. Our results continue to hold in these specifications (see columns (1), (2), (4), and
(5) of Appendix Table G.1, Panel B).


8.5    Other Robustness Tests

We conduct a number of other robustness tests, whose results are reported in appendices for brevity.
In Appendix B, we verify that our results hold for alternative proxies for liquidity in the secondary
shipping market. In Appendix C, we show that our inferences are robust to various alternative
weighting schemes in the construction of the Uncertainty measure. In Appendix D, we examine
the dynamics of the uncertainty­investment (­disinvestment) relations, as well as verify the ro-
bustness of our results to changing the maturity of the options considered in the calculation of our
Uncertainty measure.



9     Concluding Remarks
Using near-universal data on shipping firms' capital allocation decisions across new orders, secondary-
market transactions, and demolition of ships, combined with sector-specific measures of uncer-
tainty, we show that shipping firms delay both the purchases and disposal of ships in response
to heightened uncertainty. Our findings are consistent with the augmented real-options model
we propose. These dynamics are more pronounced for less liquid secondary ship markets and
for new ship orders and demolition, relative to secondary market purchase and sales. New to the


                                                  31
literature, we also show that investment (disinvestment) reductions are concentrated among more
(less) productive ships.
   Major recent geo-political developments, such as the escalation of trade tensions between U.S.
and China and U.K.'s Brexit, have raised concerns on the effects of heightened economic uncertainty
among managers and investors. The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic has only exacerbated those
concerns. Our results uniquely suggest that such developments, indicative of heightened global
uncertainty, may impose additional economic costs through their impact on the efficiency of firms'
capital allocation decisions, particularly those that are costlier to reverse. Uncertainty appears to
play an important role in decelerating "creative destruction" dynamics by impeding the adoption of
novel technologies embodied in new capital, the disposal of obsolete technologies in old-vintage
capital, and discouraging firm entry into new market segments. Critically, this dampened capital
allocation at the firm-asset level could have an adverse effect on aggregate productivity and growth.
While our work provides new insights into these dynamics, more research on this important topic is
needed.




                                                 32
References
Abadie, Alberto, and Jann Spiess, 2020, Robust Post-Matching Inference, Journal of the American
  Statistical Association 1­37.

Akcigit, Ufuk, and Sina Ates, 2019, What Happened to US Business Dynamism?, Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alfaro, Ivan, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin, 2018, The Finance Uncertainty Multiplier, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arrow, Kenneth, 1968, Optimal Capital Policy with Irreversible Investment, in "Value, Capital and
  Growth, Essays in Honor of Sir John Hicks" (JN Wolfe, Ed.).

Baker, Scott, and Nicholas Bloom, 2013, Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters as
  Natural Experiments, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, Brandice Canes-Wrone, Steven Davis, and Jonathan Rodden, 2014,
  Why Has US Policy Uncertainty Risen Since 1960?, American Economic Review 104, 56­60.

Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593­1636.

Benhabib, Jess, and Aldo Rustichini, 1991, Vintage Capital, Investment, and Growth, Journal of
  Economic Theory 55, 323­339.

Benmelech, Efraim, 2009, Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from Nineteenth-Century
  American Railroads, The Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545­1583.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai Bergman, 2011, Vintage Capital and Creditor Protection, Journal of
  Financial Economics 99, 308­332.

Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks, Econometrica 77, 623­685.

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen Terry, 2018, Really
  Uncertain Business Cycles, Econometrica 86, 1031­1065.

Bouman, Evert, Elizabeth Lindstad, Agathe Rialland, and Anders Strømman, 2017, State-of-the-Art
  Technologies, Measures, and Potential for Reducing GHG Emissions from Shipping­A Review,
  Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 52, 408­421.

Campello, Murillo, Gustavo Cortes, Fabricio d'Almeida, and Gaurav Kankanhalli, 2021, Exporting
  Uncertainty: The Impact of Brexit on Corporate America, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis Forthcoming.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2016, Declining Business Dy-
 namism: What We Know and the Way Forward, American Economic Review 106, 203­07.

Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf, 2019, Innovation, Productivity
  Dispersion, and Productivity Growth, in Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the 21st
  Century (University of Chicago Press).

Gavazza, Alessandro, 2011, The Role of Trading Frictions in Real Asset Markets, American Economic
  Review 101, 1106­43.



                                                33
Gilchrist, Simon, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2014, Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Investment
  Dynamics, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gulen, Huseyin, and Mihai Ion, 2015, Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment, The Review of
 Financial Studies 29, 523­564.

Hackbarth, Dirk, and Timothy Johnson, 2015, Real Options and Risk Dynamics, The Review of
 Economic Studies 82, 1449­1482.

Hadlock, Charles, and Joshua Pierce, 2010, New Evidence on Measuring Financial Constraints:
 Moving Beyond the KZ Index, The Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909­1940.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2001, Endogenous Growth and Obsolescence, Journal of Development Economics
  66, 153­171.

Jens, Candace, 2017, Political Uncertainty and Investment: Causal Evidence from US Gubernatorial
  Elections, Journal of Financial Economics 124, 563­579.

Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles,
  The Journal of Finance 67, 45­83.

Jurado, Kyle, Sydney Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, 2015, Measuring Uncertainty, American Economic
  Review 105, 1177­1216.

Kellogg, Ryan, 2014, The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Evidence from Texas Oil Drilling,
  American Economic Review 104, 1698­1734.

Kim, Hyunseob, and Howard Kung, 2017, The Asset Redeployability Channel: How Uncertainty
  Affects Corporate Investment, The Review of Financial Studies 30, 245­280.

Lee, Jaewoo, and Kwanho Shin, 2000, The Role of a Variable Input in the Relationship between
  Investment and Uncertainty, American Economic Review 90, 667­680.

Ma, Song, Justin Murfin, and Ryan Pratt, 2020, Young Firms, Old Capital, Cornell University Working
 Paper.

Ospina, Raydonal, and Silvia Ferrari, 2012, A General Class of Zero-or-one Inflated Beta Regression
  Models, Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 56, 1609­1623.

Rampini, Adriano, 2019, Financing Durable Assets, American Economic Review 109, 664­701.

Schlingemann, Frederik, René Stulz, and Ralph Walkling, 2002, Divestitures and the Liquidity of the
  Market for Corporate Assets, Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117­144.

Solow, Robert, 1960, Investment and Technical Progress, Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences
  1, 48­93.

Staub, Kevin, and Rainer Winkelmann, 2013, Consistent Estimation of Zero-Inflated Count Models,
  Health Economics 22, 673­686.

Stopford, Martin, 2009, Maritime Economics 3rd Edition (Routledge).

Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor
  Market Risk, Journal of Political Economy 112, 695­717.

Teece, David, 1980, Economies of Scope and the Scope of the Enterprise, Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization 1, 223­247.

                                                 34
Wang, Haifeng, and Nic Lutsey, 2013, Long-Term Potential for Increased Shipping Efficiency through
 the Adoption of Industry-Leading Practices, The International Council on Clean Transportation
 65.

Williamson, Oliver, 1975, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in
 the Economics of Internal Organization, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign's Academy
 for Entrepreneurial Leadership Historical Research Reference in Entrepreneurship .

Williamson, Oliver, 1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism (Free Press).




                                                35
                                             Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

This table presents descriptive statistics for the main variables used in our empirical analyses over the 2006­2019 period.
Dependent variables are indicated in normal-type font and independent variables are denoted in italics. The investment
measures are calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number (alternatively, dead-weight tons)
of new, used, and the sum of new and used ships acquired by the lagged number (alternatively, dead-weight tons)
of ships held, and are obtained from Clarksons Research data. The disinvestment measures are calculated at the
firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships demolished, sold, and
the sum of ships demolished and sold by the lagged number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships held, and are
obtained from Clarksons Research data. Net investment, calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level, is the total
number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships acquired minus the total number (alternatively, dead-weight tons)
of ships disinvested divided by the lagged number (alternatively, dead-weight tons) of ships held, and is obtained from
Clarksons Research data. Age is the average of the logarithm of the years since a ship was built, calculated across all ships
in a given firm-subsector-quarter. DWT is the average of the logarithm of dead-weight tons of a ship, calculated across
all ships in a given firm-subsector-quarter. RPM is the average of the logarithm of ship engine's revolutions per minute,
calculated across all ships in a given firm-subsector-quarter. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the
sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector
quoted on the Baltic Exchange, and is obtained from Bloomberg. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary
items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given
subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, and is obtained from Compustat and Orbis.
Uncertainty is the quarterly average of the annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options
expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number
of ships they operate in the subsector, and is obtained from OptionMetrics. The Liquidity measures are defined as
the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships, number of transactions divided by the lagged number of ships, and
logarithm of the number of firms in a given subsector. All variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.




                                                            36
Variable                                                            N       Mean      SD      Median   IQR
                                     Investment Measures (Quarterly)
Investment (Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)                    99,928     1.360    9.712      0       0
Investment (DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                         99,928     1.378    9.988      0       0
Investment (New Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)                99,928     1.115    9.317      0       0
Investment (New DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                     99,928     1.128    8.614      0       0
Investment (Used Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)               99,928     0.245    2.534      0       0
Investment (Used DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                    99,928     0.250    2.540      0       0
                                    Disinvestment Measures (Quarterly)
Disinvestment (Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)                 99,928     1.262    7.994      0       0
Disinvestment (DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                      99,928     1.257    8.004      0       0
Disinvestment (Ships Sold)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)            99,928     0.642    5.167      0       0
Disinvestment (DWT Sold)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                 99,928     0.639    5.198      0       0
Disinvestment (Ships Demolished)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)      99,928     0.620    6.128      0       0
Disinvestment (DWT Demolished)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)           99,928     0.618    5.218      0       0
                                   Net Investment Measures (Quarterly)
Net Investment (Net Ships)/Lagged Number of Ships (%)            99,928     0.241    13.031     0       0
Net Investment (Net DWT)/Lagged DWT of Ships (%)                 99,928     0.345    13.202     0       0
                                   Firm Fleet Characteristics (Quarterly)
Age (Log # Years)                                                99,928     2.873    0.886    2.929    1.387
DWT (Log)                                                        99,928     11.436   0.795    11.422   1.033
RPM (Log)                                                        99,928     4.769    0.386    4.742    0.284
                                       Control Variables (Quarterly)
Subsectoral BDI                                                  99,928     0.002    0.249    ­0.001   0.281
Cash Flow                                                        99,928     0.011    0.025    0.011    0.017
Uncertainty (%)                                                  99,928     9.039    2.893     8.234   3.628
Liquidity (Log # Ships)                                          99,928     7.486    0.407     7.436   0.566
Liquidity (# Trans./Lagged Number of Ships)                      99,928     1.581    0.889     1.418   1.228
Liquidity (Log # Firms)                                          99,928     5.620    0.560     5.670   0.782




                                                     37
                              Table 2. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Investment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment rate, both the total rate and
disaggregated into its components. The investment rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing
the number of ships acquired (total, new ships acquired, or used ships acquired) by the lagged number of ships held.
Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement
prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly
income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across
all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty
is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring
at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of
ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of
ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector
in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as indicated.
All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using
robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                               Investment (Ships Acquired)
                                                      Total          Total       New         Used
                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
                        Subsectoral BDI              0.494***      0.516***     0.459***     0.057
                                                       (2.83)         (2.79)      (3.52)     (1.55)
                        Cash Flow                      0.328          0.362       0.335      0.027
                                                       (1.07)         (1.16)      (1.06)     (1.49)
                        Uncertainty                  ­0.069**      ­2.642***   ­2.533***    ­0.108
                                                      (­2.44)        (­3.12)     (­3.13)    (­0.99)
                        Liquidity                                  ­4.473***   ­4.150***   ­0.323**
                                                                     (­4.29)     (­4.18)    (­2.41)
                        Uncertainty × Liquidity                     0.328***    0.315***     0.013
                                                                      (3.34)      (3.34)     (0.99)
                        Liquidity Measure              NA          # Ships     # Ships     # Ships
                        Controls
                        Firm-Subsector Fleet           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
                        Fixed Effects
                        Country×Year-Quarter           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
                        Firm                           Yes           No          No           No
                        Subsector                      Yes           No          No           No
                        Firm×Subsector                 No            Yes         Yes          Yes
                        Observations                  99,928        99,928      99,928       99,928
                        R-squared                      0.039         0.043       0.040        0.030
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              38
                            Table 3. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Disinvestment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the disinvestment rate, both the total rate and dis-
aggregated into its components. The disinvestment rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the
number of ships disinvested (total, ships demolished, or ships sold) by the lagged number of ships held. Subsectoral
BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes
commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before ex-
traordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in
a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of
annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, av-
eraged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The
Liquidity measures are defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships, number of transactions divided by the
lagged number of ships, and logarithm of the number of firms in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age,
DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, sub-
sector, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics
are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                         Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)
                                                      Total          Total     Demolition     Sale
                                                       (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)
                       Subsectoral BDI              ­0.220*          ­0.778       ­0.465    ­0.313
                                                     (­1.92)         (­1.36)      (­1.42)   (­0.86)
                       Cash Flow                     ­0.130          ­0.293       ­0.144    ­0.149
                                                     (­0.19)         (­0.56)      (­0.85)   (­1.48)
                       Uncertainty                  ­0.159**       ­1.387***    ­0.893***   ­0.495*
                                                     (­2.04)         (­3.02)      (­3.24)   (­1.80)
                       Liquidity                                   ­1.173**     ­0.850***   ­0.323
                                                                     (­2.38)      (­2.93)   (­1.21)
                       Uncertainty × Liquidity                      0.171***     0.117***    0.054*
                                                                      (3.18)       (3.62)    (1.83)
                       Liquidity Measure               NA          # Ships      # Ships      # Ships
                       Controls
                       Firm-Subsector Fleet            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
                       Fixed Effects
                       Country×Year-Quarter            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
                       Firm                            Yes           No           No           No
                       Subsector                       Yes           No           No           No
                       Firm×Subsector                  No            Yes          Yes          Yes
                       Observations                  99,928         99,928       99,928      99,928
                       R-squared                      0.050          0.052        0.076       0.025
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              39
             Table 4. Uncertainty, Investment, and Disinvestment: A Quasi-Natural Experiment

This table reports output from Eq. (9) in a matched sample in Panel A. In Panel B, we report the second stage output
from Eq. (8) estimated using instrumental variables. The dependent variable is the investment (disinvestment) rate. The
investment rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (disinvested)
by the lagged number of ships held. Treat is an indicator that takes the value of 0 for the Capesize and VLCC subsectors
and 1 for the Panamax and LR1 subsectors. Piracy is an indicator that takes the value of 1 for the years 2009­2011,
and 0 for all other years. Subsector controls are Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly
percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served
by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary
items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given
subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of
annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter,
averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector.
Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Each
treated firm-subsector is matched to 1 control firm-subsector (with replacement) which is its nearest neighbor in terms
of treatment propensity. The propensity score is a function of the firm-subsector fleet controls. In Panel B, Uncertainty is
instrumented by Treat × Piracy. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as
indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2013 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed
using robust standard errors clustered by match in Panel A and by firm-subsector and year-quarter in Panel B.


                                   Panel A: Matched Sample Difference-in-Differences
                                     Investment (Ships Acquired)               Disinvestment      (Ships    Disin-
                                                                               vested)
                                       Total        New            Used          Total      Demolish        Sale
                                        (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
         Treat × Piracy              ­1.299***    ­1.197***        ­0.102      ­0.252***    ­0.166***      ­0.086
                                      (­2.97)      (­3.41)         (-0.89)      (­3.28)      (­3.44)       (­1.17)
         Controls
         Subsector                      Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Firm-Subsector Fleet           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Fixed Effects
         Country×Year-Quarter           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Firm×Subsector                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
         Observations                 14,651       14,651          14,651       14,651        14,651       14,651
         R-squared                    0.045        0.055           0.043        0.066         0.085        0.053
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              40
                         Panel B: Instrumental Variables Regression (Second Stage)
                            Investment (Ships Acquired)                  Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)
                              Total         New            Used            Total     Demolish         Sale
                                (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)
Uncertainty                 ­0.187***    ­0.168***       ­0.019          ­0.038**     ­0.025**       ­0.013
                             (­2.80)      (­2.88)        (­0.91)          (­2.14)      (­2.29)       (­1.58)
Controls
Subsector                      Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes
Firm-Subsector Fleet           Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes
Fixed Effects
Country×Year-Quarter           Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes
Firm×Subsector                 Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes
Observations                  14,651       14,651        14,651           14,651       14,651        14,651
R-squared                     0.078        0.081         0.076            0.073        0.084         0.066
              Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                      41
                               Table 5. Uncertainty and Productivity ­ Investment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment rate conditioning on measures of
productivity. The investment rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships
acquired (high- or low-productivity) by the lagged number of ships held. Panel A reports results on investment (new or
used) conditioning on a ship's productivity. High-productivity ships are defined as a ship being above (below) median
on at least one out of two characteristics: DWT (RPM ). Low-productivity ships are analogously defined. Panel B reports
results on investment conditioning on a ship's Age at the time of investment. Subsector controls are Subsectoral
BDI and Cash Flow. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward
freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash
Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total
assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the
subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American
call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted
by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of the number
of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector
in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as indicated.
All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using
robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                         Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired) by Productivity (DWT and RPM)
                                                       New                                  Used
                                            High-             Low-                High-             Low-
                                         Productivity      Productivity        Productivity      Productivity
                                             (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)
             Uncertainty                   ­1.944***          ­0.589              ­0.074           ­0.034
                                            (­3.85)           (­0.85)             (­0.97)          (­0.63)
             Liquidity                     ­3.484***          ­0.666              ­0.201*          ­0.122*
                                            (­2.92)           (­0.48)             (­1.90)          (­1.69)
             Uncertainty × Liquidity       0.220***            0.095               0.009            0.004
                                             (2.97)            (0.99)              (0.47)           (0.70)
             Liquidity Measure              # Ships           # Ships             # Ships           # Ships
             Controls
             Subsector                        Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
             Firm-Subsector Fleet             Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
             Fixed Effects
             Country×Year-Quarter             Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
             Firm×Subsector                   Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
             Observations                   99,928            99,928              99,928            99,928
             R-squared                       0.048             0.046               0.032             0.035
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                             42
                       Panel B: Investment (Ships Acquired) by Age
                              New       1-5 Years    6-15 Years    16-25 Years     26+ Years
                               (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)
Uncertainty                ­2.533***    ­0.731**      ­0.301*        ­0.051         ­0.017
                            (­3.13)      (­2.92)       (­1.79)       (­0.63)        (­1.04)
Liquidity                  ­4.150***    ­1.705***     ­0.594**       ­0.025*        ­0.254*
                            (­4.18)      (­2.79)       (­2.53)       (­1.88)        (­1.92)
Uncertainty × Liquidity    0.315***     0.089***      0.038***        0.010          0.007
                             (3.34)       (3.07)        (3.18)        (1.22)         (1.39)
Liquidity Measure           # Ships      # Ships       # Ships        # Ships       # Ships
Controls
Subsector                     Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Firm-Subsector Fleet          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Fixed Effects
Country×Year-Quarter          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Firm×Subsector                Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                 99,928       99,928       99,928         99,928        99,928
R-squared                     0.040        0.043        0.033          0.034         0.033
    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                            43
                               Table 6. Uncertainty and Productivity ­ Disinvestment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the disinvestment rate conditioning on measures
of productivity. The disinvestment rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships
disinvested (high- or low-productivity) by the lagged number of ships held. High-productivity ships are defined as a ship
being above (below) median on two out of three characteristics: DWT (Age, RPM ). Low-productivity ships are analogously
defined. Subsector controls are Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change
in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each
subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation
and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by
the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied
volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms
operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure
is the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and
RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector,
and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are
reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                              High-Productivity Ships          Low-Productivity Ships
                                              Demolition         Sale          Demolition        Sale
                                                   (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
                   Uncertainty                   ­0.105         ­0.054          ­0.788***      ­0.341**
                                                 (­0.88)        (­0.34)          (­2.99)        (­2.23)
                   Liquidity                     ­0.152         ­0.095          ­0.698***       ­0.228
                                                 (­0.57)        (­1.02)          (­3.44)        (­1.17)
                   Uncertainty × Liquidity        0.025          0.011          0.102***       0.043**
                                                  (0.83)         (0.46)           (3.98)         (2.21)
                   Controls
                   Subsector                       Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
                   Firm-Subsector Fleet            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
                   Fixed Effects
                   Country×Year-Quarter            Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes
                   Firm×Subsector                  Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes
                   Observations                  99,928         99,928           99,928         99,928
                   R-squared                      0.088          0.046            0.090          0.032
                   Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                           44
               Table 7. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Concentration of Firm Asset Holdings

This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (8) estimated at the firm-quarter level. The dependent variable in Panel A
is the HHI of ship holdings. The HHI is calculated at the firm-quarter level based on the number of ships held by the firm
across the subsectors it operates in. The dependent variable in Panel B is the number of subsectors (specifically, the natu-
ral logarithm of the number of distinct subsectors) a firm is exposed to, calculated at the firm-quarter level. Firm controls
are Cash Flow and Subsectoral BDI. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and
amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the num-
ber of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number
of ships it operates in the subsector. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived
from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic
Exchange, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsec-
tor. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options
expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number
of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of
ships it operates in the subsector. The Liquidity measures are defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships,
number of transactions divided by the lagged number of ships, and logarithm of the number of firms in a given subsector,
averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Firm
fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for head-
quarter country, firm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period.
T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm and year-quarter.


                                     Panel A: HHI of Ship Holdings at the Firm-Level
                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
                        Uncertainty                 0.007***       0.241***     0.006***   0.166***
                                                     (3.64)          (4.17)       (3.99)     (3.82)
                        Liquidity                                  ­0.281***     ­0.018    ­0.202***
                                                                    (­6.14)      (­1.17)    (­6.82)
                        Uncertainty × Liquidity                    ­0.038***   ­0.003***   ­0.027***
                                                                    (­5.52)      (­3.16)    (­7.14)
                        Liquidity Measure              NA          # Ships     # Trans.    # Firms
                        Controls
                        Firm                           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                        Firm Fleet                     Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                        Fixed Effects
                        Country×Year-Quarter           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                        Firm                           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
                        Observations                 42,206         42,206      42,206      42,206
                        R-squared                     0.788          0.690       0.690       0.690
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              45
                 Panel B: Number of Subsectors at the Firm-Level
                                   (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)
   Uncertainty                  ­0.006***      ­0.078***   ­0.008***   ­0.041***
                                 (­7.39)        (­3.92)     (­4.84)      (­5.05)
   Liquidity                                     0.277     0.214***       0.213
                                                 (0.48)     (14.33)       (1.61)
   Uncertainty × Liquidity                      0.010**    0.001***     0.007***
                                                 (1.99)      (3.86)       (4.00)
   Liquidity Measure               NA          # Ships     # Trans.     # Firms
   Controls
   Firm                            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Firm Fleet                      Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Fixed Effects
   Country×Year-Quarter            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Firm                            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Observations                  42,206         42,206      42,206      42,206
   R-squared                      0.835          0.838       0.838       0.838
Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                          46
                 Table 8. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Productivity of Firm Asset Holdings

This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (8) estimated at the firm-quarter level. The dependent variables are the
average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by a firm in a given quarter. Firm controls are Cash Flow and Subsectoral BDI.
Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total
assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the sub-
sector, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector.
Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement
prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange, averaged across all sub-
sectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly
average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next
quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the sub-
sector, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector.
The Liquidity measure is defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships held by all firms in a given subsector,
averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Firm
fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for head-
quarter country, firm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period.
T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm and year-quarter.


                                     Productivity Characteristics at the Firm-Level
                                                           Age           DWT             RPM
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)
                            Uncertainty                 0.382***       ­0.044**       0.047***
                                                          (3.77)        (2.23)          (2.96)
                            Liquidity                    0.405*         0.075          ­0.036
                                                          (1.86)        (0.43)         (­0.59)
                            Uncertainty × Liquidity     ­0.005**       0.005***       ­0.003***
                                                         (­2.54)        (3.20)         (­3.62)
                            Liquidity Measure            # Ships        # Ships        # Ships
                            Controls
                            Firm                           Yes            Yes            Yes
                            Firm Fleet                     Yes            Yes            Yes
                            Fixed Effects
                            Country×Year-Quarter           Yes            Yes            Yes
                            Firm                           Yes            Yes            Yes
                            Observations                 42,206         42,206          42,206
                            R-squared                     0.756          0.740           0.696
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                            47
                  Table 9. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Asset Allocation at the Firm-Level

This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (8) estimated at the firm-quarter level. The dependent variables are the
investment and disinvestment rates. The investment rate is calculated at the firm-quarter level by dividing the number
of ships acquired (new, used, and total) by the lagged number of ships held. The disinvestment rate is calculated at
the firm-quarter level by dividing the number of ships disinvested (demolished, sold, and total) by the lagged number
of ships held. Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight
agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange, averaged across
all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Cash Flow is the
quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged
across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector, averaged
across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Uncertainty is
the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end
of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate
in the subsector, averaged across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates
in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector, averaged
across all subsectors that a firm operates in weighted by the number of ships it operates in the subsector. Firm fleet
controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter
country, firm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period.
T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm and year-quarter.


                                   Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired) at the Firm-Level
                                                 Total                        New                        Used
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
          Subsectoral BDI               0.515***    0.614***        0.388***    0.501***        0.127***      0.113*
                                          (3.55)      (2.98)          (3.07)      (2.99)          (3.02)      (1.88)
          Cash Flow                      1.188*      1.047**         0.913**     0.864**        0.275**      0.183**
                                          (1.66)      (2.12)          (2.38)      (2.65)          (2.24)      (2.47)
          Uncertainty                   ­0.067**    ­4.966**        ­0.051***   ­4.110***        ­0.016      ­0.856
                                         (­2.64)     (­2.41)         (­3.12)     (­2.89)         (­1.08)     (­0.72)
          Liquidity                                  ­5.843                      ­3.615                      ­2.228*
                                                     (­1.53)                     (­0.67)                     (­1.81)
          Uncertainty × Liquidity                    0.814**                     0.686**                      0.128
                                                      (2.36)                      (2.44)                      (0.93)
          Liquidity Measure                NA        # Ships           NA           # Ships        NA        # Ships
          Controls
          Firm Fleet                       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
          Fixed Effects
          Country×Year-Quarter             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
          Firm                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
          Observations                   42,206      42,206          42,206         42,206       42,206      42,206
          R-squared                       0.071       0.070           0.069          0.070        0.038       0.037
                      Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                               48
                       Panel B: Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested) at the Firm-Level
                                        Total                     Demolition                      Sale
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)
Subsectoral BDI               ­0.288***    ­0.199***          ­0.212***   ­0.126**      ­0.076**     ­0.073*
                               (­3.73)       (­3.44)           (­5.89)     (­2.24)       (­2.49)      (­1.82)
Cash Flow                      ­0.486*      ­0.327*            ­0.244      ­0.201        ­0.242       ­0.126
                               (­1.81)       (­1.70)           (­1.14)     (­1.09)       (­1.49)      (­1.17)
Uncertainty                   ­0.051***    ­6.482***          ­0.026***   ­3.378***     ­0.025*      ­3.104**
                               (­3.13)       (­2.98)           (­3.99)     (­3.41)       (­1.78)      (­2.17)
Liquidity                                  ­5.712***                      ­3.126***                  ­2.586*
                                             (­3.68)                       (­4.19)                    (­1.73)
Uncertainty × Liquidity                     0.882***                      0.498***                    0.384*
                                              (3.32)                        (3.91)                     (1.83)
Liquidity Measure                NA         # Ships             NA        # Ships          NA        # Ships
Controls
Firm Fleet                       Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
Fixed Effects
Country×Year-Quarter             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
Firm                             Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations                   42,206           42,206         42,206      42,206        42,206          42,206
R-squared                       0.052            0.055          0.059       0.060         0.035           0.035
             Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                         49
                   Table 10. Asset Liquidity and Event-Study of High Uncertainty Episodes

This table reports event-study results. The events correspond to the eight highest spikes in our shipping industry
uncertainty measure, Uncertainty, aggregated across subsectors. These spikes represent eight dates on which the
percentage change in the series represented a two standard deviation or more movement. The sample for this analysis
consists of 76 shipping firms for which we are able to obtain valid daily returns for the one-month event window
beginning on each of these dates. In each window, we calculate the average annualized buy and hold abnormal
returns (ABHAR) by compounding each stock's daily returns over the one month after the event, and subtracting the
compounded daily returns of a benchmark characteristic-matched portfolio. We weight across firms using both equal
and value weights. Low-Liquidity Firms are firms who, in the quarter of the event, operate the majority of their ships
in the four subsectors with lowest number of ships. High-Liquidity Firms are firms which, in the quarter of the event,
operate the majority of their ships in the four subsectors with the highest number of ships.


                                            All Firms    Low-Liquidity     High-Liquidity      Difference
                                                            Firms              Firms          (Low ­ High)
                                               (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
              EW ABHAR (0,+1 Month)          ­3.18%         ­8.62%**            1.81%            ­10.43**
                                             (­1.41)         (­2.47)            (1.54)            (­2.27)
              VW ABHAR (0,+1 Month)          ­2.44%         ­7.26%**            2.93%            ­10.19**
                                             (­1.37)         (­2.58)            (1.22)            (­2.18)
              Observations                      76              35                41
                   Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                           50
             Table 11. Aggregate versus Sectoral Uncertainty and Investment and Disinvestment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variables are the investment and disinvestment rates. The
investment (disinvestment) rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships
acquired (disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held. VIX is the quarterly Volatility Index from the CBOE. JLN
Uncertainty is the quarterly uncertainty index from Jurado et al. (2015). EPU is the quarterly US Economic Policy
Uncertainty Index from Baker et al. (2016). GDP Dispersion is the quarterly GDP forecast dispersion from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters compiled by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Uncertainty is the quarterly average
of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter,
averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector.
Subsector controls consist of Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. See Table 2 for definitions of these variables. The
Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are
the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for firm and
subsector are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported
in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                            Investment           Disinvestment
                                                                  (1)                  (2)
                        Liquidity                            ­3.623***              ­0.967**
                                                              (­3.90)                (­1.96)
                        VIX                                   ­0.015                 ­0.010
                                                              (­0.51)                (­0.96)
                        VIX × Liquidity                        0.125                  0.054
                                                               (1.12)                 (1.34)
                        JLN Uncertainty                       ­0.006                 ­0.289*
                                                              (­0.01)                (­1.84)
                        JLN Uncertainty × Liquidity            0.159                  0.731
                                                               (0.55)                 (0.43)
                        EPU                                   ­0.015                 ­0.001
                                                              (­0.94)                (­0.18)
                        EPU × Liquidity                        0.037                  0.000
                                                               (0.09)                 (0.66)
                        GDP Dispersion                        ­0.093                 ­1.453
                                                              (­0.40)                (­0.04)
                        GDP Dispersion × Liquidity             0.000                  0.053
                                                               (0.67)                 (0.40)
                        Uncertainty                          ­3.319***              ­1.905***
                                                              (­3.37)                (­3.01)
                        Uncertainty × Liquidity              0.416***               0.252***
                                                               (3.68)                 (3.19)
                        Liquidity Measure                       # Ships              # Ships
                        Controls
                        Subsector                                Yes                   Yes
                        Firm-Subsector Fleet                     Yes                   Yes
                        Fixed Effects
                        Firm×Subsector                           Yes                   Yes
                        Observations                            99,928               99,928
                        R-squared                               0.127                0.155
                   Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                           51
               Table 12. Investment and Disinvestment Controlling for Financing Constraints

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment (disinvestment) rate. The investment
(disinvstment) rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired
(disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held. Subsector controls consist of Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow.
Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement
prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly
income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across
all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty
is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring
at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of
ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of
ships in a given subsector. FC is either the size-age index calculated as in Hadlock and Pierce (2010) or an indicator
variable for whether a given firm is private. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by
the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are
included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses,
computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                        Investment                 Disinvestment
                                                      (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
                      Uncertainty                  ­1.327***       ­1.199***    ­1.122***    ­0.718**
                                                    (­3.87)         (­3.36)      (­3.41)      (­2.89)
                      Liquidity                    ­3.470***       ­3.447***    ­0.990**     ­0.630*
                                                    (­3.94)         (­4.12)      (­2.07)      (­1.84)
                      Uncertainty × Liquidity      0.382***        0.325***     0.121***     0.126***
                                                     (3.08)          (2.95)       (3.53)       (2.89)
                      FC                            ­0.288*        ­1.114**      0.475*        1.236
                                                    (­1.82)         (­2.37)       (1.77)       (0.63)
                      Uncertainty × FC              ­0.221*         ­0.099*       0.024        0.080
                                                    (­1.85)         (­1.89)       (0.78)       (1.07)
                      Liquidity Measure             # Ships        # Ships       # Ships     # Ships
                      FC Measure                   Size-Age         Private     Size-Age     Private
                      Controls
                      Subsector                       Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Firm-Subsector Fleet            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Fixed Effects
                      Country×Year-Quarter            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Firm×Subsector                  Yes            No            Yes         No
                      Observations                  99,928          99,928       99,928       99,928
                      R-squared                      0.049           0.049        0.045        0.045
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              52
             Table 13. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Investment and Disinvestment Tonnage

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable are the investment and disinvestment rates. The
investment (disinvestment) rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the DWT of ships acquired
(disinvested) by the lagged DWT of ships held. Subsector controls consist of  Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. 
Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement
prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly
income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across
all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty
is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring
at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of
ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a
given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the
lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are included as indicated.
All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using
robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                     DWT Invested               DWT Disinvested
                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
                      Uncertainty                 ­0.068**    ­2.215***       ­0.199**    ­1.367***
                                                   (­2.24)      (­3.76)        (­2.31)     (­3.27)
                      Liquidity                               ­3.579***                   ­1.126**
                                                                (­3.62)                    (­2.46)
                      Uncertainty × Liquidity                  0.288***                   0.194***
                                                                 (3.54)                     (3.19)
                      Liquidity Measure              NA           # Ships        NA        # Ships
                      Controls
                      Subsector                      Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Firm-Subsector Fleet           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Fixed Effects
                      Country×Year-Quarter           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Firm                           Yes           No            Yes         No
                      Subsector                      Yes           No            Yes         No
                      Firm×Subsector                 No            Yes           No          Yes
                      Observations                 99,928         99,928       99,928       99,928
                      R-squared                     0.054          0.060        0.050        0.048
                   Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                             53
Appendix A                 Proofs
A.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Let us take a representative element of the investment vector in Eq. (5) and define a function
                                                                                                    
                      H (i 0 , i 1 ) = [1 + 2 ] i 0 - n0 q1 - u 0 p1 -        max 2 i 1 - n1 q2 - u 1 p2 , 0 .

We can rewrite the function H (·) purely in terms of i 0
                                                                                     
                                                         given that the constraint i 0 + i1
                                                                                          
                                                                                             I will bind for some I .
                                                                                                 
            H (i 0 ) = [1 + 2 ] i 0 - n0 q1 - u 0 p1 -         max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 .
                                                               
To guarantee the existence of i 0       (and, equivalently, i 1 ) as characterized by Eq. (5), it suffices to show that
H (i 0 ) = 0 for some i 0  [0, I ]. Since H (·) is a sum of continuous functions, it is itself continuous. Since 1 > 0
                        

and 2 > 0, it follows that:
                                            H (0) = - 2 I - N q2 - U p2 < 0.
Finally, for I  , we have that:

      lim H (I ) = lim       [1 + 2 ] I - N q1 - U p1 + lim              max 2 (I - I ) - (N - N ) q2 - (U - U ) p2 , 0
      I               I                                        N 
                 =  - 0 = .

Thus, there must exist an I¯  such that, for I > I¯, H (I¯) > 0. Putting these conditions together with the
continuity of H (·) over [0, I ], the Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees that there exists an i 0
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      [0, I ] and
i 1  [0, I ] such that H (i 0 , i 1 ) = 0.
                             



A.2     Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. Symmetric to the case of investment.

A.3     Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Let us, once again, consider a representative element of the investment vector in Eq. (5) and define
                                                                                                 
         H (i 0 ; r ) = [1 + 2 ] i 0 - n0 q1 - u 0 p1 -        max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r .

By the Implicit Function Theorem,
                                                                     H / i 
                                                        d i0
                                                               =-
                                                                          0
                                                                              .
                                                        dr           H / r
                                                        
Considering first the derivative of H with respect to i 0 , we have:

            H (i 0
                 
                   ;r)                                                                           
                         = [1 + 2 ] - q1 - p1 -                max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r
                  
                 i0                                  i0
                                                      

                                                                                              
                         = [1 + 2 ] - q1 - p1 -            max 2 I - i 0 - N - n 0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r
                                                         i0
                         = [1 + 2 ] - q1 - p1 -        - max 2 - (q2 + p2 ), 0 ; r
                         < 0.
Next, considering the derivative of H with respect to r , we have:
                          H (i 0
                               
                                 ;r)                                              
                                       =-       max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r .
                            r               r




                                                                 54
Because G (·, r ) is a MPS of G (·, r ), for any convex function J (·),

                                                   J (2 ); r =        J (2 )d G (2 , r )


                                                                      J (2 )d G (2 , r )

                                                              = [ J (2 ); r ] .

Since max 2 I - i 0
                           
                    - N - n0            
                             q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 is convex in 2 , it follows that:
                                                                                                           
  max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r                         max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r r > r .

This implies
                                                                       
                                     max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r  0.
                            r
Thus,
                        H (i 0
                             
                               ;r)                                                   
                                     =-            max 2 I - i 0 - N - n0 q2 - U - u 0 p2 , 0 ; r
                          r                r
                                      0.
Putting these conditions together, we have:
                                                                     H / i 
                                                       d i0
                                                              =-               < 0.
                                                                           0

                                                        dr           H / r

The disinvestment case is symmetric.

A.4     Proof of Propositions 2 and 3
Proof. Considering, once again, a representative element of the investment vector in in Eq. (5), we must
show that:                                                
                                               d n0   d u0
                                                    <       .
                                                dr     dr
Using the Implicit Function Theorem, this is equivalent to showing:
                                                           H / n          H / u 
                                                                    <-
                                                                0                 0
                                                      -                               ,
                                                           H / r           H / r

            H
or, since   r    0, we must show that:
                                                             H    H
                                                                <   .
                                                              n0  u 0
Simplifying the above, it is clear that:
                                     H    H       i                              i
                                        <     F + i t > i (Ni t ) × Seller i t + i t .
                                      n0  u 0
                                               
Simplifying further, and noting that i ti = (i i t )i with i > 1 and i > 0, we have:
                                                                               
                                           F - i (Ni t ) × Seller i t > i ti - (i i t )i ,
since F > 0, N > 0, Seller i t = -1. The disinvestment case is symmetric. It immediately follows that the
                                               
                             2 i0           2 d0
cross-partial derivatives    r N     and    r N     are positive as (·) is differentiable for N > 0 and  (·) > 0.




                                                                    55
Appendix B               Alternative Liquidity Measures

    Table A.1. Uncertainty, Alternative Measures of Asset Liquidity, and Investment and Disinvestment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment (disinvestment) rate. The investment
(disinvestment) rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired
(disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held.  Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral
indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on
the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization
divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of
ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of
nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating
in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The alternative Liquidity measures
are defined as the quarterly number of transactions divided by the lagged number of ships, and the logarithm of
the number of firms, in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by
the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are
included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses,
computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                        Investment                 Disinvestment
                                                      (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
                       Subsectoral BDI             0.597***        0.582***      ­0.212*      ­0.183
                                                     (3.82)          (4.14)      (­1.94)      (­0.74)
                      Cash Flow                      0.218           0.223       ­0.087       ­0.204
                                                     (1.11)          (0.95)      (­0.79)      (­0.52)
                      Uncertainty                  ­0.028***       ­1.433***    ­0.137***    ­0.618**
                                                    (­3.32)         (­3.84)      (­2.86)      (­2.72)
                      Liquidity                    ­0.318***       ­3.476***     ­0.212*     ­0.618*
                                                    (­2.88)         (­3.91)      (­1.69)      (­1.78)
                      Uncertainty × Liquidity      0.028***        0.265***      0.005**     0.118***
                                                     (3.46)          (4.01)       (2.43)       (3.18)
                      Liquidity Measure            # Trans.        # Firms      # Trans.     # Firms
                      Controls
                      Firm-Subsector Fleet            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Fixed Effects
                      Country×Year-Quarter            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Firm×Subsector                  Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                      Observations                  99,928          99,928       99,928       99,928
                      R-squared                      0.048           0.048        0.048        0.048
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                              56
Appendix C                 Decomposed Uncertainty
Our baseline measure of uncertainty in a shipping subsector is obtained by averaging option-implied
equity volatilities of firms operating in that subsector, weighted by the number of ships in that subsec-
tor each firm operates. Implicitly, this measure allows for the contribution of each firm's uncertainty
to the subsectoral uncertainty to be proportional to its market share in that subsector. We test
whether our results are robust to an alternative weighting scheme that decomposes each firm's im-
plied volatility across subsectors based on the share of its fleet belonging to the respective subsectors.
Specifically, in each quarter, we select eight (i.e., number of subsectors in our sample) or more firms
in ascending order by the size of the total fleet. This gives a system of eight or more equations in which
each firm's loading on each subsector's implied volatility (eight unknowns) is the fraction of that firm's
fleet in that subsector. From this equation system, we solve for each subsector's implied volatility
in that period. The results from estimating our baseline specification using this alternative decom-
posed uncertainty measure are reported in Table C.1. The coefficient estimates are similar in both sta-
tistical significance and economic magnitude to those reported in Tables 2 and 3, suggesting that our
results are not an artifact of the scheme used in allocating firms' implied volatilities across subsectors.

                      Table C.1. Decomposed Uncertainty and Investment and Disinvestment

This table reports output from Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment (disinvestment) rate. The investment
rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (disinvested) by the lagged
number of ships held. Uncertainty is an alternative implied volatility measure that decomposes each firm's implied
volatility across subsectors based on the share of its fleet belonging to the respective subsectors. Subsector controls
consist of  Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow. See Table 2 for definitions of these variables. The Liquidity measure is
the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and
RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector,
and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are
reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                         Investment (Ships Acquired)           Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)
                                          Total        New            Used        Total     Demolish          Sale
                                           (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
          Uncertainty                   ­1.688**     ­1.512***       ­0.176    ­1.118***     ­0.693***       ­0.425
                                         (­2.66)      (­3.18)        (­0.61)    (­3.97)       (­5.07)        (­1.19)
          Liquidity                     ­3.289***    ­2.814***       ­0.475    ­0.873**      ­0.615***       ­0.258
                                         (­3.99)      (­4.15)        (­1.34)    (­2.55)       (­3.83)        (­0.94)
          Uncertainty × Liquidity       0.254***     0.212***         0.042    0.183***      0.102***        0.081*
                                          (3.28)       (3.31)         (0.97)     (4.12)        (5.66)         (1.91)
          Liquidity Measure              # Ships      # Ships        # Ships    # Ships       # Ships        # Ships
          Controls
          Subsector                        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Firm-Subsector Fleet             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Fixed Effects
          Country×Year-Quarter             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Firm×Subsector                   Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Observations                   99,928       99,928         99,928      99,928       99,928         99,928
          R-squared                       0.065        0.065          0.051       0.055        0.056          0.049
                      Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.



                                                                57
Appendix D                                                   Dynamics of Uncertainty Effects on Capital Alloca-
                                                             tion
Recent theoretical work on firm responses to uncertainty shocks shows that the delaying effect of
uncertainty on firm investment displays a "drop-and-rebound" pattern (e.g., Bloom (2009)). We em-
pirically examine the dynamic effect of uncertainty on shipping firms' asset allocation decisions by
estimating Eq. (8) with leads of the investment and disinvestment rates as the dependent variables.
Table D.1 reports the estimation results.

                                                                                                       TABLE D.1 ABOUT HERE.

    Columns (1) through (4) of Panel A (B) present the relationship between uncertainty and invest-
ment (disinvestment) measured one through six quarters ahead. They show that the drop in invest-
ment (disinvestment) lasts for up to three quarters ahead, with the magnitude declining over time. By
the fourth quarter, there is no significant relation between uncertainty and investment or disinvest-
ment, suggesting capital allocation returns to its baseline level about a year after a change in uncer-
tainty. These results are consistent with delaying effects of uncertainty as dynamic models predict.
    Relatedly, we examine the robustness of our results to varying the maturity of the options con-
sidered in computing the implied volatilities underlying our Uncertainty measure. The results,
presented in Figure D.1, suggest that our conclusions are similar regardless of the underlying option
maturity. This lack of variation is to be expected for two reasons. First, implied volatility captures
market expectations of the volatility of the entire stream of future cash flows, and not only for the
maturity period of the option being considered. Second, in our context, implied volatility is highly
persistent across horizons. This finding is reassuring for the validity of our results in suggesting that
the effects we document are not reactions to short-term uncertainty fluctuations.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12 Months




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24 Months
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6 Months
                                                                                                     12 Months




                                                                                                                 24 Months




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                2 Months
                                                                                          6 Months
                                                                1 Quarter
                                                2 Months




                                                                                                                                                                      1 Month
                                      1 Month




                             0.000                                                                                                                           0.000

                             -0.005
                                                                                                                                                             -0.020
                             -0.010
                                                                                                                                                             -0.040
                                                                                                                                  Standardized Coefficient
  Standardized Coefficient




                             -0.015

                             -0.020
                                                                                                                                                             -0.060
                             -0.025
                                                                                                                                                             -0.080
                             -0.030

                             -0.035                                                                                                                          -0.100

                             -0.040
                                                                                                                                                             -0.120
                             -0.045

                             -0.050                                                                                                                          -0.140
                                                                        Option Maturity                                                                                                                      Option Maturity




                                                           (A) Investment                                                                                                                  (B) Disinvestment

Figure D.1. Effect of Uncertainty on Investment and Disinvestment by Option Maturity. This figure displays
standardized coefficient estimates and 95% confidence bands for Uncertainty estimated from the specification in
Eq. (8). We report standardized coefficients (the baseline regression coefficient multiplied by the ratio of the standard
deviations of the independent and dependent variable) so as to compare the magnitude of the effects across the
different option maturities. The dependent variables are investment (Panel A) and disinvestment (Panel B). Each point
represents the coefficient corresponding to a particular maturity of options used in computing Uncertainty, with "1
Quarter" corresponding to the baseline effects reported in column (1) of Tables 2 and 3.




                                                                                                                             58
          Table D.1. Dynamics of Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Investment and Disinvestment

This table reports output from a variant of Eq. (8) which uses the leads of the investment and disinvestment rates
as the dependent variables. The investment (disinvestment) rate is calculated at the firm-subsector-quarter level by
dividing the number of ships acquired (disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held. Subsector controls are 
Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow.  Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived
from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic
Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization divided
by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the number of ships they
operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money
American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector,
weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of
the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by
the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and year-quarter are
included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses,
computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                                                Panel A: Leads of Investment
                                                              Investment (Ships Acquired)
             Lead:                           t +1         t +2         t +3        t +4        t +5         t +6
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
             Uncertainty                  ­1.817***    ­1.141**      ­0.799*      ­0.469      ­0.162    ­0.006
                                           (­2.82)      (­2.62)      (­1.89)      (­1.15)     (­0.73)   (­0.34)
             Liquidity                    ­3.404***    ­2.605***    ­1.931***    ­1.771**     ­0.889    ­0.732
                                           (­3.92)      (­4.01)      (­2.88)      (­2.14)     (­1.46)   (­1.56)
             Uncertainty × Liquidity      0.220***      0.141**      0.117*        0.071       0.064    ­0.019
                                            (2.84)       (2.67)       (1.89)       (1.18)      (0.86)   (­0.35)
             Liquidity Measure             # Ships      # Ships      # Ships      # Ships    # Ships    # Ships
             Controls
             Subsector                        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
             Firm-Subsector Fleet             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
             Fixed Effects
             Country×Year-Quarter             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
             Firm×Subsector                   Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
             Observations                   99,928       95,007       90,264      85,794      81,475        77,377
             R-squared                       0.036        0.032        0.034       0.034       0.027         0.029
                     Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                             59
                             Panel B: Leads of Disinvestment
                                         Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)
Lead:                        t +1         t +2        t +3       t +4       t +5       t +6
                              (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)
Uncertainty                ­1.037***    ­0.785**    ­0.771**    ­0.517     ­0.479     ­0.296
                             (­3.78)     (­2.66)     (-2.28)    (­1.12)    (­0.46)    (­0.70)
Liquidity                  ­0.780**      ­0.363      ­0.243     ­0.134      0.114      0.345
                             (­2.34)     (­1.00)     (­0.58)    (­0.25)     (0.27)     (0.92)
Uncertainty × Liquidity     0.134***     0.088**     0.087*      0.055      0.059      0.018
                              (3.68)      (2.38)      (1.91)     (0.94)     (1.26)     (0.34)
Liquidity Measure           # Ships      # Ships     # Ships    # Ships    # Ships    # Ships
Controls
Subsector                     Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes
Firm-Subsector Fleet          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes
Fixed Effects
Country×Year-Quarter          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes
Firm×Subsector                Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes
Observations                99,928       95,007      90,264     85,794     81,475     77,377
R-squared                    0.056        0.063       0.068      0.060      0.058      0.057
    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                            60
Appendix E               Asset Liquidity and Irreversibility
We verify that secondary market liquidity is associated with a higher liquidation value relative to
the purchase price ("price premium"), an inverse measure of irreversibility. We estimate secondary
market transaction-level regressions of the form:

                     Price Premiumi , j ,t =1 Liquidity j ,t +  Controlsi , j ,t + F E s + i , j ,t ,              (E.1)

where Price Premiumi , j ,t is an (inverse) measure of irreversibility, defined as the resale price minus
the purchase price divided by the purchase price for transaction i involving a ship in subsector j in
year-quarter t .36 Liquidity j ,t refers to one of the three subsectoral ship market liquidity measures,
# Ships, # Firms, and # Transactions. The vector Controlsi , j ,t includes Subsectoral BDI j ,t as a
subsector-quarter-level proxy for changes in expected shipping demand, and ship-level character-
istics that affect their secondary market pricing. These include the log of the ship's age, DWT, RPM,
as well as indicator variables for whether the ship was built in Korea, Japan, or China.37 We estimate
Eq. (E.1) with both subsector and year-quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are double-clustered
at the subsector and year-quarter levels. Table E.1 reports the results.

                                              TABLE E.1 ABOUT HERE.

    The estimates for Liquidity in columns (1) through (6) show that greater secondary market
liquidity is associated with higher resale relative to purchase prices and lower price dispersion
across all three liquidity measures. The economic magnitude of these relations is large. Estimates in
column (1) suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in liquidity measured by the log number
of ships in the subsector-quarter (0.41) is associated with an 10.7-percentage point (= 0.41 × 26.12)
increase in resale price premium. Likewise, the estimated coefficient on Liquidity in column (2)
indicates that a one-standard-deviation increase in the transaction-based liquidity measure (0.89)
is associated with a 5.9-percentage point (= 0.89 × 6.58) increase in resale price premia.
    The positive relationship between liquidity and price premia suggests that investment decisions
are less costly to reverse when secondary markets are more liquid. This finding provides an impor-
tant support for our model by showing that the incentive to forego investment and disinvestment
in the face of heightened uncertainty is particularly acute when secondary market liquidity is low.38
The negative relationship between liquidity and price dispersion (columns (4) through (6)) suggests
that liquidity mitigates search frictions, leading to a more "stable" match quality between buyers
and sellers (Gavazza (2011)).
    Table E.1 also sheds light on general pricing determinants in the secondary ship market. The
estimates in column (1), for instance, show that resale price premia are strongly related to shipping
demand, evident from the positive and significant coefficient on Subsectoral BDI . Younger and
larger ships, and those with lower-RPM engines attract significantly higher resale prices relative
    36
       As an alternate measure of irreversibility, we also consider Price Dispersion j ,t , defined as the quarterly mean
absolute deviation of resale prices divided by the mean resale price of all transactions involving ships in subsector
j in year-quarter t .
    37
       These three shipbuilding nations account for 95% of new ship deliveries in our sample. We do not include engine
speed as a control due to collinearity with RPM. Engines in larger ships have both lower RPM and lower speed.
    38
       The results in Table E.1 provide empirical support for our modeling of the price processes in Eq. (1) and (2). Note
that one can subtract Eq. (2) from Eq. (1) and scale by Eq. (2) to obtain an analogue to the resale price premium.
By differentiating the resulting expression with respect to N and , one can show that the resale price premium is
positively related to both liquidity and productivity for N > 0.


                                                           61
to their purchase prices. To the extent that ship prices reflect their productivity, the estimates in
columns (1) through (3) indicate that ships with lower age, higher DWT, and lower RPM engines
tend to be more productive. We exploit these ex ante proxies for ship productivity in our analyses
examining investment and disinvestment measures conditional on productivity.




                                                 62
                                                                Table E.1. Asset Liquidity and Irreversibility

     This table reports output from Eq. (E.1). The dependent variables are the price premium and the price dispersion. Price Premium is the resale price minus the
     purchase price divided by the purchase price. Price Dispersion is the quarterly mean absolute deviation of resale prices divided by the mean resale price of all transac-
     tions involving ships of a given subsector. The Liquidity measures are defined as the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships, number of transactions divided by the
     lagged number of ships, and logarithm of the number of firms in a given subsector. Age is the logarithm of the years since the ship was built, DWT is the logarithm of
     dead-weight tons of the ship, and RPM is the logarithm of the ship engine's revolutions per minute. Korea, Japan, and China are indicator variables that take the value
     of one if the ship was constructed by a builder based in each respective country. Subsector­ and year-quarter­fixed effects are included as indicated. All regressions
     are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by subsector and year-quarter.


                                                      Price            Price             Price             Price             Price          Price
                                                    Premium          Premium           Premium          Dispersion        Dispersion     Dispersion
                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)            (6)
                           Liquidity                26.118***         6.583***          32.189***         ­6.491**          ­1.746*        ­7.283**
                                                      (4.18)             (2.28)           (3.87)           (­2.12)           (­1.88)        (­2.56)
                            Subsectoral BDI         45.317***         19.142***         42.557***         19.334**          5.819***       7.281**
                                                      (5.36)             (4.16)           (4.50)            (2.22)            (2.98)         (2.17)
                           Age                     ­14.555***        ­14.892***        ­14.374***         1.199**           2.982***       0.874**
                                                     (­7.00)           (­11.70)          (­7.92)            (2.41)            (2.89)         (2.14)




63
                           DWT                      17.704***           0.419**         17.978***          ­5.812            ­1.884         ­6.824
                                                      (3.98)             (2.27)           (2.99)           (­1.07)           (­0.49)        (­1.17)
                           RPM                     ­19.730***         ­12.844*         ­11.518***           2.403             6.239          2.981
                                                     (­2.97)            (­1.79)          (­3.51)            (0.74)            (0.88)         (0.30)
                           Korea                     ­5.928            ­9.476*           ­6.009            13.483            10.280         14.287
                                                     (­1.04)            (­1.76)          (­0.95)            (0.86)            (0.69)         (0.88)
                           Japan                      3.885              3.389            2.136            ­0.378            ­0.418         ­0.179
                                                      (0.67)             (0.72)           (0.43)           (­0.30)           (­0.19)        (­0.05)
                           China                     ­1.918             ­1.227           ­2.176             5.589             7.611          4.871
                                                     (­0.71)            (­0.64)          (­0.37)            (0.10)            (0.76)         (0.34)
                           Liquidity Measure         # Ships          # Trans.          # Firms           # Ships           # Trans.       # Firms
                           Fixed Effects
                           Subsector                   Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
                           Year-Quarter                Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
                           Observations               3,489             3,112            2,112              372               344            344
                           R-squard                   0.488             0.460            0.457             0.208             0.217          0.213
                                                Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.
Appendix F              Pure-Play Firms

       Table F.1. Uncertainty, Asset Liquidity, and Investment and Disinvestment for Pure-Play Firms

This table reports output from Eq. (8) estimated on the sample of firms operating in only a single subsector over the
sample period ("pure-play" firms). The dependent variables are the investment and disinvestment rates. The invest-
ment (disinvestment) rate is calculated at the firm-quarter level by dividing the number of ships acquired (disinvested)
by the lagged number of ships held. Subsector controls are  Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow.  Subsectoral BDI is the
quarterly percentage change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly
served by ships in each subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary
items plus depreciation and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given
subsector weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of
annualized daily implied volatility of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter,
averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector.
The Liquidity measure is the quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are
the average Age, DWT, and RPM of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter
country, firm, and year-quarter are included as indicated. All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period.
T -statistics are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm and year-quarter.


                                          Panel A: Investment (Ships Acquired)
                                                         Investment        New         Used
                                                              (1)           (2)         (3)
                             Uncertainty                  ­0.887***      ­0.712***    ­0.175
                                                           (­2.81)        (­3.14)     (­1.02)
                             Liquidity                    ­2.018***      ­1.558**     ­0.460
                                                           (­2.97)        (­2.08)     (­1.44)
                             Uncertainty × Liquidity       0.079**        0.065**      0.014
                                                            (2.25)         (2.78)      (0.16)
                             Liquidity Measure             # Ships        # Ships     # Ships
                             Controls
                             Subsector                        Yes           Yes         Yes
                             Firm Fleet                       Yes           Yes         Yes
                             Fixed Effects
                             Country×Year-Quarter             Yes           Yes         Yes
                             Firm                             Yes           Yes         Yes
                             Observations                   14,497        14,497      14,497
                             R-squared                      0.050         0.048       0.042
                   Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                           64
                    Panel B: Disinvestment (Ships Disinvested)
                                  Disinvestment      Demolition        Sale
                                         (1)              (2)           (3)
      Uncertainty                    ­1.982***         ­1.217***      ­0.567
                                       (­3.88)           (­2.91)      (­0.77)
      Liquidity                      ­2.930***         ­1.485**      ­1.667**
                                       (­3.09)           (­2.18)      (­2.47)
      Uncertainty × Liquidity         0.319***          0.179***      0.082*
                                        (3.24)            (2.97)       (1.84)
      Liquidity Measure                # Ships          # Ships       # Ships
      Controls
      Subsector                          Yes              Yes           Yes
      Firm Fleet                         Yes              Yes           Yes
      Fixed Effects
      Country×Year-Quarter               Yes              Yes           Yes
      Firm                               Yes              Yes           Yes
      Observations                     14,497           14,497        14,497
      R-squared                         0.059            0.088         0.051
Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                        65
Appendix G           Lumpiness of Investment and Disinvestment
This Appendix presents results from estimating alternative specifications and on alternative samples
to the baseline model. Panel A provides results estimated using the investment and disinvestment
measures calculated at the semi-annual and annual horizons as the dependent variables. Panel
B presents results from estimating a zero-one inflated beta regression model. This method is ap-
propriate for dependent variables which are proportions, and therefore tend to be bounded and
have a mass of probability at zero, one, or both. In such cases, linear models may be inappropriate
as the effect of explanatory variables might be non-linear and the variance tends to decrease when
the mean gets closer to either the zero or one boundary. The zero-one inflated beta regression
consists of three components. First, it fits the range of the dependent variable lying between zero
and one (non-inclusive) to a beta distribution where the mean is a function of explanatory variables.
It further allows zeros and one values of the dependent variable to be explained by two distinct
(but potentially correlated) processes. Specifically, it fits separate logit regressions for the zero and
one values of the dependent variable. The model is jointly estimated via maximum likelihood.
See Ospina and Ferrari (2012) for more details. In our implementation, we use the same set of
explanatory variables across all three processes, and values of the dependent variable lying above
one are capped at one. For brevity, we report coefficient estimates solely from the first process; i.e.,
the beta distribution for values of the dependent variable between zero and one.




                                                   66
            Table G.1. Robustness Tests to Address Lumpiness of Investment and Disinvestment

This table reports output from variants of Eq. (8). Panel A reports output from semi-annual and annualized versions
of Eq. (8). The dependent variable is the investment (disinvestment) rate. The investment (disinvestment) rate is
calculated at the firm-subsector-semi-annual or firm-subsector-annual level by dividing the number of ships acquired
(disinvested) by the lagged number of ships held. The independent variables are similarly computed at the semi-annual
or annual levels. Panel B reports results from estimation procedures accounting for zero investment and disinvestment
rates. Columns (1) and (4) report results from a linear probability model (LPM) which takes the form of Eq. (8), where the
dependent variable is an indicator which takes the value of 1 if the investment (disinvestment) rate in a firm-subsector-
quarter is positive, and 0 otherwise. Columns (2) and (5) report estimates from a conditional logit model, using the same
dependent variables as in Columns (1) and (4). Columns (3) and (6) report estimates from a zero-one inflated beta (ZOIB)
model where the dependent variable is investment (disinvestment) rate, bounded below at zero and bounded above
at one. Subsector controls consist of  Subsectoral BDI and Cash Flow.  Subsectoral BDI is the quarterly percentage
change in the sectoral indices derived from forward freight agreement prices for routes commonly served by ships in each
subsector quoted on the Baltic Exchange. Cash Flow is the quarterly income before extraordinary items plus depreciation
and amortization divided by lagged total assets, averaged across all firms operating in a given subsector weighted by the
number of ships they operate in the subsector. Uncertainty is the quarterly average of annualized daily implied volatility
of nearest-to-money American call options expiring at the end of the next quarter, averaged across all firms operating
in a given subsector, weighted by the number of ships they operate in the subsector. The Liquidity measure is the
quarterly logarithm of the number of ships in a given subsector. Firm fleet controls are the average Age, DWT, and RPM
of ships held by the firm-subsector in the lagged quarter. Fixed effects for headquarter country, firm, subsector, and
year-quarter are included as indicated. We opt for a reduced set of fixed effects when estimating the conditional logit
model and ZOIB model as the estimation routines for these models do not converge under the full set of baseline fixed
effects (due to the incidental parameters problem). All regressions are estimated over the 2006­2019 period. T -statistics
are reported in parentheses, computed using robust standard errors clustered by firm-subsector and year-quarter.


                         Panel A: Investment and Disinvestment Measured at Longer Horizons
                                                     Investment                      Disinvestment
                                             Semi-Annual         Annual        Semi-Annual        Annual
                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)
                 Uncertainty                   ­3.788**        ­9.291***         ­2.387***       ­6.429***
                                                (­2.67)         (­3.22)           (­4.59)         (­2.74)
                 Liquidity                     ­6.884***      ­14.539***         ­1.187***       ­5.782**
                                                (­3.34)         (­4.79)           (­3.88)         (­2.50)
                 Uncertainty × Liquidity       0.480***        1.277***          0.319***        0.752***
                                                 (3.55)          (3.71)            (3.24)          (3.95)
                 Liquidity Measure              # Ships          # Ships           # Ships        # Ships
                 Controls
                 Subsector                        Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
                 Firm-Subsector Fleet             Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
                 Fixed Effects
                 Country×Time                     Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
                 Firm×Subsector                   Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes
                 Observations                   52,684           27,780            52,684         27,780
                 R-squared                       0.058            0.059            0.060          0.077
                    Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                            67
                    Panel B: Accounting for Zero Investment and Disinvestment
                                       Investment                              Disinvestment
                             LPM          Logit         ZOIB          LPM          Logit        ZOIB
                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
Uncertainty                ­0.044***    ­0.781***      ­0.217**     ­0.049***     ­0.241**     ­0.220**
                             (­4.89)      (­3.77)       (­2.19)       (­3.17)      (­2.26)      (­2.46)
Liquidity                  ­0.091***    ­1.174***      ­0.188*        ­0.004      ­0.683**       0.122
                             (­4.55)      (­3.62)       (­1.89)       (­0.56)      (­2.41)       (0.93)
Uncertainty × Liquidity     0.004***     0.187***       0.043*       0.014***     0.075**       0.018*
                              (5.26)       (4.47)        (1.70)        (3.88)       (2.95)       (1.68)
Liquidity Measure           # Ships      # Ships       # Ships       # Ships      # Ships      # Ships
Controls
Subsector                     Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Firm-Subsector Fleet          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Fixed Effects
Country×Year-Quarter          Yes          No            No            Yes          No           No
Firm×Subsector                Yes          No            No            Yes          No           No
Subsector                     No           Yes           Yes           No           Yes          Yes
Year-Quarter                  No           Yes           Yes           No           Yes          Yes
Observations                 99,928      48,693        82,606        99,928        55,998      82,606
R-squared                     0.091        NA            NA           0.057          NA          NA
Pseudo R-squared               NA         0.147         0.119          NA           0.078       0.061
        Statistical significance is indicated as follows: *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1.




                                                  68
