                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES IT MATTER HOW CENTRAL BANKS ACCUMULATE RESERVES? EVIDENCE
                     FROM SOVEREIGN SPREADS

                                       César Sosa-Padilla
                                      Federico Sturzenegger

                                       Working Paper 28973
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28973


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2021




We thank Santiago Cesteros, Nicolas Der Meguerditchian and Santiago Mosquera for able
research assistance, Juan Francisco Gomez, Christoph Grosse-Steffen, Alejandro Izquierdo, and
Eduardo Levy-Yeyati for sharing data with us, and Walter Sosa Escudero and Enrique Szewach
for useful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by César Sosa-Padilla and Federico Sturzenegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does It Matter How Central Banks Accumulate Reserves? Evidence from Sovereign Spreads
César Sosa-Padilla and Federico Sturzenegger
NBER Working Paper No. 28973
June 2021
JEL No. F32,F34,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

There has been substantial research on the benefits of accumulating foreign reserves, but less on
the relative merits of how these reserves are accumulated. In this paper we explore whether the
form of accumulation affects country risk. We first present a model of endogenous sovereign debt
defaults, where we show that reserve accumulation through the issuance of debt contingent on
local output reduces spreads in a way that reserve accumulation with foreign borrowing does not.
We confirm this model prediction when taking the theory to the data. These results suggest that
attention should be placed on the way reserves are accumulated, a distinction that has important
practical implications. In particular, our results call into question the benefits of programs of
reserves strengthening through external debt such as those typically implemented by multilateral
organizations.


César Sosa-Padilla
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
csosapad@nd.edu

Federico Sturzenegger
Universidad de San Andres
Vito Dumas 284
Victoria Buenos Aires
B1644BID
Argentina
fsturzenegger@udesa.edu.ar
1     Introduction

There is an extensive literature on the benefits and costs of holding foreign reserves. The benefits
associated to reserves can be broadly related to three basic attributes: the role of reserves as a
source of liquidity, their role as a hedging mechanism, and as a way to modify the real exchange
rate in what has been called the "mercantilistic" motive. The costs of reserves are associated
to the financing costs of such reserves: the foreign interest rate if the reserves are borrowed, the
domestic interest rate premia if purchased with domestic assets, or their impact on inflation if
purchased through unsterilized interventions.
    One important motivation for reserves has been that of providing a liquidity reservoir for
times of need in which reserves can be used to smooth balance of payments disruptions. Initially
the focus was mostly related to disruptions in trade flows (reserves were aimed at covering a given
number of months of imports) but more recently have focused on capital flows. This second view
was popularized in the so called Greenspan-Guidotti rule, a rule of thumb by which central
banks should hold reserves equivalent to the government's short term liabilities (Greenspan,
1999). Jeanne and Ranciere (2011) formalized this idea in a framework that added both a
negative output effect of capital flow reversals as well as a positive effect of reserve accumulation
on spreads. They find that a model with these ingredients delivers levels of reserves consistent
with those observed in most countries. After the great financial crisis many studies showed that
reserves allowed countries to face the financial crisis with lower output costs (e.g., Dominguez
et al., 2012, and Bussi`
                       ere et al., 2015). Levy-Yeyati (2008) documents the impact of reserves on
spreads suggested in Jeanne and Ranciere (2011). As a broad summary of these findings, the
IMF in 2011 (see IMF, 2011) proposed a practitioner's guide to estimate optimal reserves where
exposure to financial flow reversals (measured as the ratio of short term debt to M2) and trade
flows were the main ingredients.
    In recent years, this approach has been complemented by the view that reserves may actually
not only provide liquidity in times of need, but that they may actually change the equilibrium of
the economy. In this line, a recent literature on sovereign debt and reserve accumulation shows
how larger holdings of international reserves change the borrowing terms faced by emerging
countries and (under certain conditions) reduce equilibrium spreads (see Alfaro and Kanczuk,
2009, Bianchi et al., 2018, and Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla, 2020). Relatedly, the role of reserves
for lender-of-last-resort support are discussed in Bocola and Lorenzoni (2017) and C´
                                                                                    espedes and
Chang (2019).



                                                 2
       The hedging role of reserves was originally discussed in relation to the currency composition
of reserves (see Dellas and Yoo, 1991), but was taken a step further by Caballero and Panageas
(2003). Their idea is that the government could aim at improving its income at times of distress
by investing reserves in instruments that correlated negatively with its own shocks. Alfaro and
Kanczuk (2019) study the role of domestic liabilities as a way of providing this hedge in a model
with reserve accumulation and sovereign default. They find that countries issue domestic debt
and accumulate reserves to hedge against negative shocks. Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla (2020)
highlight a macro-stabilization hedging role for reserves in a model with default risk and nominal
rigidities. Since sovereign risk is countercyclical, low income states will simultaneously show high
interest rates and slack in the labor market. Therefore, having reserves reduces the need to roll-
over debt maturing at high interest rates and frees up resources to stabilize macro fluctuations
(i.e., reduce the slack in the labor market). Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla (2020) label this effect the
"macro-stabilization hedging" benefit of issuing debt to buy reserves.1 A practitioner's guide to
implement these ideas is discussed in Sturzenegger (2019), and Orazi et al. (2020). In particular
Orazi et al. (2020) develop a model of asset allocation for foreign reserves that is chosen in order
to correlate negatively with the shocks faced by the economy.
       Finally, the mercantilistic approach was an attempt to explain the policy of central banks
aimed at avoiding large exchange rate appreciations, a motivation that became prominent during
the reserves buildups of the 2000s, and particularly by the presumption that China was accumu-
lating reserves to fight an appreciation of its currency. It was initially suggested in Aizenman and
Riera-Crichton (2008), though Aizenman and Lee (2007) argue that on a quantitative dimension,
the role of the mercantilist view is dwarfed by other determinants, particularly liquidity.
       Other theories highlight the interaction between growth externalities and financial frictions
as a rationale for reserve accumulation (Benigno et al., 2021), and as a macroprudential policy
tool (Arce et al., 2019).
       These different motivations for holding external reserves, in turn, have led to alternative
measures of the benefits of these reserves. Rodrik and Velasco (1999) and Rodrik (2006) provide
an assessment of the benefits of reserves in terms of avoiding financial crises. They estimate
a 10% reduction in the probability of a crisis, which, combined with a 10% drop in output in
such events, entails a benefit equivalent to 1% of GDP.2 Rodrik (2006) suggests that such a
benefit bodes reasonably well with the spread differentials that countries pay to hold reserves.
   1
    In their model there is also a traditional `liquidity' role for reserves.
   2
    An independent estimation of the effect of reserves on the probability of a sudden stop is provided by Calvo
et al. (2013).


                                                       3
Levy-Yeyati (2008) argues that, because of the positive effect of reserves on spreads, the cost of
holding reserves has been overestimated.
      In this literature, two issues have captured less attention than they deserve. First, that it is
typically assumed that the central bank's and government's balance sheet are one and the same,
even when debt is typically issued by the government and does not constitute central bank debt.
The issue of who accumulates reserves may be a relevant issue, particularly if the central bank
is independent, but has been largely ignored.3
      A second issue, which will be the main point discussed here, relates to the way the reserves
buildup is financed. In fact, there are three main ways to purchase reserves: by unsterilized
purchases, by issuing foreign currency denominated debt, and by issuing debt which may be
contingent to local output. Below we will argue that domestic currency denominated debt
belongs to the latter category.
      It is easy to argue that the way reserves are financed should have a bearing on the effect
of reserves. For example, accumulating reserves with foreign currency denominated liabilities
provides liquidity but no hedge, where we refer to hedging as a way of generating positive
valuation effects (in Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2019's terminology) in times of distress. This differs
from the effects of accumulating reserves with state contingent debt which provides both liquidity
and hedging benefits.
      Accumulating reserves with liabilities entails an interest rate cost known as carry which is
another channel through which the mechanism used for accumulation matters. If liabilities are
issued in foreign currency the carry comprises the country risk and a time premia, as debt issued
to finance reserves typically has a longer maturity than the assets where those resources are
parked. This interest rate premia can be thought as the "insurance" cost that pays off in terms
of benefits of consumption smoothing when reserves are used, a benefit that, as was mentioned,
Jeanne and Ranciere (2011) show justifies the levels of reserves seen in the data.
      The same calculation holds when accumulating reserves with state contingent debt, except
that the carry needs to compensate for the risk properties of this debt, which provides a higher
level of insurance in bad times. This higher level of protection implies that the "insurance"
premia is typically (but not necessarily) larger.
      Given the practical relevance of these effects it is somewhat surprising that there is a relatively
scant literature evaluating the implications of how reserve accumulation is done. This paper will
  3
    See Samano (2021) for a recent study of reserve accumulation and default without perfect coordination
between the central bank and the government.


                                                     4
focus on how sovereign spreads are affected by the way reserves are accumulated. We will show,
both theoretically and empirically, that the financing mechanism does matter for the level of
spreads.
       At the theoretical level, our paper builds on Alfaro and Kanczuk (2019) who provide a model
where reserves can be accumulated with debt issued in terms of tradables or non-tradables. They
assume that both debt and reserves are short-term and so the optimal portfolio is particularly
sensitive to roll-over risk. This, in turn, delivers similar levels of reserves and debt, something
at odds with the data. While their model underscores that the way reserves are accumulated
is a key element in evaluating their value, we generalize their model assuming that `domestic
debt' is a financial instrument that pays coupons contingent on the realization of the domestic
income, as opposed to modelling debt issued in non-tradable units.4 Moreover, following Bianchi,
Hatchondo and Martinez (2018), we use a model with long-term debt and short-term reserves (a
better description of the assets used by the governments and central banks), and show that in
this case the resulting equilibrium portfolios are closer to the data.
       At an empirical level, Levy-Yeyati and G´
                                               omez (2020) somewhat address the issue, but only
to assess the benefits of leaning-against-the-wind policies. They show that central banks accu-
mulating reserves financed with domestic currency may experience valuations gains if they follow
a policy of purchasing to avoid large appreciations while selling at moments of distress. But they
do not take the following step to see if this, which reinforces the hedging properties of reserves,
leads to lower spreads. We show that it does.
       The paper is organized as follows. The next subsection describes a specific case that mo-
tivates why this issue is important for policy. In section 2 we present a theoretical framework
allowing for alternative ways of accumulating reserves and trace the effect of each one of them
on sovereign spreads. A testable implication of our theory is that, for a given level of debt,
financing reserve accumulation with contingent debt (in particular, using an instrument indexed
to domestic income) allows the country to pay lower spreads than it would otherwise (i.e., had
it used non-state contingent debt instead), a channel that becomes more important the larger
the macro-vulnerabilities of the country. Section 3 takes the model to the data. We confirm the
theoretical predictions both using cross country regressions as well as looking at specific exoge-
nous events. Our results indicate that the source of financing matters. Accumulating reserves
with domestic liabilities is beneficial in mitigating country risk, whereas accumulating reserves
   4
     Our modelling of state-contingent debt follows the work of Durdu (2009), Bertinatto et al. (2017) and Roldan
and Roch (2021). In particular, our model is similar to the one in Roldan and Roch (2021) except that we allow
for reserve accumulation and do not consider the case of robust foreign lenders.


                                                       5
with foreign liabilities provide no visible benefit. Section 4 concludes and provides a discussion
for future work in this area as here we just look at one dimension of the effect of how reserves
are accumulated.


1.1       A Personal Motivation

The previous debate has practical implications for central banking, as one of us verified between
2015 and 2018 when serving as Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina. At the end of the
year 2015 Argentina had negative net reserves in its central bank, strict exchange rate controls,
and a black market premium for US dollars larger than 70% (the official rate was at 9 pesos per
dollar while the black market rate stood at around 16). In a single move capital controls were
removed, exchange rate markets unified, and the exchange rate was allowed to float. Immediately
after lifting restrictions, the exchange rate settled at around 13 pesos per dollar (basically the
mid point between the two previous exchange rates) and the peso floated for the following two
years with minimal central bank intervention.
       From this starting point, and considering that reserves were nonexistent, the central bank
started an aggressive program of reserves buildup. In the following two years the Central Bank
of Argentina purchased about 40 billion dollars, roughly 8% of GDP. However, purchasing this
amount of reserves was not cost-free. In fact, the reserve purchases were sterilized with short term
central bank paper denominated in domestic currency. Thus, in 2016 and 2017, as reserves piled
up so did the amount of central bank liabilities. Figure 1 shows the evolution of these liabilities, of
net reserves, as well as the difference between the two (these can be called "unbacked liabilities").
       As can be seen, the process entailed a concomitant increase in net reserves and central bank
liabilities while "unbacked" liabilities remained roughly constant throughout 2016 and 2017. The
process of reserve accumulation peaked by the end of 2017 when net reserves had increased from
negative to close to 40bn dollars, while central bank liabilities had grown from around 25bn to
around 75bn dollars.
       In early 2018 Argentina was hit by a sudden stop.5 The central bank reacted by selling
   5
    The sudden stop was the result of a series of macroeconomic mishaps. The government elected in late 2015
had maintained a large budget deficit that the market had happily financed, even at decreasing spreads. The
government then won the midterm elections of 2017, as output was growing and inflation coming down. With the
benefit of hindsight, it is easy to see that the markets considered the electoral win as a deadline for starting fiscal
consolidation while the government considered the win as an endorsement of its gradualistic approach to fiscal
correction. As a result, the government pushed a tax reform that decreased taxes and increased the inflation
target to push the central bank into a less tighter mode. Both changes triggered market skepticism which shortly
after became a sudden stop. See Sturzenegger (2020) for a fuller description of these events.



                                                          6
                     Figure 1: Central Bank of Argentina's Net Liabilities

reserves against short term liabilities, undoing the reserve accumulation of the previous two
years though allowing the exchange rate to slide. As the exchange rate depreciated, the central
bank experienced a significant improvement in its balance sheet since the dollar value of its
local currency denominated liabilities virtually collapsed. Sturzenegger (2020) shows that the
net worth of the central bank improved in 2018 by around 38 billion dollars, a valuation gain of
close to 8% of GDP. In this episode, issuing domestic debt to purchase reserves provided a large
hedge in the face of the sudden stop.
   This historical case illustrates some of the issues discussed in the previous section regarding
the role of reserves and the way in which they are financed. In this case reserves were financed by
issuing domestic currency denominated liabilities which ended up providing a sizable hedge under
distress (when their dollar value virtually melted down). Had these reserves been purchased with
foreign debt such reduction would have not occurred.
   In the next section we model precisely this effect, the use of state contingent debt to accu-
mulate reserves allowing a valuation gain in times of distress. Only then we turn to testing this
implication in a broad data set of emerging economies.




                                                7
2        Model

In this section we present a dynamic equilibrium model of a small-open economy with long-term
defaultable debt and short-term reserves, as in Bianchi et al. (2018). However, we allow here for
two alternative debt instruments: (standard) non-contingent and contingent claims. This will
allow to compare the effects of the different financing mechanism.


2.1        Environment

Preferences and income process. The representative agent in the borrowing economy has
preferences given by
                                                   
                                              Et           j -t u (cj ) ,
                                                   j =t

                 c1- -1
where u(c) =       1-
                          is the flow utility function (with  = 1), E denotes the expectation operator,
 denotes the subjective discount factor, and ct represents consumption of private agents. The
utility function is strictly increasing and concave. The government cannot commit to future
(default and borrowing) decisions.6
        The economy's endowment of the single tradable good is denoted by y  Y  R++ . This
endowment is assumed to follow a stationary first-order Markov process given by

                                   log(yt ) = (1 - )µy +  log(yt-1 ) + t ,                                   (1)

                      iid
                        2
with || < 1 and   N (0,   ).


Asset space. The small open economy also borrows from a large pool of international investors
by issuing long-duration (potentially) indexed bonds. A bond issued in period t promises an
infinite stream of coupons, whose mean decreases at a constant rate  .7 In particular, a bond
issued issued in period t promises to pay  [1 + (yt+j - y )] (1 -  )j -1 units of the tradable good in
period t + j , for all j  1.8 Parameter  controls the average size of coupon payments, the mean
    6
     Thus, one may interpret this environment as a game in which the government making decisions in period t is
a player who takes as given the (default and borrowing) strategies of other players (governments) who will decide
after t.
   7
     Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) and Hatchondo et al. (2016) allow the government to issue both short-
term and long-term debt, and study optimal maturity. Hatchondo et al. (2014) allow the government to issue
both defaultable and non-defaultable debt.
   8
     Formally, in order to rule out negative payments, we impose a coupon structure that is:
max{ [1 + (yt+j - y )] (1 -  )j -1 , 0}. However, the coupon payments are always positive in our simulations.



                                                            8
income level is denoted with y , and   0 is a parameter that captures the "degree of indexation"
of the contingent bond.9 This way of modelling the state-contingent coupon payments is similar
to the linear-indexation in Roldan and Roch (2021).10
       Hence, debt dynamics can be represented as follows:

                                             bt+1 = (1 -  )bt + it ,

where bt is the number of coupons due at the beginning of period t and it is the number of long-
term bonds issued in period t. The advantage of this payment structure is that it enables us to
condense all future payment obligations derived from past debt issuances into a one-dimensional
state variable: the payment obligations that mature in the current period.
       The economy can also save, using one-period risk-free assets, a (which we call reserves).
Reserves trade at a price of qa and pay one unit of the tradable endowment in the next period.


Foreign lenders. Bonds are priced in a competitive market inhabited by a large number of
identical lenders. To capture global factors that are exogenous to domestic fundamentals, we
introduce risk premium shocks. These shocks are not critical for the mechanism but enrich the
analysis and are in line with a large empirical literature on the role of global shocks in driving
spreads and credit flows.11
       Foreign lenders price the payoffs of bonds using the following stochastic discount factor,
following Vasicek (1977):

                              mt,t+1 = e-r-t (t+1 +0.5t  ) ,
                                                             2
                                                                   with t  0.                                  (2)

Here, r is the international risk-free rate, and t  0 is a stochastic parameter governing the risk
premium shock. Notice that (2) implies that bond payoffs are more valuable for investors when
the small open economy faces a negative shock, capturing a positive degree of correlation between
the small open economy and the lenders' income process. To the extent that the government is
more likely to default when there are negative shocks to the tradable endowment (), this implies
   9
      If parameter  is equal to zero then the coupon payments are as in Hatchondo and Martinez (2009) and our
model collapses to the one in Bianchi et al. (2018).
   10
      Bertinatto et al. (2017) and Hatchondo and Martinez (2012) are early references to works on sovereign default
with indexed contracts. Roldan and Roch (2021) study the benefits (and costs) of using indexed sovereign bonds
when the economy faces robust lenders. Durdu (2009) studies indexed bonds in a small open economy with
financial frictions (abstracting from sovereign default).
   11
      See for example Longstaff et al. (2011); Forbes and Warnock (2012); Uribe and Yue (2006), Rey (2013); Johri,
Khan and Sosa-Padilla (2020).


                                                        9
that lenders demand a positive risk premium to be willing to invest in government bonds.
       The risk premium shock  follows a two-state Markov switching regime with values {L , H }
and transition probabilities {LH , HL }. In the "risk-neutral regime," we assume that  = L = 0
so that the stochastic discount factor reduces to mt,t+1 = e-r , eliminating any risk premia. In
the "risk premia regime,"  = H > 0, and lenders require a risk premia to invest in government
bonds. The value of  can be seen as capturing how correlated the small open economy is
with the lenders' income process or, alternatively, the degree of diversification in foreign lenders'
portfolios. Therefore, a higher  is associated with stronger risk premium shocks.
       The standard asset pricing condition for bonds is therefore

                                         ^t+1 ) [ (1 + (yt+1 - y )) + (1 -  )qt+1 ] ,
                     qt = Et mt,t+1 (1 - d

      ^t+1 is the equilibrium default decision in t + 1. Notice that assuming that these investors
where d
also price the risk-free asset gives us that the price of reserves is qa = e-r , a result that follows
from the log-normal structure of the lender's stochastic discount factor.


Defaults. When the government defaults, it does so on all current and future debt obligations.
This is a standard assumption in the literature.12
       Upon default, the government retains control of its reserves and access to savings but cannot
borrow in the default period. A default entails a utility loss d (y ), which depends on the
realization of the endowment. We think of this utility loss as capturing various default costs
related to reputation, sanctions, or misallocation of resources; we do not model these explicitly.13
We abstract from financial exclusion as an additional source of default penalty. That is, the
government can once again borrow from international markets in the period following a default.


Timing. The timing of events within each period is as follows. First, the government learns
the economy's income and the realization of the global risk premium shock. After that, the
government chooses whether to default on its debt. Before the period ends, the government may
  12
      Sovereign debt contracts often contain an acceleration clause and a cross-default clause. The first clause
allows creditors to call the debt they hold in case the government defaults on a payment. The cross-default clause
states that a default in any government obligation constitutes a default in the contract containing that clause.
These clauses imply that after a default event, future debt obligations become current.
   13
      An alternative assumption in the literature specifies an exogenous cost of default in terms of output. Assuming
log utility and that output losses from default are proportional to consumption in default, the losses from default
are identical for the output and utility cost specifications. See Sturzenegger (2004), Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer
(2006), and Sosa-Padilla (2018) for related work on the cost of sovereign defaults.



                                                         10
change its debt and reserves positions, subject to the constraints imposed by its default decision.


2.2     Recursive formulation

We consider a Markov equilibrium, in which all policies depend on the payoff-relevant states
(b, a, s) where s  {y,  }. Let d denote the current-period default decision. We assume that d
is equal to 1 if the government defaulted in the current period and is equal to 0 if it did not.
Let V denote the government's value function at the beginning of a period, that is, before the
default decision is made. Let V0 denote the value function of a sovereign not in default. Let V1
denote the value function of a sovereign in default. For any bond price function q , the function
V satisfies the following functional equation:

                         V (b, a, s) = max            d V1 (a, s) + (1 - d) V0 (b, a, s) ,                 (3)
                                        d  {0,1}


where
                             V0 (b, a, s) = max u(c) +  Es |s V (b , a , s ) ,                             (4)
                                            b ,a ,c

subject to
                 c + g +  [1 + (y - y )] b + a qa = y + q (b , a , s)(b - (1 -  )b) + a                    (5)

where  [1 + (y - y )] is the contingent coupon obligation and g represents a time-invariant level
of government spending (capturing the role of budget rigidities). The value of default is:


                 V1 (a, s) = max u y + a - g - a qa - d (y ) +  Es |s V 0, a , s             .             (6)
                              a


   A Markov perfect equilibrium is then defined as follows.

Definition 1 (Markov perfect equilibrium). A Markov perfect equilibrium is defined by value
                                                                              ^(b, a, s), a
functions {V (b, a, s), V0 (b, a, s), V1 (a, s)}, associated policy functions d           ^(b, a, s), ^
                                                                                                      b(b, a, s) ,
and a bond price schedule q (b , a , s) such that

   1. given the bond price schedule, policy functions solve problems (3) ­ (6),

   2. the bond price schedule satisfies the bond pricing equation

          q b , a , s = Es |s m s , s      ^(b , a , s )
                                         1-d                    1 + (y - y ) + (1 -  )q b , a , s      ,    (7)


      where
                                     b =^
                                        b (b , a , s ) and a = a
                                                               ^ (b , a , s ) .

                                                          11
2.3       Numerical solution and calibration

We refer to the model with non-state contingent coupons (i.e. with  = 0) as the benchmark
model and calibrate it following Bianchi et al. (2018).


Numerical Solution. As in Hatchondo et al. (2010), we solve for the equilibrium by computing
the limit of the finite-horizon version of our economy. The recursive government problem is
solved using value function iteration. For each state, we solve the optimal portfolio allocation
by searching over a grid of debt and reserve levels and then using the best portfolio on that grid
as an initial guess in a nonlinear optimization routine. The value functions V0 and V1 and the
function that indicates the equilibrium bond price q ^b(·), a
                                                            ^(·), s are approximated using linear
interpolation over y and cubic spline interpolation over debt and reserves positions.


Calibration. Since the our benchmark model (imposing  = 0) is identical to the model in
Bianchi et al. (2018) we use their same calibration strategy. A period in the model refers to a
year. We split the parameters of the model into two groups. The first group of parameters (those
in the top part of Table 1) take values that can be set either directly from the data or using
typical values from the literature. The second group of parameter values (those in the bottom
part of Table 1) are set by simultaneously matching key moments from the data.
       We assume the following functional form for the utility cost of default,

                                         d (y ) = 0 + 1 log(y ) .

As in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), having two parameters in the cost of default gives us
enough flexibility to match the spread dynamics observed in the data.
       The parameter values that govern the tradable endowment process are chosen to mimic the
behavior of logged and linearly detrended GDP for Mexico. This yields  = 0.034 and  = 0.66.14
We set µy = - 1
              2 
                 2 so that mean income is normalized to one (i.e. y
                                                                  ¯ = 1).
       The values of the risk-free interest rate and the domestic discount factor are set to r = 0.04 and
 = 0.92, which are standard in quantitative sovereign default studies. The level of government
spending is set to 12% of GDP (as found in Mexican data).
       We set  = 0.2845. With this value and the targeted level of sovereign spread, sovereign debt
  14
    Mexico is a common reference for studies on emerging economies because its business cycle displays the same
properties that are observed in other emerging economies (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007, Neumeyer and Perri, 2005,
and Uribe and Yue, 2006).


                                                      12
                         Table 1: Parameter values for the benchmark model.
                  Parameter   Description                                      Value

                  r           Risk-free rate                                    0.04
                              Domestic discount factor                          0.92
                  LH          Prob. of transitioning to high risk premium       0.15
                  HL          Prob. of transitioning to low risk premium         0.8
                              Std. dev. of innovation to log(y )               0.034
                              Autocorrelation of log(y )                        0.66
                                                                                  1 2
                  µy          Mean of log(y )                                  -2  
                  g           Government consumption                            0.12
                              Coupon decaying rate                            0.2845
                              Avg. coupon size                              (r +  )e-r
                              Parameters set by simulation

                              Coefficient of relative risk aversion             3.3
                  0           Default cost parameter                           2.45
                  1           Default cost parameter                            19
                  H           Pricing kernel parameter                          23


in the simulations has an average duration of three years, which is roughly the average duration of
public debt in Mexico.15 The parameter governing the average size of the bond coupon payments
is normalized to  = (r +  )e-r , which ensures that a default-free bond (with the same coupon
structure of our sovereign bonds) trades at a price of e-r .
       Bianchi et al. (2018) use the average EMBI+ spread to parameterize the shock process to
lenders' risk aversion. They assume that a period with high lenders' risk aversion is one in which
the global EMBI+ without countries in default is one standard deviation above the median over
the sample period. With this procedure, they obtain three episodes of a high risk premium every
20 years with an average duration equal to 1.25 years for each episode, which implies LH = 0.15
and HL = 0.8. On average, the global EMBI+ was 2 percentage points higher in those episodes
than in normal periods.


Targeted moments. The calibration strategy described so far leaves four parameters to assign
values to: the default cost parameters (0 and 1 ), the risk premium parameter (H ), and the
risk aversion parameter ( ). Bianchi et al. (2018) target four moments: (i) a mean debt-to-GDP
ratio of 43.5%, (ii) a mean sovereign spread of 2.4%, (iii) an increase of 200 basis points in the
spread during high-risk premium periods, and (iv) a volatility of consumption relative to output
equal to 1.
  15
   We use the Macaulay definition of duration that, with the coupon structure in this paper, is given by
D = (1 + ib )/( + ib ), where ib denotes the constant per-period yield delivered by the bond.


                                                    13
2.4     Quantitative results

Business cycle statistics. The first two columns of Table 2 show that the simulations of the
benchmark model match well the targeted moments. The model also does a good job in mimicking
other non-targeted moments. In particular, the model is able to capture the countercyclicality of
sovereign spreads and the procyclicality of consumption. As mentioned by Bianchi et al. (2018),
this calibration strategy produces a mean reserves-to-GDP ratio that is roughly 70% of the one
in the data (6% vs. 8.5%).

                                Table 2: Key statistics ­ model and data.
                                                   Data            Model
                                                           Benchmark Indexed debt
                                                            ( = 0)       ( = 1)
                     Targeted
                     Mean debt (b/y )              43.5        43.3           54.2
                     Mean rs (in %)                2.4         2.4            2.6
                     rs w/ risk-prem. shock        2.0         2.2            2.8
                      (c)/ (y )                     1.0         1.0            0.9
                     Non-Targeted
                      (rs ) (in %)                  0.9        2.0             2.5
                     (rs , y )                     -0.5        -0.7           -0.8
                     (c, y )                        0.8        0.9             0.9
                     Mean Reserves (a/y )          8.5         6.0            11.9

                   Note : Moments in the model are computed for the average of pre-default
                   simulation samples. We simulate the model for 1,000 samples of 300
                   periods each. We then take the last 35 observations of each sample
                   in which the last default was observed at least 25 periods before the
                   beginning of the sample. The `Data' column is the one reported in
                   Bianchi et al. (2018) and corresponds to Mexico.




Indexed debt. The last column of Table 2 has the simulated moments for the case in which
the government uses indexed debt (with  = 1, as in Roldan and Roch, 2021).16 There are
some notable differences. First, the government optimally chooses to hold a much higher debt
ratio (55% vs. 43.5%). Second, this higher debt ratio is mostly used to finance the hoarding
of international reserves: the indexed debt version features a ratio of reserves-to-income that
  16
    Note that in this version we do not recalibrate the model, but just modify the value of  from zero to one.
Both Durdu (2009) and Roldan and Roch (2021) compute ex-ante optimal configurations for the debt indexation
in models (related to but) different from ours.




                                                     14
is roughly double of the one seen in the benchmark model.17 Third, this different portfolio
has a non-trivial impact on the equilibrium spreads: using indexed debt, this substantially
higher indebtedness level implies only a slightly higher average spread ­ this is the joint effect
of having more reserves and using state contingent debt (which lowers coupon payments in
times of distress). Fourth, as expected, using state contingent debt delivers a smoother path for
consumption.
       The state contingency afforded by the indexed debt implies that, on the margin, higher debt
has a smaller effect on spreads resulting in a flatter spread-debt menu. For low debt levels, where
one-period ahead default probability is low, lenders penalize the use of indexed debt and demand
slightly higher spreads. For high debt levels, where the default probability is substantial, the use
of indexed debt helps avoid defaults and therefore comes at cheaper rates. Figure 2 shows this.
                               1000


                                900


                                800


                                700


                                600


                                500


                                400


                                300


                                200


                                100


                                  0
                                      0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1




                            Figure 2: Spread-debt menus and debt indexation
            Note : The figure is computed for the mean income and reserve levels in the simulations of
            each model, and assuming no risk-premium shock in the current period (t = 0).


       Therefore, as shown in Figure 2, a testable implication of our theory is that, for a given level
of debt, financing reserve accumulation with contingent debt (in particular, using an instrument
indexed to the performance of domestic income) allows the country to pay lower spreads than it
would otherwise (i.e., had it used non-state contingent debt instead).
  17
    Comparing with other models using state contingent sovereign debt (e.g., Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2019), our
model delivers an equilibrium portfolio that is closer to the data: a reserves-to-debt ratio that is roughly 20%.
As a reference point, Alfaro and Kanczuk (2019) find this ratio to be above 80%.




                                                                  15
3      Taking the model to the data

3.1      Data description

We now take the model to the data by estimating the effect of how reserves are accumulated
on government bond spreads. While the relationship between spreads and reserves has been
established (see for example, Levy-Yeyati and G´
                                               omez, 2020), in this paper we will focus on the
whether the effects differ depending on how reserves are financed.
     In order to estimate the effect of different forms of reserve accumulation we are aided by
the fact that the IMF has worked to produce standardized data for central bank (Cartas and
Harutyunyan (2017)). The IMF data starts from a common balance sheet for the central bank,
and has managed to fit into this format data from around 145 countries with temporal coverage,
at the time of writing, running up to 2018. Appendix A lists the countries included in this
sample. This homogeneous structure includes the following items,


                                           Balance Sheet

    Claims on non-residents (1)                         Liabilities to non-residents (a)

    Claims on others depository corporations (2)        Monetary base (b)

    Net Claims on Central Government (3)                Other Liabilities To Other Depository Corpo-
                                                        rations (c)

                                                        Deposits and Securities other than Shares Ex-
                                                        cluded from Monetary Base (d)

                                                        Loans (e)

                                                        Financial Derivatives (f)

                                                        Shares and equity (g)

                                                        Other items. (h)



     To estimate the separate effects of accumulating reserves from its three financing sources:
foreign liabilities, unsterilized purchases, and domestic currency liabilities, we construct the
following variables:
     Reserve Ratio = (1)/GDP ,
     Remunerated Domestic Liabilities = [(c) + (d) + (e) + (f )]/GDP ,
     Unsterilized Purchases = (b)/GDP ,

                                                   16
   External Liabilities = (a)/GDP .
   Other Balance Sheet = [(g ) + (h) - (2) - (3)]/GDP
   The first variable, Reserve Ratio, is just the total claims on non-residents (largely made up
of gross reserves), which is the number typically used in the literature. Remunerated Domestic
Liabilities is the amount of liabilities issued by the central bank in domestic currency. Unsterilized
Purchases is defined as the Monetary Base and will capture the amount of reserves that has been
financed by unsterilized purchases. External Liabilities represents liabilities incurred with non-
residents. Other Balance Sheet groups the remaining terms of the balance sheet.
   Of course these variables can also move without affecting reserves. For example, the central
bank can issue domestic liabilities, or even foreign liabilities, to sterilize money demand, or money
can be issued to finance the treasury and thus credited in the domestic credit account on the
asset side. So, our identification strategy will be to assess the impact of reserves on spreads by
holding constant all but one of the items in the balance sheet. In this way we can isolate the
impact of a change in reserves arising from these three sources: external liabilities, domestic
liabilities and unsterilized interventions.
   In our empirical specification below the accumulation of reserves with domestic currency
liabilities will be our proxy for what we called in the model "state contingent" debt. This analogy
was illustrated by the historical example in section 1.1, where we showed how domestic currency
debt falls in value during crisis events. Alfaro and Kanczuk (2019) also model the hedging
alternative to accumulate reserves as issuing debt denominated in domestic non-tradable units.
   To empirically assess the validity of the model we follow two approaches. First, we construct
a panel of spreads for the countries included in the IMF's central bank balance sheet database
and estimate the effect of the different ways of accumulating reserves on sovereign spreads.
Second, we look at exogenous shocks to spreads, identified by large swings in the VIX index, and
assess whether the way reserves were accumulated mattered for the change in sovereign spreads
during those events. We find that both approaches deliver results consistent with the model,
validating the hypothesis that the way reserves are accumulated does matter: financing reserves
with domestic currency denominated debt (again, our proxy for `state contingent' debt in the
model), by providing better hedging during negative events, lowers spreads in a way that reserves
buildup with foreign liabilities does not.




                                                 17
3.2       Cross country evidence

Table 3 shows the main results of the paper for the log-spread. As control variables, in order
to limit our degrees of freedom when choosing the specification, we decided to restrict ourselves
to those used in independent work. In particular, we follow Levy-Yeyati and G´
                                                                             omez (2020),
who have a direct test of the effect of reserves on spreads. In this way, we only modify the
reserve variable, splitting the effect for the different mechanisms for financing reserves. The
specification we build upon includes a measure for the degree of risk aversion in the market,
defined as the spreads between an Option-Adjusted Spreads (OAS) index of all bonds in a given
rating category and the Treasury curve (ICE BofAML Option-Adjusted Spreads constructed by
Merrill Lynch); it also includes the rating of the country's debt constructed by S&P for long-term
debt denominated in foreign currency of each country; the world interest rate, defined as the US
Treasury 10 year constant maturity yield; and a measure of the stock of private and public debt
(taken from World Bank).18 Our data is at a monthly frequency. GDP data is smoothed to
monthly frequency using splines. In some specifications we use year and country fixed effects.
Appendix A lists the variables and sources.
       Columns (1) and (2) in Table 3 extend the results in Levy-Yeyati and G´
                                                                             omez (2020), with
and without country fixed effects, to a larger number of countries. All the coefficients have
the expected signs and are strongly statistically significant (the sole exception being the world
interest rate in the specification with country fixed effects). Most relevant to the discussion here
is the negative coefficient of reserves on spreads. An increase of 1% in the reserve to GDP ratio
appears to be associated with a reduction in spreads by between 2.6 and 2.8%.
       Columns (3) to (5) in Table 3 split the effect of reserves on spreads depending on how the
reserves are accumulated. Column (3), for example, adds as controls the amount of domestic
liabilities and the unsterilized purchases terms, thus controlling for these two variables. We can
then reinterpret the reserve coefficient in column (3) as that obtained from changing reserves
by accumulating foreign liabilities. The fact that the coefficient is not significant indicates that
there is no impact on spreads from accumulating reserves through this channel. Column (4) fixes
unsterilized purchases and foreign liabilities, so the reserve coefficient in this column identifies the
effects of reserve purchases using domestic debt. The coefficient here not only becomes significant
but also larger than in the original specification, now a 1% increase in the reserves to GDP ratio
  18
    As a robustness check we added the fiscal deficit and current account imbalances but they both do not
appear statistically significant given the other control variables. In turn, the coefficients of the other controls do
not change. See Table B.1 in Appendix B.



                                                         18
                              Table 3: Regression results. Full Sample
                                               Dependent variable: log(spread)
                           (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)              (7)        (8)
                                                                     
 Risk Aversion           0.76      0.78     0.77      0.78       0.77     0.95             0.96       0.96
                         (0.02)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.06)   (0.04)           (0.04)     (0.04)

 Rating                  -0.36      -0.35      -0.33      -0.33      -0.33      -0.33      -0.32      -0.32
                          (0.03)     (0.11)     (0.11)     (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.10)

 World Rate              -0.29        -0.17     -0.19       -0.17     -0.18     0.20       0.20       0.20
                          (0.02)     (0.11)     (0.11)     (0.11)     (0.11)    (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)

 Reserve Ratio           -2.58      -2.76        -0.68    -3.56      -3.17        -0.25    -3.24      -2.85
                          (0.11)     (0.55)     (0.97)     (0.33)     (0.94)     (1.04)     (0.43)     (1.08)

 Sovereign Debt          1.53       1.56        1.31       1.14       1.14        1.02       0.86       0.86
                         (0.05)     (0.53)      (0.54)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.66)     (0.63)     (0.63)

 Private Debt            0.74       1.01       1.11        1.05      1.08        1.00       0.94       0.96
                         (0.05)     (0.31)     (0.42)      (0.44)    (0.38)      (0.43)     (0.44)     (0.41)

 Remunerated                                   -3.10                   -0.31    -3.27                   -0.43
 Domestic Liabilites                           (1.30)                 (1.16)    (1.46)                 (1.18)
 Unsterilized                                   -2.44       0.50                  -2.54      0.43
 Purchases                                      (1.47)     (1.35)                (1.56)     (1.29)
 Others                                        -1.77       1.55        1.14     -1.89       1.51        1.10
 Balance Sheet                                 (1.01)      (0.61)     (0.96)    (1.05)      (0.60)     (1.04)
 External Liabilities                                     4.71       4.29                  4.74       4.32
                                                          (1.14)     (0.89)                (1.16)     (0.97)
 Constant                2.29
                         (0.15)
 Fixed effects?             No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Year dummies?              No        No          No        No          No        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Observations             4,497      4,497      4,497      4,497      4,497      4,497      4,497      4,497
 Adjusted R2               0.52      0.57        0.58      0.59        0.59      0.62       0.63        0.63
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in logs, the
 remaining variables are ratios of GDP.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01


accumulated through this channel is associated to a reduction in spreads of 3.6%. Column
(5) shows the effect of accumulating reserves through unsterilized purchases, the effect is again
significant but with a point estimate that is lower than that corresponding to the accumulation
of reserves through issuing domestic currency debt. In this case a 1% increase in reserves reduces

                                                    19
spreads by 3.2%. These results remain basically unchanged when introducing year fixed effects
in columns (6) to (8).
      The purpose of this paper is to show that the way reserves are financed matters. To make
this point more clearly, in Table 4 we show the p-values of the test of differences between the
coefficients of reserves across different specifications.19 The table shows that the effect on spreads
of accumulating reserves with external liabilities is statistically different from that resulting from
accumulating reserves with domestic denominated liabilities. In turn, the null hypothesis that
the coefficients of accumulating with domestic liabilities and through unsterilized purchases are
the same cannot be rejected at standard values.

                               Table 4: Difference Test Between Coefficients

                                    Reserve Ratio     p-value    Reserve Ratio     p-value
                                       EL - DL         0.00         EL - DL          0.01
                                       DL - U          0.70         DL - U           0.74
                        Year FE                  No                          Yes

                  Note : `EL', `DL', and `U' stand for `External liabilities', `Domestic liabilities'
                  and `Unsterilized purchases', respectively. For example, `EL-DL' in the upper-
                  left corner refers to the difference in the coefficient for Reserve Ratio across
                  specifications (3) and (4) in Table 3.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




Robustness. In Table 5 we test a number of hypotheses to provide robustness to our assertion
that the way reserves are accumulated matters. For brevity, Table 5 only shows the coefficient
of the reserves variable, as the coefficients of the other variables are relatively stable, and similar
to those shown in Table 3.20
      Our first robustness check feeds directly from the model of section 2 which shows that ac-
cumulating reserves with state contingent debt (in our empirical exercise we proxy by domestic
currency denominated debt), has a stronger negative effect on spreads at larger levels of debt
than at lower levels of debt. The first row of Table 5 splits the observations by level of debt.
In order to have a reasonable separation, we use the lowest and highest terciles of the debt to
GDP ratio to split observations into `Low Debt' and `High Debt', respectively. Consistent with
the model, the results indicate that for low levels of debt, the effect of reserves is insignificant
(regardless of the way they are accumulated), whereas it is significant and negative for higher
 19                                                            1 - 2
      Where the formula for the z-test is given by Z =                        .
                                                         SE (1 )2 + SE (2 )2
 20
    The full regressions are included in Tables B.2, B.3, B.4, B.5, and B.6 in Appendix B.



                                                          20
levels of debt and when reserves are accumulated through contingent debt.21 These results carry,
in the second row, to the case when we split the countries between `Low Spread' and `High
Spread' observations according to their median spreads.
       The model suggests that credit constrained or more vulnerable countries (with higher spreads)
will benefit more from accumulating reserves through instruments that provide a better hedge
in times of need. Thus, an alternative way to assess the predictions of the model is to look
for variables that signal macroeconomic instability. The third row in Table 5 provides one such
alternative, by splitting the sample into `High' and `Low' devaluation rate countries. We define
countries with high devaluation rates as those that depreciated their currencies by more than
5% per year on average. This group comprises 60% of the sample. This exercise shows that our
main empirical results arise basically from the `High Devaluation Rate' countries: as suggested
by the model the value of reserve accumulation is not as relevant in economies with stable
macroeconomic frameworks. Similar results are obtained when splitting the sample between
high interest rates and high inflation rates, but we do not show these results here for brevity of
exposition.22
       The final two rows of Table 5 dwell a bit further into this hypothesis, by looking at countries
that have large fiscal deficits compared to those that have low deficits, and by looking at countries
that have higher degrees of dollarization. The results are similar with some caveats. When
considering the group of countries that exhibit on average large primary deficits (in the forth
row of Table 5),23 all forms of accumulating reserves reduce country spreads. Thus, for these
countries the value of reserves seems to be paramount. Again, accumulating reserves through the
issue of domestic currency denominated liabilities seems the most effective mechanism. In fact,
for these countries the coefficient indicates a 7.4% reduction in spreads for each additional point
in the reserves to GDP ratio accumulated in this way. For countries with solid fiscal accounts,
only the coefficient on the domestic liabilities financing coefficient remains significant.24
       Another way of capturing macroeconomic weakness is using a dollarization variable. We split
the sample between countries with average deposits in dollars amounting to 20% or more of total
  21
     An alternative approach splits the countries into `High Debt' countries and `Low Debt' countries. To do so
we look at the country specific average debt levels throughout the sample and then use the lowest and highest
terciles of the average debt levels to split the countries into the two groups. The results also indicate that the
coefficient of state contingent debt is larger in absolute value when debt is high. See Table B.7 in Appendix B.
  22
     These results are presented in Table B.8 in Appendix B.
  23
     We use "Primary net lending/borrowing (also referred as primary balance) (% of GDP) (GGX-
ONLB G01 GDP PT)" from IMF. Annual primary deficits are calculated to maximize sample size.
  24
     For the robustness exercises in the last two rows of Table 5, we verified that the coefficients using these
subsamples are similar to those of the original sample. The full regressions are in Table B.9 in Appendix B.



                                                       21
                                            Table 5: Regression results. Robustness
                                                                   Dependent variable: log (spread)
             External Liabilities       Domestic Liabilities         Unsterilzed     External Liabilities             Domestic Liabilities    Unsterilized
                                              High Debt                                                                       Low Debt
                      -0.33                    -3.47                     -0.24                0.20                               -1.26            -1.16
                     (1.18)                     (0.89)                  (1.01)               (1.37)                             (0.77)           (1.75)
No. Obs.             1,188                       1,188                  1,188                1,734                             1,734             1,734
                                             High Spread                                                                  Low Spread
                      0.67                     -2.92                     -0.98                -0.06                          -1.35              -5.52
                     (1.57)                     (0.51)                  (0.69)               (1.21)                         (1.47)               (1.42)
No. Obs.             2,517                       2,517                  2,517                1,980                             1,980             1,980
                                       High Rate Devaluation                                                        Low Rate Devaluation
                      -0.26                   -3.72                     -3.04                 -1.69                         -1.29                 -0.83
                     (1.08)                    (0.95)                   (0.89)               (2.82)                        (1.11)                (2.06)
No. Obs.             2,683                       2,683                  2,683                1,814                             1,814             1,814
                                             With Deficit                                                               Without Deficit
                    -2.36                     -7.37                     -4.49                 -0.61                        -2.20                  -2.33
                     (0.50)                    (0.85)                   (0.83)               (1.94)                         (0.83)               (2.31)
No. Obs.             1,166                       1,166                  1,166                1,471                             1,471             1,471
                                       Dollarizated Countries                                                    Non-Dollarizated Countries
                      -0.41                    -4.23                    -3.58                -2.30                        -3.21                   -1.54
                     (0.78)                     (1.06)                  (1.26)               (1.23)                        (0.60)                (0.98)
No. Obs.             2,005                       2,005                  2,005                1,908                             1,908             1,908
                                                                                                                              
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include country and year fixed effects. p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01



deposits ("dollarized countries") and the rest. Data is taken from (Levy-Yeyati, 2006). Again,
as shown in the last row of Table 5, countries with substantial dollarization do not benefit from
accumulating reserves with foreign liabilities, whereas countries with low levels of dollarization
show a mild improvement, hinting that the weaker effect of accumulating reserves with foreign
liabilities may come from dollarized economies.
    Table 6 shows that the effect on spreads of accumulating reserves with external liabilities
is statistically different from that resulting from accumulating reserves with domestic currency
denominated liabilities, and that this is true for all the robustness checks presented in Table 5
in high macroeconomic vulnerable environments (the first two columns of Table 6). Moreover,
in three out of five cases, the coefficients of accumulating with domestic currency denominated
liabilities and unsterilized purchases are also statistically different from each other, at standard
values. Notably, these statistical differences disappear (almost entirely) when focusing on less
macro-vulnerable environments (last two columns in Table 6).




                                                                          22
                       Table 6: Difference Test Between Coefficients. Split Sample

                              Reserve Ratio    p-value     Reserve Ratio      p-value
                                     High Debt                       Low Debt
                                EL - DL          0.03           EL-DL            0.35
                                DL - U           0.02           DL - U           0.96

                                    High Spread                     Low Spread
                                EL - DL          0.03           EL-DL            0.50
                                DL - U           0.02           DL - U           0.04

                               High Rate Devaluation            Low Rate Devaluation
                                                        
                                EL - DL          0.02           EL-DL            0.89
                                DL - U           0.60           DL - U           0.84

                                    With Deficit                  Without Deficit
                                                     
                                EL - DL          0.00           EL-DL            0.45
                                DL - U           0.01           DL - U           0.96

                               Dollarizated Countries      Non-Dollarizated Countries
                                                     
                                EL - DL          0.00           EL-DL            0.51
                                DL - U           0.69           DL - U           0.15

                        Note : `EL', `DL', and `U' stand for `External liabilities', `Domes-
                        tic liabilities' and `Unsterilized purchases', respectively.  p<0.1;
                        
                          p<0.05;  p<0.01.


3.3       Exogenous shocks

The use of cross country regressions, even when controlling for country and year effects, is subject
to endogeneity concerns. In this section we therefore attempt to test the hypothesis in a context
where the exogeneity of the shocks is established on firmer ground. To do so, we follow Rey
(2013) and Acharya and Krishnamurthy (2019) in using the VIX index as a way of identifying
large exogenous shocks, as they are associated to global shocks independent of each particular
country.
      We identify as large shocks to the VIX all the dates in which the following two conditions are
met: (i) first, the difference in value of the VIX index relative to its average during the interval
comprising 5 and 10 days before each date is larger than 20, and (ii) additionally, we require that
the cross country average increase in sovereign spreads is at least 10 basis points.25 This last
restriction insures that the shocks that we discuss have at least a minimal relevance for sovereign
spreads. This simple rule identifies, in the 2009-2019 time period considered, three episodes of
 25
      For this exercise we use CDS spread data which is readily available at a daily frequency.



                                                           23
sharp increases in the index shown in Figure 3.




                                           Figure 3: VIX Index

       These three large episodes26 include the 7th of May 2010, following the flash crash in the US
stock market the previous day, the 8th of August of 2011 known as the "Black Monday" of 2011
as a result of S&P's downgrade of US debt, and the 24th August of 2015, a second flash crash
of the US stock market. All of these events are clearly exogenous to the emerging economies we
consider.
       For each of these episodes we compute the change in the CDS spreads for the day of the event
and then check if the way reserves have been accumulated matters for this jump in spreads.
       Figure 4 shows the changes in spreads: it presents the pooled data from the three episodes,
as well as the data for each individual event. Each subplot shows the change in CDS spreads (on
the vertical axis), plotted against the ratio of domestic (or external) liabilities to reserves during
the previous month (on the horizontal axis). If a higher level of domestic liabilities to reserves
reduces the spread, we should expect the curve to have a negative slope. If a higher level of
external liabilities increases the spread, we should expect the curve to have a positive slope. The
coefficients of the OLS regressions are reported in Table 7.
  26
    In two of the episodes there are two dates in which the conditions hold but less than 10 days apart, in these
cases we consider the earliest of the two dates.


                                                       24
                            Pooled




                  First Event (05/07/2010)




                 Second Event (08/08/2011)




                  Third Event (08/24/2015)




                              25
Figure 4: Events Studies for Domestic and External Liabilities.
       Let's first consider the pooled data for the three episodes. The first row in Figure 4 and
in Table 7 show that spreads behave differently depending on how reserves have been financed.
As can be seen in the first row of Figure 4, a higher share of domestic currency denominated
liabilities tends to reduce the impact on spreads. The opposite occurs if reserves are mostly
financed with external liabilities. The first row of Table 7 shows the value of the coefficients and
a test of their equality. Not only the signs are as expected, but also the hypothesis that both
coefficients are equal can be strongly rejected.
       The remainder of Figure 4 and Table 7 shows the data for the three individual events. As can
be seen, the coefficients are as expected, and in two of the three cases the hypothesis of equality
of coefficients can be rejected.27

                             Table 7: Regression results. Exogenous shocks.


                                            Dependent variable: Spread Variation

                              Domestic Liabilities      External Liabilities        p-value difference

            Pooled                   -39.80                     155.00                      0.06
                                     (19.70)                   (100.00)

            First Event             -37.60                       45.10                      0.00
                                      (9.70)                    (28.00)

            Second Event             -58.00                   208.00                        0.00
                                     (27.40)                   (37.30)

            Third Event               -22.30                    180.00                      0 .24
                                     (36.90)                   (167.00)

            Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p<0.1;   
                                                                      p<0.05;   
                                                                                   p<0.01




4        Concluding remarks

In a nutshell this paper addresses the simple but specific question of whether the way a central
bank finances its reserves matters for country spreads. This specific question is motivated by the
  27
     As can be seen, in the third event there is one outlier. The pooled results (and obviously the results for the
first and second events) do not hinge on this observation. Results removing these outlier are presented in Table
B.10 of Appendix B.


                                                        26
broader question of whether the way reserve accumulation is financed matters for a larger set of
macroeconomic variables.
   The link relating the way reserves are accumulated to sovereign spreads is a natural starting
point. Accumulating reserves with dollar debt (i.e., assets and liabilities with the same denom-
ination), while providing liquidity in foreign currency, does not provide any hedge in times of
distress. Domestic debt (either denominated in local currency or indexed to domestic outcomes),
on the other hand, provides both hedge and liquidity, thus affecting the possibility of default and
thus impacting directly on sovereign spreads.
   This paper contributes in several ways to the literature. First, it provides a general model
to explain why the form of reserve accumulation matters. Accumulating reserves with state
contingent debt that reduces the financing needs in times of distress lowers the risk of default
and leads to lower spreads (for a given level of debt). Secondly, we show these effects are found in
the data: the way reserves are financed does have implications for economic outcomes. We show
that accumulating reserves with domestic currency denominated liabilities does reduce spreads
while using external liabilities does not. These results have been mostly absent from the literature
even when they have relevant implications for policy makers.
   For example, since reserves accumulated through increasing external liabilities are shown to
have a relatively minor effect on country spreads, this means that programs of reserve buildup, as
typically laid out in IMF programs in dollars or SDRs, may have limited effects on country risk.
Given that the issuance of domestic currency denominated liabilities seems to be more beneficial,
our results suggest that, to the extent that foreign investors can diversify country specific risks
(as multilaterals may be able to do), the instruments used for such programs can be improved
upon by offering financing schemes that more closely resemble contingent debt. It may be argued
that conditionality and renegotiation fulfill that role, but this does not belittle the importance
of finding better debt instruments.
   Of course, the variables that may be affected by the way reserves are accumulated go be-
yond sovereign spreads. The probability of a sudden stop is an obvious candidate. Unsterilized
purchases may have a detrimental effects on other variables, such as inflation. Given that the lit-
erature has been relatively silent about the form of financing of reserves, we hope that this work,
though it focuses on spreads, motivates the exploration of this relationship for other variables.




                                                27
References
Acharya, Viral and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Capital flow management with multiple in-
 struments," Series on Central Banking Analysis and Economic Policies no. 26, 2019.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, "Emerging markets business cycles: the cycle is the
 trend," Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (1), 69­102.

Aizenman, Joshua and Daniel Riera-Crichton, "Real exchange rate and international re-
 serves in an era of growing financial and trade integration," The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2008, 90 (4), 812­815.

   and Jaewoo Lee, "International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist views, theory
  and evidence," Open Economies Review, 2007, 18 (2), 191­214.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk, "Optimal reserve management and sovereign debt,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2009, 77 (1), 23­36.

   and , "Debt redemption and reserve accumulation," IMF Economic Review, 2019, 67 (2),
  261­287.

Arce, Fernando, Julien Bengui, and Javier Bianchi, "A macroprudential theory of foreign
 reserve accumulation," 2019. NBER Working Paper No. 26236.

Arellano, Cristina and Ananth Ramanarayanan, "Default and the maturity structure in
 sovereign bonds," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 187­232.

Benigno, G., L. Fornaro, and M. Wolf, "Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial
 Crisis," 2021. Mimeo, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Bertinatto, Lucas Pablo, David Gomtsyan, Guido Sandleris, Horacio Sapriza, Filippo
 Taddei et al., "Indexed sovereign debt: An applied framework," The Carlo Alberto Notebooks,
 2017, 104.

Bianchi, Javier and C´  esar Sosa-Padilla, "Reserve Accumulation, Macroeconomic Stabiliza-
  tion, and Sovereign Risk," 2020. NBER Working Paper 27323.

  , Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, "International reserves and rollover
  risk," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (9), 2629­2670.

Bocola, Luigi and Guido Lorenzoni, "Financial crises, dollarization, and lending of last
 resort in open economies," 2017. NBER Working Paper No. 23266.

Bussi`
     ere, Matthieu, Gong Cheng, Menzie D Chinn, and No¨            emie Lisack, "For a few
 dollars more: Reserves and growth in times of crises," Journal of International Money and
 Finance, 2015, 52, 127­145.

Caballero, Ricardo J and Stavros Panageas, "Hedging sudden stops & precautionary re-
 cessions: a quantitative framework," 2003. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
 nology, Dept. of Economics.


                                            28
Calvo, Guillermo A, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Rudy Loo-Kung, "Optimal holdings of
 international reserves: Self-insurance against sudden stops," Monetaria (CEMLA), 2013, 1
 (1).

Cartas, Jose and Artak Harutyunyan, Monetary and financial statistics manual and com-
 pilation guide, International Monetary Fund, 2017.

C´
 espedes, Luis Felipe and Roberto Chang, "Optimal Foreign Reserves and Central Bank
 Policy Under Financial Stress," 2019. NBER Working Paper 27923.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, "Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk,"
 American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2674­2699.

Dellas, H and Ch. Yoo, "Reserve currency preferences of central banks.," Journal of Interna-
 tional Money and Finance, 1991, 10, 406­419.

Dominguez, Kathryn ME, Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito, "International reserves
 and the global financial crisis," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 388­406.

Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, "Quantitative implications of indexed bonds in small open economies,"
 Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 2009, 33, 883­902.

Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock, "Capital flow waves: surges, stops, flight, and re-
  trenchment," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235­251.

Greenspan, Alan, "Currency reserves and debt," in "Remarks before the World Bank Confer-
 ence on Recent Trends in Reserves Management, Washington, DC," Vol. 29 1999.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, "Long-duration bonds and sovereign
 defaults," Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79 (1), 117­125.

   and , "On the benefits of GDP-indexed government debt: lessons from a model of sovereign
  defaults," FRB Richmond Economic Quarterly, 2012, 98 (2), 139­157.

  , , and C´esar Sosa-Padilla, "Debt dilution and sovereign default risk," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2016, 124 (5), 1383­1422.

  , , and Horacio Sapriza, "Quantitative properties of sovereign default models: Solution
  methods matter," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2010, 13 (4), 919­933.

  ,  , and Yasin K¨  ur¸    ¨
                        sat Onder , "Non-defaultable debt and sovereign risk," 2014. IMF
  Working Paper 14/198.

IMF, "Assessing Reserve Adequacy," IMF Policy Papers, 2011.

Jeanne, Olivier and Romain Ranciere, "The optimal level of international reserves for
  emerging market countries: A new formula and some applications," Economic Journal, 2011,
  121(555), 905­930.

Johri, Alok, Shahed Khan, and C´      esar Sosa-Padilla, "Interest Rate Uncertainty and
  Sovereign Default Risk," 2020. NBER Working Paper 27639.


                                              29
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, "Financial dollarization: evaluating the consequences," Economic Pol-
  icy, 2006, 21 (45), 62­118.

  , "The cost of reserves," Economics Letters, 2008, 100 (1), 39­42.

  and Juan Francisco G´  omez, "The cost of holding foreign exchange reserves," in "Asset
  Management at Central Banks and Monetary Authorities," Springer, 2020, pp. 91­110.

Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, "How
  sovereign is sovereign credit risk?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3
  (2), 75­103.

Neumeyer, Pablo A. and Fabrizio Perri, "Business cycles in emerging economies: The role
 of interest rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52(2), 345­380.

Orazi, Pablo, Mario Torriani, and Matias Vicens, "Strategic Asset Allocation of a Re-
 serves' Portfolio: Hedging against Shocks," Central Bank of Argentina, Economic Research
 Department, 2020. Working Paper No. 88.

Rey, H´el`
         ene, "Dilemma not trilemma: the global cycle and monetary policy independence,"
 Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, 2013.

Rodrik, Dani, "The social cost of foreign exchange reserves," International Economic Journal,
 2006, 20 (3), 253­266.

   and Andres Velasco, "Short-term capital flows," 1999. NBER Working Paper No. 7364.

Roldan, Francisco and Francisco Roch, "Uncertainty Premia, Sovereign Default Risk, and
 State-Contingent Debt," 2021. IMF Working Paper 21/76.

Samano, Agustin, "International Reserves and Central Bank Independence," Mimeo, 2021.

Sosa-Padilla, C´ esar, "Sovereign defaults and banking crises," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2018, 99, 88­105.

Sturzenegger, Federico, "Tools for the Analysis of Debt Problems," Journal of Reconstructing
  Finance, 2004, 1 (1), 201­223.

  , "Reserve Management: A Governor's Eye View," HSBC Reserve Management Trends 2019,
  Central Bank Publications, 2019.

  , "Macri's Macro: The Elusive Road to Stability and Growth," Brookings Papers of Economic
  Activity, 2020, (135), 339­411.

   and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, Debt Defaults and Lessons from a Decade of Crises, Cambridge
  and London: MIT Press, 2006.

Uribe, Mart´
           in and Vivian Z. Yue, "Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives
 whom?," Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 6­36.

Vasicek, Oldrich, "An equilibrium characterization of the term structure," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 1977, 5 (2), 177­188.

                                              30
                                Appendices
A    Data appendix

                   Table A.1: Summary Statistics of Selected Variables

Statistic                        N      Mean       St. Dev.     Min      Median    Max
Sovereign spread                4,497   409.83      334.41     21.20     321.77    3,863
Credit Rating                   4,497   16.38        3.46        1         16        21
Reserves Ratio                  4,497    0.15        0.08     0.0004      0.13      0.47
Sovereign Debt Ratio            4,497    0.23        0.15       0.01      0.19      0.83
Private Debt                    4,497    0.13        0.16       0.00      0.08      0.96
Risk Aversion                   4,497   573.48      286.38    257.14     488.91   2,030.95
10 Year US Treasury             4,497    3.11        1.02      1.50       2.89      5.39
Unsterilized Purchases          4,497    0.10        0.09     -0.14       0.09      0.41
External Liabilities Ratio      4,497    0.02        0.03       0.0       0.01      0.16
Remunerated Liabilities Ratio   4,497    0.04        0.05       0.0       0.02      0.23



                           Table A.2: Countries in the Sample

                           Algeria                     Mexico
                           Belarus                    Morocco
                            Belize                     Nigeria
                            Brazil                    Pakistan
                           Bulgaria                     Peru
                          Colombia                  Philippines
                         Ivory Coast             Russian Federation
                      Dominican Republic              Senegal
                            Egypt                  South Africa
                           Georgia                   Sri Lanka
                            Ghana                    Thailand
                          Indonesia                   Tunisia
                           Jamaica                     Turkey
                            Jordan                    Ukraine
                         Kazakhstan                  Venezuela




                                           31
                                 Table A.3: Variables and Sources
Name                                 Description                                    Source
                                JP Morgan EMBI global
Sovereign Spread              index blended spread, in bps                     The World Bank

                              Merrill Lynch ICE BofAML
Risk aversion                  Option-Adjusted Spreads                              FRED

                               US Treasury notes, 10 year
World Rate                    constant maturity yield, bps                          FRED

                             S&P rating, long term debt,
                            end of period, foreign currency
Credit rating              We construct an index starting in                  Standard & Poor's
                                 1 at Not Rated (NR)
                            up to the top in 29 at "AAA".

Sovereign Debt              Public and publicly guaranteed                    The World Bank's,
                             debt from private creditors              International Debt Statistics (IDS)

Private Debt                     External debt stock's,                        The World Bank's
                                 private nonguaranteed                ,International Debt Statistics (IDS)

GDP                             GDP, current US dollars                        The World Bank

Reserves Ratio                  Claims on non residents                               IFS

Remunerated
Domestic Liabilities                                                                  IFS

Unsterilized
Purchases                                                                             IFS

External Liabilities                                                                  IFS

Fiscal Balance              Primary net lending/borrowing                        IMF
                                                                         (GGXONLB G01 GDP PT)

Dollarization          Deposits in dollars (as % of total deposits)           (Levy-Yeyati, 2006)




                                                  32
B    Online appendix (not for publication)

                            Table B.1: Regression results. Robustness Checks
                                                   Dependent variable: log(spread)
                               (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)       (8)
     Risk Aversion           0.67      0.70      0.94
                                                         0.94 
                                                                   0.94 
                                                                              0.71           0.71      0.71
                             (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)         (0.05)    (0.05)

     Rating                  -2.12     -1.98     -2.06         -2.04     -2.03     -1.83     -1.81     -1.81
                              (0.41)    (0.62)    (0.75)        (0.76)    (0.75)    (0.61)    (0.62)    (0.63)

     World Rate              -0.30      -0.19    0.15          0.15      0.15       -0.20     -0.19     -0.19
                             (0.14)    (0.14)    (0.07)        (0.07)    (0.07)    (0.14)    (0.14)    (0.14)

     Reserve Ratio           -2.41     -2.37      -0.33        -2.80     -2.47      -0.97    -3.32     -3.53
                             (1.04)     (0.62)   (0.93)        (1.15)    (1.24)    (0.68)     (0.62)    (1.08)

     Sovereign Debt            0.06     0.92      0.36          0.15      0.17      1.08      0.91      0.89
                              (0.26)   (0.64)    (0.69)        (0.65)    (0.63)    (0.72)    (0.74)    (0.66)

     Private Debt              1.25    2.17      1.36          1.32      1.32      2.21      2.14      2.13
                              (0.87)   (1.04)    (0.70)        (0.68)    (0.67)    (1.03)    (1.03)    (1.02)

     Remunerated                                 -2.50                    -0.36    -2.38                0.22
     Domestic Liabilites                         (1.28)                  (1.23)    (1.13)              (1.29)

     Unsterilized                                 -1.95         0.32               -2.38      -0.21
     Purchases                                   (1.52)        (1.02)              (1.28)    (1.10)

     Others                                       -0.47        2.26       1.90      -0.76    1.87       2.09
     Balance Sheet                               (1.10)        (0.52)    (1.20)    (0.86)    (0.55)    (1.40)

     External Liabilities                                      3.33       2.94               3.24      3.48
                                                               (1.52)    (2.07)              (1.42)    (1.86)

     Current                   -0.51    -0.02     0.06          0.04      0.04      0.07      0.06      0.06
     Account                  (0.39)   (0.33)    (0.26)        (0.27)    (0.26)    (0.33)    (0.34)    (0.33)

     Fiscal                    0.53     0.15      -0.05         -0.02     -0.03     -0.07     -0.08     -0.08
     Deficit                  (0.50)   (0.50)    (0.70)        (0.68)    (0.68)    (0.60)    (0.57)    (0.57)

     Constant                7.98
                             (1.07)

     Fixed effects?             No       Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
     Year dummies?              No       No         No           No         No       Yes       Yes       Yes
     Observations             1,975     1,975     1,975         1,975     1,975     1,975     1,975     1,975
     Adjusted R2               0.66     0.59       0.65         0.65       0.65     0.60       0.60      0.60

    Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
    logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01



                                                          33
                   Table B.2: Regression Results. Split Sample by Debt

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         log (spread)
                                      High Debt                              Low Debt
                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Risk Aversion               0.85         0.85          0.85       1.07         1.06         1.07
                            (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.12)     (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)

Rating                     -0.28        -0.27          -0.28      -2.61        -2.80        -2.82
                            (0.07)       (0.07)         (0.07)     (0.38)       (0.38)       (0.38)

World Rate                  0.22         0.22          0.22       0.26         0.26         0.26
                            (0.09)       (0.09)        (0.09)     (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.07)

Reserve Ratio                -0.33      -3.47           -0.24       0.20         -1.26        -1.16
                            (1.18)       (0.89)        (1.01)      (1.37)       (0.77)       (1.75)

Sovereign Debt               -0.06        -0.15         -0.06       0.07         0.13         0.21
                            (0.71)       (0.68)        (0.71)      (1.26)       (1.32)       (1.20)

Private Debt                 -0.35        -0.27         -0.34       0.59         0.59         0.51
                            (0.37)       (0.35)        (0.39)      (0.49)       (0.48)       (0.46)

Remunerated                 -3.46                      -3.55        -1.90                     -0.53
Domestic Liabilites         (1.82)                     (1.59)      (1.62)                    (1.77)

Unsterilized                 0.09        3.19                       -1.95        -0.47
Purchases                   (1.02)       (1.45)                    (1.52)       (1.84)

Others                       -1.48        1.63         -1.57        -0.92        0.64         0.35
Balance Sheet               (1.02)       (1.08)        (0.77)      (1.57)       (0.91)       (2.06)

External Liabilities                     3.87           -0.09                    -0.65        -0.76
                                         (1.97)        (1.18)                   (1.89)       (1.68)

Observations                1,188        1,188          1,188      1,734        1,734        1,734
Adjusted R2                  0.70         0.70          0.70       0.72          0.72         0.72

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p < 0.1; p < 0.05; p < 0.01.




                                                  34
                  Table B.3: Regression Results. Split Sample by Spreads

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         log (spread)
                                      High Spread                          Low Spread
                              (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
 Risk Aversion              0.98         1.00          0.99      0.90         0.90         0.91
                            (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)    (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)

 Rating                     -0.32        -0.31         -0.31     -0.41        -0.42        -0.41
                            (0.15)       (0.13)        (0.13)     (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.10)

 World Rate                 0.20         0.21          0.21       0.20        0.20          0.20
                            (0.05)       (0.05)        (0.05)     (0.08)      (0.08)        (0.08)

 Reserve Ratio                0.67      -2.92           -0.98      -0.06        -1.35      -5.52
                             (1.57)      (0.51)        (0.69)     (1.21)       (1.47)       (1.42)

 Sovereign Debt               0.01        -0.31         -0.40     1.50        1.69          1.40
                             (0.70)      (0.63)        (0.65)     (0.61)      (0.61)        (0.81)

 Private Debt                0.93        0.89          1.11        0.90         0.96         0.71
                             (0.56)      (0.48)        (0.46)     (0.64)       (0.68)       (0.67)

 Remunerated                -3.76                      -1.77       -2.28                     3.14
 Domestic Liabilites        (1.88)                     (0.84)     (2.67)                    (2.23)

 Unsterilized                -1.26       2.59                    -5.89        -4.76
 Purchases                  (1.76)       (0.69)                   (0.76)       (1.41)

 Others                     -3.13        1.11          -0.90       -0.07        1.00       5.41
 Balance Sheet              (1.45)       (0.44)        (0.50)     (1.89)       (1.38)      (1.19)

 External Liabilities                    7.00          5.02                     0.05        5.26
                                         (1.08)        (1.06)                  (2.50)       (2.33)

 Observations                2,517       2,517         2,517      1,980        1,980        1,980
 Adjusted R2                 0.65         0.68          0.68       0.68         0.68        0.66

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                  35
           Table B.4: Regression results. Split Sample by Rate of Devaluation

                                                  Dependent variable:
                                                        log(spread)
                                       High Rate                         Low Rate
                               (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)
    Risk Aversion              0.97 0.98 0.98 0.92 0.92 0.92
                              (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.07) (0.06) (0.06)

    Rating                   -0.35 -0.35 -0.34 -0.18                       -0.18      -0.18
                              (0.14) (0.13) (0.13) (0.11)                   (0.11)     (0.11)

    World Rate                 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.22 0.22 0.22
                              (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05)

    Reserve Ratio            -0.26      -3.72 -3.04 -1.69                  -1.29      -0.83
                              (1.08)     (0.95) (0.89) (2.82)               (1.11)     (2.06)

    Sovereign Debt             1.10       0.84        0.83       1.74        1.75       1.76
                              (0.70)     (0.70)      (0.73)     (0.89)      (0.88)     (0.88)

    Private Debt               0.65       0.70        0.65       0.65        0.66       0.67
                              (0.54)     (0.57)      (0.55)     (0.43)      (0.48)     (0.44)

    Remunerated         -4.27                       -1.15        0.40                 -0.49
    Domestic Liabilites (1.67)                       (0.89)     (3.36)                 (2.58)

    Unsterilized             -2.92        0.55                   0.81        0.42
    Purchases                 (1.61)     (1.18)                 (2.37)      (2.72)

    Others                   -2.69        1.34        0.58       2.12        1.69       1.21
    Balance Sheet             (1.07)     (0.94)      (0.72)     (2.93)      (1.32)     (2.44)

    External Liabilities                  5.25 4.55                        -0.57      -1.01
                                         (1.31) (1.05)                      (3.53)     (2.15)

    Observations             2,683       2,683      2,683       1,814      1,814      1,814
    Adjusted R2               0.67       0.67        0.68       0.64       0.64        0.64

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                   36
                  Table B.5: Regression Results. Split Sample by Deficit

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         log (spread)
                                     With Deficit                          Without Deficit
                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Risk Aversion               1.00         1.02          1.01       0.87         0.87         0.87
                            (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.08)

Rating                     -1.39        -1.31          -1.35      -2.14        -2.09        -2.09
                            (0.22)       (0.28)         (0.24)     (0.54)       (0.54)       (0.51)

World Rate                  0.13         0.14          0.14       0.20         0.20         0.20
                            (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.07)     (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.06)

Reserve Ratio              -2.36        -7.37          -4.49        -0.61      -2.20          -2.33
                            (0.50)       (0.85)         (0.83)     (1.94)       (0.83)       (2.31)

Sovereign Debt              1.43         0.89          1.20        2.30          2.20         2.19
                            (0.47)       (0.52)        (0.46)      (1.27)       (1.47)       (1.54)

Private Debt                 0.57        0.82           0.66        -0.67       -0.78        -0.78
                            (0.35)       (0.34)        (0.46)      (0.53)       (0.47)       (0.43)

Remunerated                -6.19                       -3.88        -1.63                     0.15
Domestic Liabilites         (2.01)                     (1.79)      (2.04)                    (2.18)

Unsterilized                -2.03        2.73                       -1.76        -0.03
Purchases                   (1.01)       (1.09)                    (1.84)       (1.58)

Others                     -2.54         2.83           -0.28       -0.85        1.08         1.22
Balance Sheet               (0.81)       (0.84)        (0.82)      (2.31)       (0.85)       (2.84)

External Liabilities                     6.13          2.69                      2.77         2.91
                                         (1.26)        (1.12)                   (3.22)       (4.30)

Observations                1,166        1,166          1,166      1,471        1,471        1,471
Adjusted R2                  0.77         0.77          0.77       0.71          0.71         0.71

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                  37
         Table B.6: Regression Results. Split Sample by Dollarizated Countries

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         log (spread)
                                     Dollarizated                          Non-Dollarizated
                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Risk Aversion               0.92         0.92          0.92       0.95         0.97         0.97
                            (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)     (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)

Rating                     -1.44        -1.42          -1.44      -0.94        -0.87        -0.91
                            (0.53)       (0.52)         (0.53)     (0.19)       (0.16)       (0.15)

World Rate                   0.07         0.07          0.07      0.28         0.28         0.28
                            (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)     (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)

Reserve Ratio                -0.41      -4.23          -3.58       -2.30       -3.21          -1.54
                            (0.78)       (1.06)         (1.26)     (1.23)       (0.60)       (0.98)

Sovereign Debt              1.27          1.08          1.10        1.36         1.34         1.12
                            (0.70)       (0.71)        (0.69)      (0.97)       (0.94)       (0.91)

Private Debt                0.77         0.76          0.75         1.36         1.25         1.50
                            (0.37)       (0.37)        (0.37)      (1.36)       (1.29)       (1.41)

Remunerated                -3.89                        -0.83       -1.22                     -1.61
Domestic Liabilites         (1.09)                     (1.44)      (1.04)                    (1.12)

Unsterilized               -3.07          0.54                      1.74        2.49
Purchases                   (0.72)       (1.24)                    (1.97)       (1.43)

Others                      -1.92        1.78           1.15        0.67       2.04           0.09
Balance Sheet               (0.92)       (0.89)        (0.99)      (1.31)      (0.77)        (1.00)

External Liabilities                     4.29          3.60                    6.48          5.33
                                         (1.10)        (0.90)                  (2.44)        (2.70)

Observations                2,005        2,005          2,005      1,908        1,908        1,908
Adjusted R2                  0.71         0.71          0.71       0.66          0.67         0.66

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                  38
              Table B.7: Regression Results. Split Sample by Country Debt

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                         log (spread)
                                      High Debt                              Low Debt
                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Risk Aversion               0.82         0.83          0.83       1.00         0.99         1.00
                            (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.12)     (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)

Rating                     -0.35        -0.34          -0.34      -1.70        -1.69        -1.74
                            (0.06)       (0.05)         (0.05)     (0.34)       (0.35)       (0.36)

World Rate                  0.23         0.24          0.23       0.23         0.23         0.23
                            (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.12)     (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)

Reserve Ratio                -0.85      -4.41          1.98         -0.46      -2.03          0.29
                            (2.30)       (1.58)        (0.55)      (1.46)      (0.96)        (1.38)

Sovereign Debt               -0.05        -0.06         -0.13      2.06        2.51         2.25
                            (0.33)       (0.34)        (0.38)      (0.84)      (0.79)       (0.80)

Private Debt                 0.33         0.33          0.30        0.34         0.31         0.28
                            (0.31)       (0.32)        (0.33)      (0.59)       (0.63)       (0.59)

Remunerated                  -3.36                     -6.00        -2.19                     -2.77
Domestic Liabilites         (2.43)                      (1.84)     (2.30)                    (1.84)

Unsterilized                 2.93        6.41                       0.54         1.93
Purchases                   (2.10)       (1.80)                    (1.04)       (1.67)

Others                       -0.85        2.66         -3.62        0.14        1.75          -0.64
Balance Sheet               (2.70)       (1.77)         (0.84)     (1.88)       (0.91)       (1.68)

External Liabilities                     4.03           -2.33                    0.56         -1.46
                                         (2.14)        (1.83)                   (2.16)       (1.32)

Observations                 788          788           788        2,067        2,067        2,067
Adjusted R2                  0.83         0.84          0.83        0.74         0.74         0.74

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p < 0.1; p < 0.05; p < 0.01.




                                                  39
                                     Table B.8: Regression by Interest Rate and Inflation Rate
                                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                               log (spread)
                               High interest Rate               Low interest Rate       High Inflation Rate                       Low inflation Rate
                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)
                                                                                                                                                   
      Risk Aversion           0.93       0.93       0.93       0.92       0.92       0.92       0.98       0.98       0.98       0.94       0.95       0.94
                             (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.08)

      Rating                 -1.10 -1.05 -1.06 -0.70 -0.63 -0.58 -1.25 -1.25 -1.26 -0.27 -0.26 -0.26
                              (0.34) (0.33) (0.33) (0.18) (0.17) (0.12) (0.18) (0.18) (0.18) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07)

      World Rate              0.31 0.31 0.31 0.17 0.18 0.18 0.22 0.22 0.22 0.23 0.23 0.23
                             (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07) (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07)

      Reserve Ratio           0.03 -2.38 -0.59                 1.07 -1.70 -3.49 -1.69 -1.84 -1.28                                1.63 -3.90 -3.56
                             (1.76) (1.40) (1.02)             (1.62) (1.33) (1.20) (1.21) (0.80) (0.69)                         (1.36) (1.08) (2.44)

      Sovereign Debt          0.90       0.58       0.59       1.18 1.19 1.20 2.33 2.36 2.33 1.09                                           1.00       0.96




40
                             (0.95)     (1.05)     (1.06)     (0.51) (0.51) (0.53) (0.81) (0.92) (0.86) (0.64)                             (0.61)     (0.56)

      Private Debt           -0.42 -0.39 -0.35                 0.94       0.93       0.92       1.32 1.32 1.32 0.19                         0.18       0.20
                              (0.55) (0.64) (0.62)            (0.56)     (0.54)     (0.52)     (0.29) (0.28) (0.28) (0.63)                 (0.58)     (0.58)

      Remunerated        -1.79                     -1.44 -2.67                       1.76 -0.18                      -0.56 -5.47                      -0.01
      Domestic Liabilites (2.84)                    (1.46) (1.78)                   (1.71) (1.87)                     (1.24) (1.81)                    (3.10)

      Unsterilized           -0.19       2.09                 -4.47 -1.75                       0.40       0.53                 -4.90       0.65
      Purchases               (2.06)    (0.93)                 (1.90) (1.80)                   (0.89)     (1.18)                 (2.65)    (3.17)

      Others                  1.15       3.64 1.83             0.35       3.12 4.90 1.35                   1.51       0.93 -1.87            3.58 3.33
      Balance Sheet          (2.00)     (1.85) (1.46)         (1.28)     (0.89) (1.89) (1.35)             (0.87)     (0.88) (1.55)         (1.20) (2.48)

      External Liabilities               3.57       1.70                  3.23 5.03                        0.09 -0.44                       6.14 5.93
                                        (3.12)     (2.74)                (1.52) (1.48)                    (1.94) (0.94)                    (1.79) (2.34)

      Observations           1,461      1,461      1,461      1,399      1,399      1,399      1,806      1,806      1,806      1,895      1,895      1,895
      Adjusted R2            0.65       0.65        0.65      0.74       0.74        0.74      0.76        0.76      0.76       0.71       0.72       0.72

     Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in logs, the remaining
     variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.
             Table B.9: Results for Fiscal Balance and Dollarization samples

                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                           log(spread)
                                       Dollar sample                        Deficit sample
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)
    Risk Aversion              0.94       0.95           0.95      0.93        0.93      0.93
                               (0.04)     (0.04)         (0.04)    (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.05)

    Rating                    -1.22       -1.18          -1.19     -1.74       -1.70     -1.72
                               (0.23)      (0.24)         (0.25)    (0.46)      (0.49)    (0.51)

    World Rate                 0.18       0.18           0.18      0.16        0.17      0.17
                               (0.05)     (0.05)         (0.05)    (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.05)

    Reserve Ratio               -0.84     -3.01          -2.47      -0.75      -3.48     -3.50
                               (0.70)      (0.38)         (0.82)   (0.67)       (0.97)    (1.04)

    Sovereign Debt             1.18        1.07          1.07      1.20         1.07      1.06
                               (0.56)      (0.54)        (0.54)    (0.54)       (0.61)    (0.62)

    Private Debt               0.78        0.76          0.75      1.05         1.08      1.01
                               (0.36)      (0.36)        (0.34)    (0.53)       (0.57)    (0.59)

    Remunerated               -2.59                       -0.81    -2.97                   -0.29
    Domestic Liabilites        (0.97)                    (0.96)     (1.12)                (1.41)

    Unsterilized               -1.63        0.49                   -2.89         -0.27
    Purchases                  (0.98)      (0.98)                   (0.82)      (1.15)

    Others                     -1.21       1.25           0.66     -1.51        1.41       1.45
    Balance Sheet              (0.73)      (0.50)        (0.89)    (0.85)       (0.79)    (0.95)

    External Liabilities                  3.21           2.63                   3.21      3.23
                                          (0.93)         (0.74)                 (1.35)    (1.37)

    Observations               3,913       3,913          3,913     2,637       2,637        2,637
    Adjusted R2                 0.66       0.66            0.66     0.67         0.67        0.67

Note : Robust standard errors in parentheses. Risk Aversion, Rating and World rate are expressed in
logs, the remaining variables are ratios of GDP. All regressions include year and country fixed effects.

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                    41
      Table B.10: Regression results. Exogenous shocks without outlier.

                               Dependent variable: Spread Variation
                 Domestic Liabilities      External Liabilities         p-value difference
Pooled                  -27.60                    53.40                         0.03
                        (13.10)                  (34.90)

First Event             -37.60                    45.10                         0.00
                          (9.70)                 (28.00)

Second Event            -58.00                  208.00                          0.00
                        (27.40)                  (37.30)

Third Event                8.02                  -11.10                         0.26
                         (16.20)                  (4.97)


Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p<0.1;   
                                                          p<0.05;   
                                                                       p<0.01




                                          42
