                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE IMPACT OF INCREASED ACCESS TO TELEMEDICINE

                                         Dan Zeltzer
                                         Liran Einav
                                        Joseph Rashba
                                        Ran D. Balicer

                                     Working Paper 28978
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28978


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank seminar participants at the NBER Aging Program Meeting, Stanford, Tel Aviv
University, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, and ASHEcon for helpful comments, and Nadav
Shimoni and Moria Mahanaimy for practitioner perspectives and expert advice regarding
differential diagnosis protocols. Einav gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Tad
and Dianne Taube Healthcare Fellowship at SIEPR. We also gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the Koret Foundation. IRB Reference 0161-20-COM1. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Joseph Rashba, and Ran D. Balicer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine
Dan Zeltzer, Liran Einav, Joseph Rashba, and Ran D. Balicer
NBER Working Paper No. 28978
July 2021
JEL No. I11,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of increased access to telemedicine that followed widespread adoption
during the March-April 2020 lockdown period in Israel (due to COVID-19). We focus on the
post-lockdown period, which in Israel was characterized by a temporary return to normalcy. Prior
to the lockdown, telemedicine accounted for about 5% of all primary care visits. It peaked at
around 40% during the lockdown, and remained high, at around 20%, during the post-lockdown
period. Using a difference-in-differences framework, we compare primary care episodes before
and after the lockdown between patients with high and low access to telemedicine, with access
defined based on their main primary care physician's propensity to adopt telemedicine during the
lockdown. Increased access to telemedicine results in a 3.5% increase in primary care visits, but a
5% lower per-episode cost, so overall resource utilization is slightly lower. We find that remote
visits involve slightly fewer prescriptions and more follow-ups, mainly with the same physician,
which is consistent with a prolonged diagnostic path in the absence of physical examination.
However, analyzing specific conditions, we find no evidence of missed diagnoses or adverse
outcomes. Taken together, our findings suggest that the increased convenience of telemedicine
does not compromise care quality or raise costs.

Dan Zeltzer                                      Joseph Rashba
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics            josephra@clalit.org.il
Tel Aviv University
P.O.Box 39040                                    Ran D. Balicer
Tel Aviv 6997801                                 Department of Epidemiology
Israel                                           Faculty of Health Sciences
dzeltzer@tauex.tau.ac.il                         Ben Gurion University
                                                 Beersheba
Liran Einav                                      Israel
Stanford University                              rbalicer@clalit.org.il
Department of Economics
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Over the last two decades, telemedicine--the administration of health services remotely--
has been touted by many as a potential tool to transform the provision of healthcare. Just
like e-commerce has revolutionized retail, so the argument goes, telemedicine was going
to revolutionize the healthcare industry (Dorsey and Topol, 2016).1 Yet, as recently as
early 2020, the adoption and use of telemedicine by both providers and patients had been
largely limited to small-scale programs that targeted remote locations, late hours, or specific
conditions (Tuckson et al., 2017). For example, in the United States, for various reasons, such
as limited reimbursement, licensure hurdles, and state practice laws, remote visits accounted
for less than 1% of primary care visits before 2020 and were typically not provided by the
patients' regular primary care providers (Dorsey and Topol, 2016).
    This state of affairs is likely to change after the COVID-19 pandemic, which has precip-
itated a rapid expansion of telemedicine. Since March 2020, healthcare systems throughout
the world have substantially expanded the provision and coverage of remote medicine, lead-
ing to a surge in adoption (Alexander et al., 2020; Mehrotra et al., 2020b; Patel et al., 2020,
2021). In the United States, for example, the share of remote visits rose sharply once hurdles
were swiftly lifted in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, peaking at nearly 30% of all visits
in April 2020, before stabilizing at much higher levels than before the pandemic (Mehrotra
et al., 2020a; Patel et al., 2020). The rapid growth of telemedicine and the the broadening of
clinicians' licenses to use it raise the question of what will become of these new approaches
to treatment once the immediate COVID-19 crisis has passed (Cutler et al., 2020; Dorsey
and Topol, 2020).
    Providing care remotely entails both risks and opportunities. On the positive side,
telemedicine has the potential to improve access to care and to make care much more con-
venient (Hollander and Carr, 2020). It may also expand the geographic reach of providers
and reduce the costs of follow-up encounters, supporting continuity of care. On the negative
side, the ease of access to telemedicine might increase low-value utilization. Further, remote
diagnosis without physical examination of patients could cause mistakes or increased use of
specialist services or other costly substitutes to primary care (Ashwood et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2021). Understanding these pros and cons is critical in guiding the future, post-pandemic use
of remote medicine. In this study, we attempt to start filling this gap by taking advantage of
    1
    Examples of media coverage include: Frakt, Austin, "You Mean I Don't Have to Show Up? The Promise
of Telemedicine," The New York Times, May 16, 2016; Beck, Melinda, "How Telemedicine Is Transforming
Health Care," The Wall Street Journal, June 26, 2016; Hansen, Claire, "The Telemedicine Revolution: A
Crucial Component of Everyday Care," U.S. News, Novermber 2, 2017; "A Digital Revolution in Health
Care is Speeding Up," The Economist, March 4, 2017.



                                                 1
a unique situation created in Israel during and shortly after the first COVID-19 wave, when
widespread adoption of remote medicine was followed by a short period of nearly complete
reopening.
    The Israeli context is particularly useful for studying the impact of telemedicine. First,
like most other countries, Israel moved to quickly facilitate the use of telemedicine during
the first COVID-19 wave, resulting in a surge of adoption. By April 2020, about 40% of all
primary care visits were provided remotely, and levels remained high thereafter (Figure 1).
Second, Israel responded to the first COVID-19 cases in March 2020 with extremely quick
and aggressive lockdown measures, which resulted in a successful (though temporary) mi-
tigation of COVID-19. At the time, it was widely believed that Israel was approaching full
suppression, leading to an equally quick and swift move to fully re-open the economy and
return to normalcy, with schools, malls, and restaurants all opening in early May. These
unique circumstances allow us to study the combined use of in-person care and telemedicine,
when COVID-19 levels are low. Third, we obtained access to detailed medical records from
Israel's largest healthcare provider, covering 12 million primary care episodes between Jan-
uary 2019 and June 2020. The data cover all the provider's enrollees, who account for more
than half of the Israeli population. This allows us to observe a healthcare system in its
entirety. It enables us to evaluate not only the impact of shifting to remote care during a
single visit, but also the endogenous selection of providers, the use of subsequent healthcare
services, and the impact on health outcomes, diagnosis accuracy, and total cost of care.
    The key challenge to studying the impact of remote medicine is that the in-person versus
remote setting for a primary care visit is, naturally, endogenous. Patient and provider
inclination to use telemedicine surely depends on the medical characteristics of each case.
For example, remote visits have an outsized share of mental health complaints and a smaller
share of ear, nose, and throat complaints, because the former require no physical exams to
handle, whereas the latter do. To address this challenge, our empirical strategy does not
rely on the actual visit setting but instead focuses on patients' access to telemedicine, which
we measure based on the decision of a patient's regular primary care physician to adopt
telemedicine. To measure physician adoption, we use their tendency to shift to remote care
during the COVID-19 lockdown period (March-April 2020), adjusting for case mix, time, and
place. Based on this analysis, we consider physicians whose adoption was above median as
high adopters and the rest as low adopters, and their patients as having high and low access,
respectively, in the post-lockdown period (May-June 2020). Indeed, patients affiliated with
high adopters were much more likely to have remote visits in the post-lockdown period: 30%
of their primary care visits were conducted remotely, compared to only 8% for patients of
low adopters.


                                              2
    We use this variation in telemedicine access to implement a difference-in-differences ap-
proach and compare outcomes of primary care visits and the ensuing episodes before and
after the lockdown between patients with high and low access to telemedicine. Thus, we allow
the choice of setting to be endogenously determined by patients and providers, a likely sce-
nario under future policies. Our difference-in-differences design also allows high telemedicine
adopters to have different practice styles than low adopters, as long as their trends over time
are similar (and they are). Placebo analyses further support the assumptions underlying the
research design.
    Our findings suggest that increased telemedicine access is associated with a modest,
3.5% increase in the utilization of primary care, and this increased use is offset by lower
episode intensity. The overall cost of services utilized during the 30 days following an initial
primary care visit is 5% lower, so overall healthcare costs slightly decrease. We find that
access to telemedicine has only a modest impact on visit outcomes: patients with higher
access to telemedicine receive slightly fewer prescriptions and referrals to other providers.
We find no significant difference in the probability of referrals to laboratory tests or to
the emergency department (ED). And while access to telemedicine is associated with a
slight increase in the number of follow-up visits, such visits are predominantly with the same
physicians that provided the initial visit. Overall, our findings are consistent with physicians'
taking somewhat longer to complete diagnostic processes in some cases. Furthermore, a
significant share of follow-ups--including ones that would have likely happened even without
telemedicine access--shift to remote visits.
    We explore the extent to which the results vary across different types of patients and
medical conditions. Among other things, we show that the results are quite similar when
we focus on conditions that are acute and less deferrable. This is particularly reassuring
because a plausible concern about the research design is that the lockdown made patients
defer primary care encounters--perhaps even more so for patients whose physicians did not
use much telemedicine. The finding that the results are similar for less deferrable condi-
tions suggests that this concern is unlikely to drive the main results. We also reproduce our
findings using an alternative (and slightly longer) post period in 2021, after a successful vac-
cination campaign that has lead to a full reopening. During this period, which is presumably
shadowed less by COVID-19, telemedicine use--and its estimated impacts on the outcomes
we observe--remain very similar as in our baseline analysis, which is reassuring.
    The increase in the probability of follow-ups raises the possibility that physicians are
less certain in diagnoses given remotely. A related concern is that remote visits may involve
more errors, such as misdiagnosis or missed diagnoses. To explore this possibility, we ana-
lyze in more detail the diagnosis and treatment of three medical conditions: urinary tract


                                               3
infections, heart attacks, and bone fractures, which we chose because they are common and,
more important, because false negative cases are likely observed (absent treatment, all three
conditions would involve aggravating symptoms that would lead patients to seek further
care). Across all three conditions, we cannot detect any evidence for missed diagnoses or
adverse outcomes.
    Taken together, our findings suggest that access to telemedicine does not substantially
alter the utilization or outcomes of care. Physicians appear to properly diagnose and treat
the marginal low severity cases that telemedicine brings rather than overtreat or refer them.
More broadly, the results suggest that providing patients access to telemedicine can produc-
tively complement in-person primary care.
    We are obviously not the first to study the impact of telemedicine, but given the limited
nature of telemedicine use prior to COVID-19, the scope of earlier work is narrower. For
example, Shi et al. (2018), using US commercial insurance claims data, match 40,000 direct-
to-consumer telemedicine visits of adults with acute respiratory infection diagnoses with
in-person visits in primary care and urgent care settings. They find that telemedicine visits
have similar rates of antibiotic use as in-person visits, but less-appropriate streptococcal
testing and a higher frequency of follow-up visits. In contrast, Ray et al. (2019), who match
4,500 pediatric telemedicine visits for acute respiratory infections with in-person visits, find
that telemedicine visits have higher antibiotic prescribing and lower guideline-concordant
antibiotic management. Other works have focused on patient response and substitutability
with in-person care. For example, Player et al. (2018) find that most patients surveyed
after an e-visit at the Medical University of South Carolina in 2015­2017 reported a positive
experience and that had, in their view, replaced an in-person visit. Shah et al. (2018) also
find that virtual visits partly replace in-person visits in a Massachusetts-based accountable
care organization in 2014­2017. In contrast, Ashwood et al. (2017), matching telemedicine
and in-person visits, estimate that only 12% of direct-to-consumer telemedicine visits replace
visits to other providers. Analyzing commercial claims for 2016­2019, Li et al. (2021) find
that compared to in-person visits, telemedicine visits for acute respiratory infection involve
more downstream care. A meta-analysis by Shigekawa et al. (2018) concludes that the impact
of telemedicine interventions on the use of other services remains unclear.
    Our research design is different from existing works in that we exploit the variation in
recent adoption of telemedicine rather than matching cases across settings. Given the sharp
increase in telemedicine use due to COVID-19, the scale and breadth of our data is much
larger than these earlier important studies. The data we use cover the provision of remote
visits in almost all aspects of primary care, rather than specific conditions, and they covers
synchronous visits that are provided, for the most part, by the patients' regular primary


                                               4
care physicians, as opposed to asynchronous visits or visits provided by dedicated clinicians
in specialized telemedicine clinics. This nature of broader telemedicine deployment seems
more similar to the likely future use of telemedicine in the post-pandemic era.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the setting and data.
Section 3 discusses our empirical strategy, and Section 4 presents our main results. Section 5
discusses additional robustness and heterogeneity analyses, and Section 6 concludes.


2       Setting and Data

2.1     Background
Israel confirmed its first COVID-19 case on February 21, 2020, and quickly put in place
multiple measures to clamp down the spread. Panel A of Figure 2 displays the 7-day moving
average of daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases. In response to a rapid increase in the
number of confirmed cases, Israel shut down all schools and universities on March 12 and
announced a state of emergency on March 19, effectively closing much of the country. Further
tightening occurred on March 25 when it was announced that individuals could not go further
than 100 meters from their homes except for essential services. These measures, in addition
to limits on international travel and relatively high compliance by the population, led to a
swift drop in cases and a rapid return to normalcy. By early May, the test positivity rate
fell to 1% from its high of over 10% in late March, and daily new confirmed cases fell to as
low as single digits (see Panel A and Panel B of Figure 2). At the time, Israel was widely
seen as a model for how to successfully contain the spread of COVID-19.
      With the virus seen as largely contained, Israel quickly began reopening the economy and
education system in late April and early May. Retail restrictions were eased beginning in
late April.2 Schools began reopening on May 3 and were fully open by May 20. On May 7,
malls and markets opened, and by late May, restaurants opened for indoor dining, and gyms
and large public pools were opened for indoor exercise. Addressing the nation after a period
with only a handful of daily confirmed COVID-19 cases despite extensive testing, Benjamin
Netanyahu, Israel's prime minister, famously urged Israelis to "get out, return to normalcy,
. . . have fun."3 Panel C of Figure 2, based on Google Mobility data, shows that visits
to groceries and pharmacies returned to baseline, pre-COVID levels. Panel D of Figure 2
shows the average daily number of visits seen by primary care physicians, demonstrating
that total visit volumes returned to nearly pre-COVID levels, further supporting the fact
    2
    "IKEA opens half of stores in Israel after lockdown eased." Reuters, April 22, 2020.
    3
    "Netanyahu to Israelis: Have Fun, We're Easing Coronavirus Restrictions," The Jerusalem Post, May
26, 2020.


                                                 5
that behavior during this period broadly represents the "back to normal" environment and
is not significantly influenced by COVID-19 concerns.
    Daily case rates began ticking up in June, but additional social distancing measures were
not reinstated until early July. Israel ultimately experienced additional waves of COVID-19
associated with much higher numbers of cases and deaths. Nonetheless, the short period of
the partial (and temporary) return to normalcy following the very successful mitigation of
the first COVID-19 wave was characterized by a widespread belief that full suppression was
imminent, ans so we view it as a useful emulation of the post-pandemic era. Particularly
useful is the combination of increased (and heterogeneous) access to telemedicine and low
threat of COVID-19.
    Guided by this context, we split our sample into three periods.4 First, the pre-COVID
period between January 7, 2019, and March 1, 2020, which we refer to as the pre-lockdown
period. Second, we define the period between March 2, 2020, and May 10, 2020, characterized
by extreme restrictions on mobility, economic activity, and healthcare use, as the lockdown
period. Finally, we use the four-week period of relative normalcy between May 11, 2020, and
June 7, 2020, as the post-lockdown period, covering the time between the lifting of major
restrictions and the time when the number of daily cases started climbing again.

2.2     Data
Data Source. Our data come from Clalit Health Services, the largest of Israel's four
non-profit health maintenance organizations (HMOs) that provide universal, mandatory,
tax-funded healthcare coverage from birth onward to all Israeli residents. Universal coverage
broadly resembles that of Medicare parts A, B, and D and includes hospital admissions,
outpatient services, physician consults, prescription drugs, and durable medical equipment.
Clalit covers over one-half of the Israeli population, approximately 4.5 million members of
all ages. It is an integrated payer and provider, providing most of the services it finances
by salaried providers and reimbursing services purchased from external providers. All four
HMOs offer identical coverage but use distinct provider networks to do so, with the exception
of hospitals, which are used by all four. In principle, members can switch HMOs up to twice
a year and maintain their universal coverage, but the annual switching rate is extremely low
(around 1%), so each HMO covers a very stable population of members.
    In the years prior to 2020, Clalit sought to expand its use of telemedicine but, as in the
rest of the world, progress was slow and the scope and utilization of remote care was limited.
Service was limited to specialized, after-hours, direct-to-consumer clinics. Physicians did
   4
    Because utilization exhibits strong weekly periodicity, all periods begin on a Monday and their lengths
are multiples of 7 days.


                                                    6
occasionally call patients, for example, to follow up on matters such as lab test results.
Patients could not, in general, remotely visit their regular primary care physicians; they had
to schedule an in-person appointment to do so.5
     Throughout the first COVID-19 wave, health clinics remained open and physicians were
still able to see patients in person. However, patients and physicians were encouraged to
conduct telemedicine visits whenever possible. Since the first wave, patients have been able,
for the first time, to choose between an in-person and remote setting when visiting office-
based physicians, based on the mix between the two that the physician chooses to offer. The
majority of remote visits are conducted via phone, though some physicians also use video
conferencing technology. Because we do not observe the communication platform used, we
refer to all synchronous remote visits as "telemedicine visits." These visits are equivalent to
in-person visits for reimbursement purposes and do not differentially affect physicians' pay.6
As shown in Figure 1, the telemedicine share of visits increased sharply from a pre-COVID
level of 6% to around 40% in mid-April. After the lockdown ended, the share of remote
visits fell and plateaued at about 20%, well above the pre-COVID baseline.
     Clalit maintains detailed and comprehensive claim-level data associated with all the ser-
vices it provides or reimburses to its universe of members, similar to billing data in the United
States. Clalit also maintains electronic medical records (EMR) data on its patients, which
include diagnoses, lab test results, and vital sign measurements. Universally covered services
are fully subsidized (HMOs receive risk-adjusted capitated payments from the government
for each individual they enroll). Throughout our study period, all primary care visits, both
in-person and remote, were fully covered and did not have associated co-pays.

Study Sample. To construct the study sample, we include all Clalit physicians who serve
as primary care providers for both adults and children. We then include all covered members
   5
      Since 2015, patients have had the ability to consult primary care, pediatric, and dermatology specialists
regarding minor acute conditions via remote channels (voice or video chat). However, this service was limited
to after hours and was intended mainly as a mode of triage, with physicians having no prior or subsequent
interaction with patients. During the period between 2015 and 2020, this service accounted for 0.25% of all
primary care visits. Since 2015, Clalit has also offered a patient portal, where patients can submit requests
to their primary care doctor for prescription refills or other administrative tasks. Such requests are answered
asynchronously within five business days and are not used for diagnosing new conditions. This functionality
has not changed during the period of this study.
    6
      Primary care physicians in Clalit receive a global compensation that is a combination of a baseline salary
that depends on tenure and compensation component that is proportional to the number of attributed
patients and time slots that are regularly available for patients. That is, physician compensation is not
directly tied to the number of visits they provide, either in-person or remotely. When accounting for these
visits in cost calculations, Clalit (and this study) uses per-visit charges that are based on customary charges
by non-employed providers. During the period of our study, these charges were the same for in-person and
remote visits. Specialists are reimbursed according to a pay schedule, which during the study period was
the same for in-person and remote visits.


                                                       7
for which one of these 4,293 physicians serves as their main primary care provider, defined as
the provider each member saw the most in 2019 (see Appendix A for more details). For these
4.3 million members, we extract all healthcare utilization during the study period, January
2019 through June 2020. We use this sample to study the impact of telemedicine on overall
utilization and cost of care.
    Our main study sample, which we use for studying visit and episode outcomes, includes
all patients who had one or more primary care episodes during our study period (in the
context of their interactions with medical providers, we refer to Clalit members as patients;
all patients in our study are also Clalit members). We define a primary care episode as a 30-
day period that starts with a synchronous primary care visit, in either a remote or in-person
setting. We refer to this first visit in an episode as the index visit. We restrict attention
to new care episodes by including only episodes that start with a non-follow-up index visit,
namely, a visit without any health care encounter (hospital visit, physician visit, or lab test)
in the 14 days preceding it. Such non-follow-up visits account for 44% of all primary care
visits. Appendix A provides more detail on these definitions and on the construction of this
sample. The resulting sample includes 12 million care episodes involving 3.7 million patients.
    We split this sample into three main sub-periods, according to the timeline of the COVID-
19 lockdown discussed in Section 2.1. Our main focus is on half a million primary care
episodes that started during the post-lockdown period, which we compare to 10.4 million
primary care episodes that started during the pre-lockdown period, or in some cases against
episodes that started during the same date range (May 11 to June 7) in 2019. Appendix A
discusses the sample and study periods in detail.

Main Variables. We consider the effect of access to telemedicine on several sets of out-
comes. The first outcome is utilization and total cost of care for all members. We record
utilization for each covered member during the pre- and post-lockdown periods as an indica-
tor variable, which is equal to 1 if the member used healthcare services (of any type) during
the period and 0 if the patient did not use care at all. Total cost is the sum of the total cost
of services used. All costs are denominated in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS).7 Second, we
observe the outcomes of the index visits that started primary care episodes: prescriptions,
test orders, and referrals to other providers. Third, for each primary care episode, we also
count the number of follow-up visits that occur during the 7 days following the index visit;
we include follow-up visits with either the same physician as the one providing the index visit
or other physicians, either remotely or in-person. Finally, we associate each episode with
utilization and cost of all services during the 30 days following the index visit. We break
  7
      During the study period, the exchange rate was approximately 3.6 NIS per USD.


                                                    8
down costs to the following categories: prescription drugs, primary care, lab and imaging,
specialists, outpatient, emergency department, inpatient urgent, inpatient elective, and all
other services. In our main analysis, we use the following control variables: gender, five-year
age group, the Johns Hopkins ACG risk score (a commercial risk classifier that measures
predicted future healthcare utilization), number of diagnosed chronic conditions, subdistrict,
and category of diagnosis. Appendix A provides detailed definitions of all variables.

Summary Statistics. Table 1 presents visit summary statistics for sampled index visits in
the post-lockdown period by visit setting: remote or in-person. Out of the 560,000 sampled
visits, 18% were telemedicine visits; the rest were in-person visits. Panel A shows data on
patient characteristics. Compared to in-person visits, telemedicine visits had patients who
were 4 percentage points more likely to be female, have much higher socioeconomic status
(SES), were about three years older on average, and had slightly higher ACG risk scores and
a slightly greater number of chronic conditions. These differences suggest that remote visits
do not have the same mix of complaints and health issues (see Appendix Figure A1), further
highlighting the need to account for this selection in the study design.
    The difference in SES--determined by the patient place of residence, based on classifica-
tion by Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics--is remarkable, with 42% of remote visits being
conducted with patients from the top SES tercile, compared with only 26% of in-person vis-
its.8 It highlights the need to account, as we do, for variation across location in telemedicine
adoption.
    The remaining panels of Table 1 further compare physicians' decisions, follow-ups, and
service utilization and cost over the subsequent 30 days between remote and in-person (index)
visits. In-person and remote visits slightly differ on all these measures. These differences
in outcomes may reflect differences in the case mix. Panel B shows data on visit outcomes.
Remote visits involve significantly fewer prescriptions (38.2% versus 53.1%), more lab tests
(32.4% versus 30.9%), and fewer referrals to other providers (e.g., 0.5% of remote visits are
referred to the emergency department versus 0.8% of in-person visits). Panel C shows data
on the average number of physician visits in the 7-day period after the index visit. Episodes
starting with a remote index visits involve a greater number of follow-ups (0.38 additional
physician visits, compared with 0.33 for episodes starting with an in-person visit). Compared
to in-person visits, remote visits have three times more remote follow-ups (0.13 for remote
versus 0.04 for in-person). Panel D shows data on overall costs. Over the 30 days following
the index visit, episodes starting with a remote visit have a higher total spending on average
than episodes starting with an in-person visit (688 NIS compared to 657 NIS).
  8
      Patel et al. (2021) document similar patterns in the United States.


                                                      9
3     Empirical Strategy
Naturally, the choice of remote versus in-person setting for a primary care visit is likely
endogenous. Therefore, our empirical strategy does not rely on directly comparing remote to
in-person visits, but instead takes advantage of variation in patients' access to telemedicine.
    Specifically, the strategy consists of three steps. First, for each primary care physician in
the sample, we estimate her propensity to adopt telemedicine during the lockdown period.
Second, we split the patient population into those whose primary care physicians had a high
propensity to adopt telemedicine and to those whose primary care physicians had a low
adoption propensity and compare the two patient populations in the post-lockdown period.
Finally, to account for potentially unobserved differences between the patient populations
of high-telemedicine and low-telemedicine physicians, we apply a difference-in-differences
strategy using data on the pre-lockdown period.
    This section discusses the underlying measurements, estimation procedures, and identi-
fication assumptions.

3.1    Measuring Physician Adoption of Remote Care
We first estimate, using data on all visits conducted by physicians in our sample during the
lockdown period, each physician's propensity for conducting remote visits:

                            Remoteijtl = j + t + l + Xit + ijtl ,                             (1)

where i, j , t, and l are indices for the index visit of patient i with physician j at time (week)
t and location (subdistrict) l. Remoteijtl is an indicator for a remote visit; Xit denotes
visit controls, including patient age, gender, number of chronic conditions, ACG score, and
diagnosis category; and t and l are week and subdistrict fixed effects. The estimated
physician fixed effects, j , serve as our measure of the tendency of each physician to shift to
remote care during the lockdown period.
    Figure 3 shows the distribution of raw and residualized physician use of telemedicine
during the lockdown period. Panel A of Figure 3 shows the distribution of the raw share of
visits that each physician in our sample conducted remotely. It reveals marked heterogeneity
among physicians in their tendency to use telemedicine: while about 20% of physicians had
zero or very few telemedicine visits, about a sixth shifted the majority of their practice
to be remote during the lockdown period. Panel B of Figure 3 shows the distribution of
estimated physician fixed effects (j from equation (1)). Accounting for time, location,
and visit characteristics, the tendency of physicians in our sample to adopt telemedicine


                                               10
exhibits a fairly symmetric distribution around the median, -0.01, which we use below to
classify physicians as high or low adopters. We henceforth refer to this estimated j as the
physician's telemedicine adoption.
    Table 2 presents summary statistics on the characteristics of high and low adopters
and their case mix during the post-lockdown period. Compared with low adopters, high
telemedicine adopters are far more likely to be female, somewhat younger, and more likely
to specialize in family medicine (rather than in pediatric medicine). Telemedicine adoption,
measured during the lockdown period, is also predictive of physicians' propensity to use
telemedicine in the post-lockdown period. Relative to low adopters, who handle only 6%
of their post-lockdown cases remotely, high adopters handle 32% of their post-period visits
remotely. Panel B shows data on the distribution of characteristics of (index) primary
care visits of the patients affiliated with each group of physicians in the post-lockdown
period. Patients of high telemedicine adopters tend to be older and sicker (they have higher
ACG scores and more chronic conditions). They are also more likely to come from high
socioeconomic status and are more likely to be female. These differences highlights the need
to account for differences in characteristics and case mix between high and low adopters and
their patients.
    Physician telemedicine adoption predicts future utilization of telemedicine by their pa-
tients. Patients whose main primary care physician had above-median adoption during
the lockdown period conducted 30% of their primary care visits remotely during the post-
lockdown period, compared to 8% for patients of below-median adopters.

3.2    Estimating The Impact of Increased Telemedicine Access
The key challenge for identification is that the in-person versus remote setting for a primary
care visit is naturally endogenous. To address this challenge, our empirical strategy does
not rely on the actual visit setting but instead focuses on patients' access to telemedicine,
measured based on the telemedicine adoption of their primary care physician. That is, we
classify physicians as high telemedicine adopters based on whether their estimated j from
equation (1) is greater or less than the median:
                                      
                                      1 if  > median 
                                           j        k k
                              Highj =
                                      0 otherwise.

    This measure is then used as a proxy for access to telemedicine for all their affiliated pa-
tients in the post-lockdown period. Namely, let j (i) denote the main primary care physician
of patient i. We say that patient i had high access to telemedicine if and only if Highj (i) = 1.

                                               11
We then consider how telemedicine access affects the outcomes of patients across all their
visits during the post-lockdown period, regardless of either the actual visit setting (remote
or in-person) or the identity of the physician conducting the visit.
    Physician adoption of telemedicine, which we use as a proxy for patient access, may be
endogenous too. For example, as we have described, it is correlated with other physician
characteristics, such as physician age and gender, and different patient composition. This
motivates our use of a difference-in-differences approach, which addresses this endogeneity
concern by comparing post-lockdown outcomes for patients of high and low adopters against
the patterns observed in the pre-lockdown period, when telemedicine was rarely practiced.
    That is, to estimate the impact of access to telemedicine on care outcomes, we use the
following difference-in-differences specification:

                 Outcomeit = Highj (i) · Postt + µj (i) + t + l(i) + Xit + it ,              (2)

where j (i) is the main primary care physician of patient i, and l(i) is patient i's location
(subdistrict); Highj (i) indicates the patient's telemedicine access, which is interacted with
P ostt , a dummy for the post-lockdown period; µj (i) , t , and l(i) are physician, week, and
subdistrict fixed effects; Xit are visit controls. The parameter of interest is  , which captures
the impact of access to telemedicine. It is estimated as the difference in differences in the
change between the pre- and post-lockdown periods between patients with high and low
access to telemedicine.
    We use this same specification across our different study samples and different outcomes
within each sample. In all analyses, we use only data from the pre- and post-lockdown
periods and exclude the lockdown period, both because during this period telemedicine
adoption was ramping up and because this period involved mobility restrictions and was
overshadowed by the COVID-19 emergency, presumably affecting both the provision and
demand for health care in unique ways. This also guarantees that there is a clear separation
and no mechanical link between our measure of physician propensity to adopt telemedicine
(which is based on lockdown behavior) and the main analysis (which is based on behavior
pre- and post-lockdown).


3.3    Potential Concerns
The key identification assumption is that, if not for the impact of telemedicine, high and
low telemedicine adopters would have had otherwise similar trends in their medical practice,
and their patients would have had otherwise similar trends in morbidity during the post-
lockdown period. Supportive evidence for this assumption comes from examining pre-trends


                                               12
in physician practice, using a version of the model in equation (2) with flexible lags and
leads.
    Figure 4 shows flexible estimates of time trends for the three most common visit outcomes
(estimates for all other visit outcomes and for 7-day physician follow-ups are shown in Ap-
pendix Figure A2 and Appendix Figure A3). Despite marked (common) temporal variation
in the weekly means of different outcomes in the pre period, the correlation between pre-
lockdown outcomes of the high and low access groups is greater than 0.90 for all outcomes.
Namely, high and low adopters of telemedicine seem to respond similarly to external factors,
such as seasonal diseases. Consequently, they have pre-trends in care decisions and patient
outcomes that are nearly parallel: Throughout 2019 and early 2020, the demeaned difference
in outcomes rarely varies by more than a few percentage points over the pre-period mean
and is extremely flat.
    Residual concerns about the research design are related to the validity of the parallel-
trends identification assumption in the post-lockdown period, where it is (as with any poten-
tial outcomes framework) not directly testable. It would be violated if patients of high and
low telemedicine adopters had disparate outcomes in the post-lockdown period for reasons
other than their access to telemedicine. One plausible concern in our specific context is that
patients of low adopting physicians had greater difficulty in accessing their physician during
the lockdown period and thus may have been more likely to defer care and consequently
had differentially more pent-up demand post lockdown. We explore this concern by showing
separate results for medical conditions that are less likely to be deferrable.
    A different, more standard concern is one of reverse causality. Namely, that physicians
may have adopted telemedicine in response to idiosyncratic shocks to their patients' health.
This concern seems less relevant in our case given that, as we describe above, we measure
physician adoption during the lockdown period while we estimate the impact of adoption on
episodes that started after the lockdown period ended.
    Finally, one may worry that telemedicine adoption may drive patient choice of providers--
and therefore providers' case mix--in the post-lockdown period. However, as described in
Appendix A, we construct patient-physician relationships based on the pre-lockdown period
(when telemedicine was hardly used) and hold it fixed throughout the analysis. We also
report below (in Section 5.1) reassuring results from auxiliary analyses, in which we use
"placebo" post-periods (from before telemedicine adoption).




                                             13
4       Results

4.1     Utilization and Total Cost of Care
Table 3 presents the results of estimating equation (2) for two outcomes: care utilization
(namely, the probability of any use) and total cost of all services.9 We find that access to
telemedicine is associated with a small (0.3%) increase in the probability of any healthcare
utilization. Despite this modest increase in utilization, access to telemedicine is associated
with 3% lower total cost of care per member.
    As shown in Table 3, the results are qualitatively similar when we restrict attention
to primary care episodes only, which are the focus of the rest of this section. Greater
access to telemedicine is associated with a 3.6% increase in the share of members who have a
primary care episode, but the per-member cost of such episodes (averaged across all members,
including those with no episodes) decreases by 5.7%. These findings are consistent with high-
access cases being treated with lower average intensity (we further explore--and confirm--
this hypothesis in the next section), suggesting that the marginal increase in utilization is
coming from less severe cases.

4.2     Visit and Episode Outcomes
Index Visit Outcomes. Panel A of Figure 5 presents the results of estimating equa-
tion (2) for different outcomes associated with the index visits (that is, visits that start
new care episodes). Such visits are of particular interest because they typically involve the
diagnosis of the case and determine the course of treatment. Compared to the pre-lockdown
period, in which 57% of index visits included a prescription, 25% included a lab test referral,
and 8.5% included a referral to another physician (typically a specialist), index visits of pa-
tients with high access to telemedicine involve 5% fewer prescriptions (a 2.9 perentage point
reduction) and fewer referrals to outpatient providers (4.6% fewer physician referrals, 9.5%
fewer imaging referrals, and 4.5% fewer referrals to other non-physician outpatient providers).
Relative to the pre-lockdown level, high-access patients also have 3.5% fewer referrals to the
emergency department (although this last estimate is not statistically significant). There is
no impact on referrals to lab tests.
    These changes in visit outcomes brought by telemedicine access are modest in size. Es-
timates are much smaller in magnitude than the standard deviation of the outcome across
    9
    As discussed in Section 2.2, this analysis is using the sample of all Clalit members, including those with
zero utilization. Each member is associated with two observations: one for the post-lockdown period (in
2020) and one for the corresponding period in 2019.



                                                     14
physicians (in the pre-lockdown period), which is a measure of the general variability of
visit outcomes. The decrease in prescriptions constitutes less than a third of the standard
deviation in prescription rates across physicians. The effects on referrals are less than a
sixth of a standard deviation in referral rates across physicians. These estimates suggest
that providing care remotely does not significantly alter physician decision making during
the index visit.

Physician Follow-Ups. Panel B of Figure 5 presents estimates of the impact of increased
telemedicine access on the number of follow-up encounters with physician providers (of all
medical specialties) within 7 days of the index visit. Access to remote care is associated with
a 8.2% increase in the total number of follow-up encounters (relative to the 0.31 average
number of such follow-ups in the pre-lockdown period). While in the pre-lockdown period
only about half of these follow-ups are with the same physicians that conducted the index
visit, more than 80% of the increase in follow-ups is concentrated in encounters with the
index-visit provider.
    These results may be related to the reduction in prescriptions and referrals associated
with increased access to telemedicine, which we documented above. It is consistent with
the hypothesis that remote cases take somewhat longer to resolve. But the process does
not appear to increase care fragmentation. In fact, telemedicine may facilitate care man-
agement because it shifts follow-ups to remote visits, making them more convenient: access
to telemedicine is associated with a 13.5% increase in remote follow-up visits and a 5.3%
decrease in in-person follow-up visits (relative to the 0.31 average total number of follow-ups
in the pre-lockdown period).

Cost and Utilization. Notwithstanding the increase in follow-ups, and consistent with
the previous findings of an overall reduction in the cost of care, the overall intensity of
care episodes is lower for patients with high access to telemedicine. Figure 6 shows the
estimated impacts of telemedicine access on cost and utilization over the 30 days following
the index visit. High telemedicine access is associated with a 5.1% decrease in total cost
per episode (a decline of 29 NIS per episode, relative to the pre-lockdown level of 565 NIS).
This impact on episode cost is quite modest: it amounts to less than a tenth of the standard
deviation of total episode cost across (index) physicians. Cost is either lower or unchanged
across nearly all spending categories, except for primary care visits, the cost of which slightly
increases. Panel B shows that this small reduction in total episode cost reflects a reduction
in utilization, which is to be expected given that service prices are common to all patients
and fairly stable. In this regard, the negative effect of telemedicine access on episode cost


                                               15
is conservative: in our study, remote visits are priced at the same rate as in-person visits,
despite the potential savings on facilities and equipment associated with remote medicine.

4.3     Diagnostic Accuracy
Even though shifting care remotely is not associated with substantial changes in the intensity
of care, it may still entail some decrease in diagnostic accuracy due to the absence of direct
contact with the patient. But assessing diagnostic quality using our main sample of all
primary care episodes is challenging given the wide array of patient conditions covered,
which may require different diagnostic procedures that resolve over different timelines. To
gain insight, we focus on specific medical conditions and conduct a more granular analysis
of the diagnostic process of three medical conditions: urinary tract infection (UTI), acute
myocardial infarction (AMI, also known as "heart attack"), and bone fractures.
    To account for the endogeneity of the diagnosis itself--particularly, for the possibility
that physicians may be less accurate in remote settings--we sample each target condition
together with all related conditions that share similar symptoms with it (and are therefore
part the corresponding differential diagnosis). Appendix Table A1, Appendix Table A2, and
Appendix Table A3 show the respective lists of target and differential diagnoses that were
included in each subsample. Appendix B provides additional details on the construction of
these samples.
    We selected these specific conditions for three main reasons. First, they are fairly common
and are observed in both remote and in-person visits. Second, in contrast to, for example,
Streptococcal throat infection or respiratory infections, these three conditions share few
symptoms with COVID-19 infections, reducing concerns that uncertainty about the diagnosis
of the then-new disease would confound our analysis. Third, if any of these conditions is left
undiagnosed during the index visit, aggravating symptoms would likely send patients to seek
additional care. Therefore, comparing the rates of diagnosis of the target condition during
the index visits with diagnosis rates over the subsequent 30-day period provides a measure
for false negative diagnoses.10
    The focus on specific conditions also allows us to control for risk factors and to consider
outcomes that are specific to each target condition. For example, in the analysis of UTI,
we control for patient history of UTI (a risk factor) and consider as outcomes referrals to
urine tests (the most common diagnostic test) and antibiotics specific to UTI (the main
treatment). Appendix Table A4 shows detailed summary statistics that specify all risk
factors, diagnostics, and outcomes we use for each of the subsamples, which are further
  10
    A similar idea is used in Abaluck et al. (2016), Mullainathan and Obermeyer (2019), and Chan et al.
(2019).


                                                  16
discussed in Appendix B. A caveat in restricting the analysis to specific conditions is that
sample sizes are, naturally, much smaller (N = 14, 877 for UTI-related cases, N = 10, 105
for AMI-related cases, and N = 8, 550 for fracture-related cases).
    Table 4 shows estimates of the impact of access to telemedicine on the diagnosis and
treatment of each of the three conditions. Columns 1­4 show results for UTIs. In the
pre-lockdown period, 40.3% of cases with UTI-related symptoms were diagnosed as a UTI
during the (predominantly in-person) index visit, while 43.4% of these cases were diagnosed
within 30 days of the index visit. That is, some diagnoses occurred after the index visit.
However, we cannot detect any significant impact of remote medicine on either of these rates
(telemedicine access has an estimated impact of 0.8 percentage points and 1.0 percentage
points on index and 30-day diagnoses rates, respectively; both estimates are not statistically
significant). Compared with the baseline practice, access to remote care does not appear to
involve more missed UTI diagnoses.
    Considering physician use of diagnosis codes in visit summaries can also shed light on how
thorough their interaction is with the patient and how certain they are in the findings. We
measure two related statistics: (i) the average number of distinct diagnosis codes recorded
on the visit summary, and (ii) how specific these codes are. In the pre-lockdown period,
physicians recorded an average of 1.6 diagnosis codes for UTI-related visits. About half
of these codes refer to specific medical conditions (e.g., "cystisis", an inflammation of the
bladder) whereas the rest represent less specific symptoms (e.g., "dysuria", discomfort or
burning sensation when urinating, a symptom associated with multiple medical conditions).
As shown in Panel A of Table 4, neither the total number of codes nor the share of less
specific symptoms significantly changed with access to telemedicine.
    Interestingly, despite having no impact on diagnosis rates, telemedicine access is associ-
ated with a 4.1 percentage point increase in the probability of referrals to urine tests during
the index visit (a 10% increase over the baseline of 41%, though this estimate is not pre-
cise), and with a similar increase in the performance of urine tests during the episode. For
UTI-related cases, we find no significant impact on prescription of antibiotics, either during
the index visit or during the subsequent 30 days. Nor do we detect a statistically significant
impact on cost and utilization during the 30 days following the index visit (although our
small study samples may lack power to detect the relevant effect sizes). At least in the short
run, there seem to be no adverse health effects due to the shift to remote care.
    Columns 5­12 of Table 4 show results of similar analyses for the two alternative target
conditions: AMI and bone fractures. We find no significant effects of remote medicine on
the outcomes of diagnoses or treatment, although here too our small study samples may
lack power to detect the relevant effect sizes. We nonetheless report all these results for


                                              17
completeness.


5     Heterogeneity and Robustness

5.1    Specification Checks
Placebo Analysis. To reduce concerns that our estimates capture random variation in
the outcomes over time, we conduct a placebo analysis in which we reproduce our main
results by estimating the model specified in equation (2) using an alternative sample that
parallels our main sample, but with "placebo" pre and post periods, both of which had ended
before widespread telemedicine adoption began. The pre period is between January 11 and
February 7, 2019. The post period is between January 11 and February 7, 2020. Using this
placebo sample, we estimate our main specification to compare visit outcomes of the first
primary care episode for each member and period of high and low telemedicine adopters
between these placebo periods. Because broad adoption of telemedicine did not yet occur by
February 2020, under the identification assumptions we expect to find no difference between
high and low adoption groups. Appendix Figure A4 summarizes these results. As expected,
we find negligible and largely insignificant differences between outcomes associated with high
adopters relative to low adopters.

Alternative Post Period. An important concern is that our analysis does not generalize,
as during the post-lockdown period, COVID-19 still dominated the news in Israel and around
the world. To explore this concern, we reproduce the main findings using an alternative
post-lockdown period starting nearly a year later, from April 5, 2021 to May 30, 2021. This
alternative period followed a massive vaccination campaign in Israel that had led to full
suppression of COVID-19 and complete reopening of the economy. Descriptive statistics
and further details on the context are discussed in Appendix D, and the results from this
alternative specification are reported in Panel A of Table 5 and Appendix Figure A11.
    We find that greater access to telemedicine is associated with a 3.5% increase in the share
of members who have a primary care episode during the alternative post-lockdown period
in 2021, which is nearly identical to the baseline estimate. Index visits of patients with high
access to telemedicine involve 4.4% fewer prescriptions, which is also similar, and are not
associated with an increase in referrals. The estimated impacts of 7-day physician followups
(overall, with the same index physician, and in-person) maintain their sign, though their
magnitude is somewhat smaller. Overall, the stability of our results is reassuring.




                                              18
Alternative Definition of Physician Adoption of Telemedicine. To check the ro-
bustness of our results to our chosen (somewhat arbitrary) definition of telemedicine access,
we reproduced all findings using an alternative measure of telemedicine adoption that con-
siders as high and low access only patients whose physicians' estimated tendency to use
telemedicine (j from equation (1)) was within the top and bottom tercile, discarding physi-
cians from the middle tercile altogether. Key results are reported in Panel A of Table 5 and
full results are reported in Appendix Figure A5 and Appendix Table A5. Results are very
similar to the ones obtained using our original measure of adoption.

Deferrability of the Index Condition. As discussed in Section 3, an important plausible
concern about our empirical strategy is that low-access patients might have been more likely
to defer care during the lockdown period and consequently have greater pent-up demand for
care post-lockdown.11 Such pent-up demand would violate the parallel trends assumption
(for the post period) and bias downward our estimates of the impact of telemedicine access on
cost and utilization. To address this concern, we study heterogeneity in our main estimates
with respect to the deferrability of the index condition.
    To measure the deferrability of different conditions, we calculate the relative drop in
overall utilization associated with each diagnosis code during the lockdown period, relative
to the parallel period a year earlier. We then consider diagnoses with an above-median drop
during lockdown as more deferrable and the rest as less deferrable. Appendix C provides
more details on these definitions. Panel B of Table 5 shows the results of our main analysis,
when estimated separately for index visits with less- and more-deferrable diagnoses.
    Reassuringly, the increase in overall use of primary care due to increased access to
telemedicine is concentrated in visits with diagnoses that are less deferrable, which should
be less likely to be impacted by the concern of pent-up demand. Rather, the results are
more consistent with telemedicine access driving up utilization associated with minor acute
conditions. For both more- and less-deferrable visits, telemedicine access is associated with
fewer prescription and referrals during the index visit and more follow-ups after it, although
the decrease in the average (and total) cost of primary care episodes is concentrated in more-
deferrable conditions. Appendix Figure A6 and Appendix Table A6 show results for all other
outcomes. Overall, the estimated impacts of telemedicine are fairly similar between these
two groups of conditions.
   11
      For example, Song et al. (2021) documents a disruption to preventive care during lockdown; Ziedan et
al. (2020) document a similar reduction in ambulatory and outpatient visits.




                                                   19
5.2     Heterogeneity Across Patients
Our large sample size allows us to further explore the heterogeneity in our key estimates
across other different subsamples. We analyze heterogeneity of our main estimates by re-
peating our main analyses separately for different subsamples by age, gender, and socioeco-
nomic status (SES). For age, we break the sample into three age groups: children (aged 0 to
18), adults (aged 19 to 64), and seniors (aged 65 and older). This split is motivated by the
differences across these age groups in typical medical concerns and utilization patterns. For
SES, we break the sample by terciles of an SES score defined based on the average income
at the patient place of residence (see Appendix A).
    These estimates for the impact of access to telemedicine on visit outcomes of different
subgroups are summarized in the remaining panels of Table 5 and presented in detail in the
appendix.12 Naturally, when we focus on smaller subsamples, estimates are more noisy and
statistical power is more limited. But overall, despite the differences in baseline outcomes
across the different age, gender, and SES subgroups, estimates of the impact of telemedicine
relative to each subgroup's own baseline are similar in magnitude. These results suggest that
the estimated effects of telemedicine (or the lack thereof) are quite blunt and are not driven
by any particular subgroup.


6      Conclusion
We analyze the impact of increased access to telemedicine using data on the universe of
primary care encounters and healthcare services used by members of the largest Israeli HMO.
Our empirical strategy circumvents the potential selection into either a remote or in-person
setting by considering all visits (remote as well as in-person) of patients with high and
low access to telemedicine, which we proxy based on the adoption of telemedicine by their
primary care physician. This analysis makes use of the sharp--and heterogeneous--increase
in telemedicine adoption during the first COVID-19 wave in Israel, which was associated
with a successful mitigation of the virus and followed by a period of (temporary) return to
near-normal life. We compare outcomes of patients with high and low telemedicine access
in this period against the baseline, pre-COVID period.
    Overall, we find that telemedicine slightly increases care utilization that is offset by
a decrease in average episode intensity, resulting in overall slightly lower cost. Access to
  12
     Detailed estimates for the impact of telemedicine access on visit and episode outcomes by subgroup
are shown in Appendix Figure A7 (age), Appendix Figure A8 (gender), and Appendix Figure A9 (SES);
estimates for the impact on total utilization and cost are shown in Appendix Table A5. Descriptive statistics
for each of the subsamples are summarized in Appendix Table A7.



                                                     20
telemedicine has only modest impacts on outcomes of primary care visits, subsequent follow-
ups, and overall utilization and cost over the 30 days following each visit. Telemedicine
is associated with a modest decrease in referrals and a modest increase in follow-ups--
possibly reflecting a prolonged diagnostic process due to lack of physicals. Analyzing specific
conditions, we find no evidence for an increase in missed diagnoses or adverse outcomes.
Given that we did not quantify multiple potential benefits of telemedicine, which include
increased convenience and improved access, we consider our findings as suggesting that a
combination of remote and in-person care has the potential to improve patient wellbeing.
    We should emphasize some limitations to our results. First, they reflect the sorting
of patient and providers into remote and in-person modes. While it appears beneficial
overall, such sorting might easily change as the environment and incentives for either side
change, and therefore more work would be needed to establish the impact of different factors
on the success of remote provision of care. Second, our horizon is relatively short, and
more work would be required to assess the longer-term consequences of shifting healthcare
to remote settings on, for example, the continued interaction and nature of relationships
between patients and providers. More research is clearly required to understand the many
aspects of this unprecedented and universal shift of healthcare delivery, with avenues for
further research including the role of supporting diagnostic technology, such as home tests
or remote sensors, the design of optimal reimbursement policies, and the optimal ways to
combine telemedicine and in-person care.

References
Abaluck, Jason, Leila Agha, Chris Kabrhel, Ali Raja, and Arjun Venkatesh,
 "The determinants of productivity in medical testing: Intensity and allocation of care,"
 American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3730­3764.

Alexander, G Caleb, Matthew Tajanlangit, James Heyward, Omar Mansour,
 Dima M Qato, and Randall S Stafford, "Use and content of primary care office-based
 vs telemedicine care visits during the COVID-19 pandemic in the US," JAMA Network
 Open, 2020, 3 (10), e2021476­e2021476.

Ashwood, J Scott, Ateev Mehrotra, David Cowling, and Lori Uscher-Pines,
 "Direct-to-consumer telehealth may increase access to care but does not decrease spend-
 ing," Health Affairs, 2017, 36 (3), 485­491.

Chan, David C, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu, "Selection with variation in
 diagnostic skill: Evidence from radiologists," NBER Working Paper No. 26467, 2019.

Cutler, David M, Sayeh Nikpay, and Robert S Huckman, "The Business of Medicine
 in the Era of COVID-19," JAMA, 2020, 323 (20), 2003­2004.


                                              21
Dorsey, E Ray and Eric J Topol, "State of telehealth," New England Journal of Medicine,
 2016, 375 (2), 154­161.
   and    , "Telemedicine 2020 and the next decade," The Lancet, 2020, 395 (10227), 859.
Hollander, Judd E and Brendan G Carr, "Virtually perfect? Telemedicine for COVID-
 19," New England Journal of Medicine, 2020, 382 (18), 1679­1681.
Li, Kathleen Yinran, Ziwei Zhu, Sophia Ng, and Chad Ellimoottil, "Direct-To-
  Consumer Telemedicine Visits For Acute Respiratory Infections Linked To More Down-
  stream Visits: Study examines the association between telemedicine and downstream
  health care utilization," Health Affairs, 2021, 40 (4), 596­602.
Mehrotra, A, M Chernew, D Linetsky, H Hatch, and D Cutler, "The Impact of
 the COVID-19 Pandemic on Outpatient Care: Visits Return to Prepandemic Levels, but
 Not for All Providers and Patients," 2020. To the Point (blog), Commonwealth Fund,
 Published online October 15, 2020. https://doi.org/10.26099/41xy-9m57.
  , , , , and , "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on outpatient visits: A
  rebound emerges," 2020. To the Point (blog), Commonwealth Fund, Published online May
  19, 2020. https://doi.org/10.26099/ds9e-jm36.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Ziad Obermeyer, "A machine learning approach to low-
 value health care: Wasted tests, missed heart attacks and mis-predictions," NBER Work-
 ing Paper No. 26168, 2019.
Patel, Sadiq Y, Ateev Mehrotra, Haiden A Huskamp, Lori Uscher-Pines, Is-
 hani Ganguli, and Michael L Barnett, "Trends in Outpatient Care Delivery and
 Telemedicine During the COVID-19 Pandemic in the US," JAMA Internal Medicine, Pub-
 lished online November 16, 2020. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.5928, 2020.
  , , , , , and Michael Lawrence Barnett, "Variation In Telemedicine Use And
  Outpatient Care During The COVID-19 Pandemic In The United States: Study examines
  variation in total US outpatient visits and telemedicine use across patient demographics,
  specialties, and conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic," Health Affairs, 2021, 40 (2),
  349­358.
Player, Marty, Edward O'Bryan, Emily Sederstrom, Jasmine Pinckney, and
  Vanessa Diaz, "Electronic visits for common acute conditions: Evaluation of a recently
  established program," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (12), 2024­2030.
Ray, Kristin N, Zhuo Shi, Courtney A Gidengil, Sabrina J Poon, Lori Uscher-
 Pines, and Ateev Mehrotra, "Antibiotic prescribing during pediatric direct-to-
 consumer telemedicine visits," Pediatrics, 2019, 143 (5).
Shah, Sachin J, Lee H Schwamm, Adam B Cohen, Marcy R Simoni, Juan
  Estrada, Marcelo Matiello, Atheendar Venkataramani, and Sandhya K Rao,
  "Virtual visits partially replaced in-person visits in an ACO-based medical specialty prac-
  tice," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (12), 2045­2051.

                                             22
Shi, Zhuo, Ateev Mehrotra, Courtney A Gidengil, Sabrina J Poon, Lori Uscher-
  Pines, and Kristin N Ray, "Quality of care for acute respiratory infections during
  direct-to-consumer telemedicine visits for adults," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (12), 2014­
  2023.

Shigekawa, Erin, Margaret Fix, Garen Corbett, Dylan H Roby, and Janet Coff-
  man, "The current state of telehealth evidence: a rapid review," Health Affairs, 2018, 37
  (12), 1975­1982.

Song, Hummy, Alon Bergman, Angela T Chen, Dan Ellis, Guy David, Ari B
  Friedman, Amelia M Bond, Julie M Bailey, Ronald Brooks, and Aaron Smith-
  McLallen, "Disruptions in preventive care: Mammograms during the COVID-19 pan-
  demic," Health services research, 2021, 56 (1), 95­101.

Tuckson, Reed V, Margo Edmunds, and Michael L Hodgkins, "Telehealth," New
 England Journal of Medicine, 2017, 377 (16), 1585­1592.

Ziedan, Engy, Kosali I Simon, and Coady Wing, "Effects of state COVID-19 closure
  policy on non-COVID-19 health care utilization," NBER Working Paper No. 27621, 2020.




                                            23
                Figure 1: Share of Primary Care Visits Provided Remotely

     50
                    Pre                                                   Post
                                                 Lockdown
                 Lockdown                                               Lockdown
     40



     30



     20



     10



      0
       Jan            Feb           Mar              Apr         May            Jun            Jul

Figure shows a 7-day moving average of the daily percent of primary care visits provided remotely.
Labels refer to the study periods. See Section 2.2 for detailed definitions.




                                                24
                                     Figure 2: The First COVID-19 Outbreak in Israel in 2020

                                    (A) New COVID-19 Cases
                              1000
       Total Number

                               750
                               500
                               250
                                 0
                                  Jan        Feb      Mar              Apr     May     Jun      Jul


                                    (B) Positive COVID-19 Tests
                                12
                                 9
       Percent




                                 6
                                 3
                                 0
                                  Jan          Feb       Mar           Apr     May     Jun      Jul
       Change from Baseline




                                     (C) Movement Trends (Groceries and Pharmacies)
                                25
                                 0
                               -25
                               -50
                                  Jan          Feb         Mar         Apr     May     Jun      Jul


                                     (D) Visits Per Physician
                                30
       Daily Average




                                20
                                10
                                 0
                                  Jan          Feb         Mar         Apr     May     Jun      Jul

Figure shows different statistics around the time of the first COVID-19 wave in Israel in 2020. Gray-
shaded areas refer to the lockdown period (March 1 to May 10) and the areas between the two vertical
dashed lines refer to this study's post period (May 11 to June 7). For details, see Section 2.2. Panels A
and B use data sourced from Israel's Ministry of Health and show the 7-day moving average of the daily
number of new confirmed COVID-19 cases and the percent of positive tests (the hump in the percent
of positive tests in May is due to low testing rates during the two-day Jewish holiday of Pentecost).
Panel C uses data from Google's Global Mobility Report and shows average mobility related to groceries
and pharmacies. Panel D uses data from Clalit Health Services and shows the 7-day moving average
of the daily number of visits (both remote and in person) performed by primary care physicians in our
study sample. All data series were smoothed using 7-day moving average. Partial series start when
data are first available.



                                                                  25
                                                Figure 3: Physician Utilization of Telemedicine
                                                        (A) Raw Telemedicine Share of Visits

                                          400

                  Number of Physicians
                                          300



                                          200



                                          100



                                            0
                                                 0.00          0.25         0.50        0.75      1.00
                                                                Physician Remote Use

                                                  (B) Residualized Telemedicine Share of Visits


                                          400
                   Number of Physicians




                                          300



                                          200



                                          100



                                            0
                                                             -0.4           0.0           0.4
                                                                 Physician Remote Use

Figure shows the distribution of physician propensity to use telemedicine. Panel A shows a histogram
of the share of visits that each primary care physician in our sample conducted remotely (via phone or
video) during the lockdown period spanning March 1, 2020, through May 9, 2020. During this period,
sampled physicians had at least 50 visits each. (The leftmost bin in this panel contains only physicians
with exactly zero telemedicine visits; other bins cover left-open right-closed intervals of width 0.05.)
Panel B shows the distribution of physician fixed effects estimated using equation (1) for the same set
of visits as in Panel A, but controlling for case characteristics, location, and time. The vertical dashed
line shows the median of this distribution (-0.01), which we use to classify physicians as high or low
adopters.




                                                                          26
 Figure 4: Flexibly Estimated Time Trends in Common Visit Outcomes, by Physician
Telemedicine Use During the Lockdown Period

                                     A. Mean Weekly Levels
                                           Prescription                     Lab Referral                 Physician Referral


                               0.6                                   High
                                                              0.3
          Fraction of Visits




                                                                                                0.10

                               0.4                            0.2    Low


                                                                                                0.05
                               0.2                            0.1



                               0.0                            0.0                               0.00
                                 Jan Apr Jul    Oct Jan Apr      Jan Apr Jul      Oct Jan Apr      Jan Apr Jul   Oct Jan Apr
                                2019                2020        2019                  2020        2019               2020


                                     B. Flexible DD Estimates
                                           Prescription                     Lab Referral                 Physician Referral
                                20                              20                               20


                                10                              10                               10
          % of Baseline




                                 0                               0                                 0


                               -10                            -10                               -10


                               -20                            -20                               -20
                                  Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr         Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr           Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr
                                 2019             2020           2019             2020             2019             2020


 Figure shows, using the sample of all visits starting new primary care episodes, flexibly estimated time
 trends for the three most common visit outcomes. Panel A shows raw (unadjusted) weekly means for
 visits of patients affiliated with high telemedicine adopters (High) and low telemedicine adopters (Low).
 Panel B shows flexible difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of high access to telemedicine
 from a version of equation (2) with the same fixed effects and controls but with fully flexible week
 dummies (and the same week dummies interacted with a dummy for High). The figure shows the
 estimates of week dummies interacted with dummy for High relative to the (omitted) last week of the
 pre-lockdown period. The 95% confidence interval is shown in dark gray. For comparability, estimates
 and their confidence intervals are expressed as a share (percent) of each mean outcome in the pre-
 lockdown period. The shaded light gray rectangles mark the lockdown period, which we only use for
 the measurement of telemedicine adoption but otherwise exclude from the analyses. Outcomes are not
 mutually exclusive. See Section 2.2 for detailed variable definitions.




                                                                             27
 Figure 5: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Index Visit In-Visit Actions
and 7-Day Follow-Ups
                  (A) In-Visit Actions                              (B) 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
                                   -5.0%
            Prescription             q
                (0.573)                                                                                    8.2%
                                                                    All Follow-Ups
                                             0.0%                                                              q
           Lab Referral                       q
                                                                             (0.308)
                (0.254)
                                   -4.6%
      Physician Referral             q
                (0.085)                                                                                   6.8%
                             -9.5%                             With Index Physician                        q
       Imaging Referral        q
                (0.082)
                                   -4.5%
         Other Referral              q
                (0.060)                                                                         -5.3%
                                   -3.5%                                 In-Person                q

            ED Referral                  q
                (0.009)
                       -20 -10         0     10     20                                 -20    -10      0      10    20
                       Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit outcomes. Each row
 shows the difference-in-differences estimate for the impact of increased access to telemedicine ( from
 equation (2)) for a different outcome. For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as a
 percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome during the pre-lockdown period (shown in
 parenthesis). In Panel B, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the mean of all follow-ups
 (0.308). Appendix Table A8 (Panels A and B) shows the unscaled estimates. The sample includes all
 new primary care episodes that took place in the pre-lockdown period of January 2019­February 2020
 and the post-lockdown period of May­June 2020. Outcomes shown are for the first visit of each episode.
 Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive. Section 2.2
 discusses in more detail the sample and variable definitions.




                                                          28
Figure 6: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Cost and Utilization 30-Days
After an Index Primary Care Visit
                            (A) Cost                                           (B) Utilization
                                       -5.1%                                                   -1.2%
            All Services                 q
                                                                     Any Service                    q
                   (565)                                                 (0.855)
                                      -6.0%                                                   -3.2%
                  Drugs                 q
                                                                           Drugs                q
                  (118)                                                   (0.673)
                                                  2.0%                                                  3.8%
          Primary Care                                q
                                                                    Primary Care                            q
                   (86)                                                  (0.422)
                                        -3.3%                                              -4.2%
      Labs and Imaging                       q
                                                                Labs and Imaging               q
                  (58)                                                    (0.342)
                                                 0.2%                                          -1.4%
              Specialist                          q
                                                                       Specialist                   q
                   (30)                                                  (0.248)
                                       -5.2%                                                  -1.7%
              Outpatient                q
                                                                       Outpatient                   q
                   (44)                                                  (0.080)
                                        -2.3%                                                 -2.2%
                     ED                      q
                                                                              ED                   q
                    (24)                                                  (0.031)
                                       -5.3%                                                        1.0%
        Inpatient Urgent                q
                                                                 Inpatient Urgent                       q
                   (112)                                                  (0.009)
                             -14.9%                                                     -8.1%
       Inpatient Elective      q
                                                                Inpatient Elective        q
                     (70)                                                 (0.006)
                                -10.1%                                                        -3.1%
                   Other           q
                                                                            Other               q
                    (24)                                                  (0.268)
                        -20 -10         0     10     20                          -20 -10         0     10     20
                        Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                         Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on cost and utilization.. Each
 row shows the difference-in-differences estimate for the impact of increased access to telemedicine (
 from equation (2)) for a different outcome. For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented
 as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome during the pre-lockdown period (shown
 in parenthesis). Panel A shows estimates for the average cost of services, by type of service. Costs
 are inclusive of the index visit; remote and in-person visits were reimbursed at the same rate during
 the study period. Panel B shows estimates for the probability of use of each service. Primary care
 utilization refers to additional visits (excluding the index visit). Appendix Table A8 (Panels C and
 D) shows the unscaled estimates. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown mean. Estimates and
 confidence intervals with values above 20% or below -20% are winsorized. Section 2.2 discusses in
 more detail the sample and variable definitions.




                                                           29
       Table 1: Patient, Visit, and Episode Characteristics, by Index Visit Setting

                                                        In-Person     Remote
                                                            (1)         (2)

                      A. Patient Characteristics
                       Female                                 0.541     0.582
                       High SES                               0.262     0.417
                       Age                                     36.8      40.2
                       ACG                                    1.032     1.159
                       Number of Chronic Conditions           2.564     2.949
                      B. In-Visit Actions
                        Prescription                          0.531     0.382
                        Lab Referral                          0.309     0.324
                        Physician Referral                    0.098     0.079
                        Imaging Referral                      0.093     0.062
                        Other Referral                        0.066     0.060
                        ED Referral                           0.008     0.005
                      C. Number of 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
                        All Follow-Ups                  0.333           0.378
                        With Index Physician            0.165           0.204
                        Not With Index Physician        0.167           0.174
                        Remote                          0.041           0.134
                        In-Person                       0.292           0.245
                      D. 30-Day Cost (NIS)
                       All Services                            657        688
                       Drugs                                   129        155
                       Inpatient Urgent                        130        138
                       Primary Care                             89         92
                       Inpatient Elective                       93         76
                       Labs and Imaging                         73         78
                       Outpatient                               55         56
                       Specialist                               35         38
                       ED                                       23         21
                       Other                                    31         33
                      Number of Visits                     453,966    101,671

Table compares mean outcomes between telemedicine visits and in-person visits that start new
care episodes. The sample includes the post-lockdown period; its construction is discussed in Sec-
tion 2.2. Costs are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS). Outcomes in Panel B are indicators for each
outcome occurring during the index visit. In Panel C, Number of 7-Day Phyisician Follow-Ups is the
number of physician visits made by the patient in the 7 days following the index visit, with both
primary care physicians and specialists. In Panel D, 30-Day Cost include the cost of all events that
started within 30 days of an index primary care visit.




                                                 30
Table 2: Physician and Case Characteristics, by Physician Telemedicine Adoption Status

                                                           High     Low
                                                            (1)      (2)

                          A. Physician Characteristics
                           Age                               51.6     54.5
                           Female                           0.589    0.312
                           Pediatrician                     0.201    0.306
                           Weekly Visits                     89.9     96.7
                           Share Remote                     0.319    0.061
                           Number of Physicians             2,146    2,147
                          B. Case Characteristics (Affiliated Patients)
                            Age                              40.7    34.7
                            Female                          0.559   0.539
                            High SES                        0.373   0.223
                            ACG                              1.16    0.97
                            Number of Chronic Conditions     2.97    2.36
                            Share Remote                    0.303   0.083
                            Number of Visits              251,434 304,203

Table shows characteristics of physicians and their patient case mix during the post-lockdown period,
by physician propensity to adopt telemedicine. To measure physician adoption, we estimate, using the
model equation (1), each physician's tendency to shift care remotely during the COVID-19 lockdown
period (of March-April 2020), adjusting for case mix, time, and place. Based on this analysis, we
consider physicians whose adoption was above median as high adopters (High) and the rest as low
adopters (Low). The two column show data separately for these groups of physicians. Panel A shows
the characteristics of physicians in each group. Panel B shows summary statistics for the visits of
patients affiliated with physicians in each group in the post-lockdown period. The sample used in
Panel B includes non-follow-up primary care visits with any primary care physician, not just the main
primary care provider. See Section 2.2 for detailed definitions.




                                                 31
       Table 3: The Impact of Telemedicine on Utilization and Total Cost of Care

                                                    Pre-
                                                               Estimated              Percentage
                                                  Lockdown                  (S.E.)
                                                                Impact                 Impact
                                                    Mean
                                                      (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)


         A. Utilization
          Any Healthcare Utilization                0.511      0.0014      (0.0007)     0.3%
           Any Primary Care Episodes                0.178      0.0063      (0.0005)     3.5%

         B. Cost (NIS)
           Total Healthcare Cost                      463          -14          (7)    -3.0%
           Total Cost of Primary Care Episodes        105           -6          (2)    -5.7%


The table shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on utilization and total cost
of care. Each row shows an estimate of  from equation (2) for a different outcome. Utilization is
defined as the share (between 0 and 1) with any service use. Cost is defined as the total cost of services
used. The sample includes all members, including those with zero utilization. Primary care episodes
refer to care episodes starting with a primary care visit that had no other encounters in the 14 days
preceding it. Total cost of new primary care episodes includes all services utilized within 30 days of
the index visit data.




                                                    32
                                 Table 4: The Impact of Telemedicine on the Diagnosis of Specific Medical Conditions

                                                            UTI                                       AMI                                 Fractures
                                       Mean      Estimate    (S.E.)      Percent   Mean    Estimate    (S.E.)      Percent   Mean    Estimate   (S.E.)     Percent
                                         (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)          (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)        (12)

     A. Diagnosis Rates
      Target Condition dx (Index)        0.403      0.008     (0.020)     2.0%     0.023     0.002      (0.011)    9.4%      0.385     0.009     (0.038)      2.4%
      Target Condition dx (Episode)      0.434      0.010     (0.020)     2.3%     0.026     0.007      (0.012)   25.4%      0.393     0.003     (0.039)      0.8%
      Number of Recorded dx Codes        1.600     -0.084     (0.044)    -5.3%     2.100     0.023      (0.085)    1.1%      1.880     0.013     (0.116)      0.7%
      Share of Recorded Codes that
                                         0.444     0.008      (0.020)    1.9%      0.509     0.049      (0.030)    9.6%      0.560     -0.033    (0.036)     -5.9%
      Represent Symptoms
     B. Diagnostic Tests
       Test Referral (Index)             0.408     0.041      (0.023)   10.1%      0.012     0.008      (0.008)   70.4%      0.132     0.035     (0.029)    26.4%
       Test Performance (Episode)        0.380     0.035      (0.023)    9.3%      0.010     0.004      (0.008)   40.5%      0.144     0.035     (0.031)    24.4%
       Test Positivity (Episode)         0.075     0.002      (0.012)    2.1%
     C. Prescriptions
       Prescriptions (Index)             0.206     0.008      (0.018)    4.0%      0.053     0.006      (0.016)   11.7%      0.082     -0.055    (0.025)    -67.7%
       Prescriptions (Episode)           0.253     0.010      (0.019)    4.1%      0.118     0.017      (0.022)   14.1%      0.120     -0.047    (0.029)    -39.2%




33
     D. 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
      All                                0.559     0.015      (0.073)     2.6%     0.667     -0.086     (0.115)   -12.9%     0.610     0.038     (0.143)     6.3%
      With Index Physician               0.258     0.051      (0.050)    19.9%     0.292      0.036     (0.079)    12.4%     0.240     0.143     (0.104)    59.5%
      Remote                             0.045     0.060      (0.023)   132.5%     0.035      0.102     (0.036)   292.7%     0.023     0.019     (0.040)    83.0%
     E. Utilization and Cost
       Specialist Referral (Index)       0.113     -0.008     (0.014)    -7.0%     0.121      0.001     (0.024)     0.6%     0.118      0.003    (0.028)      2.9%
       ED Referral (Index)               0.014     -0.001     (0.006)    -5.3%     0.051      0.014     (0.015)    27.7%     0.040     -0.005    (0.017)    -13.6%
       ED Use (24 Hours)                 0.007      0.001     (0.004)    10.4%     0.012      0.003     (0.008)    21.5%     0.009     -0.018    (0.009)   -196.9%
       ED Use (Episode)                  0.053      0.004     (0.011)     8.3%     0.072     -0.034     (0.018)   -47.5%     0.051     -0.019    (0.020)    -37.8%
       UCC Use (Episode)                 0.020     -0.008     (0.007)   -38.4%     0.041     -0.012     (0.013)   -30.4%     0.046     -0.014    (0.018)    -30.5%
       Total Cost (Episode)                737        176       (172)    23.8%      1060       -456       (325)   -43.0%       647       -153      (349)    -23.6%

      Table shows estimates of the impact of access to telemedicine ( from the model specified in equation (2)), for subsamples of specific conditions
      and their differential diagnoses. The samples are described in detail in Section 4.3. Different rows show results for different outcomes. For each
      condition, the first column shows the pre-lockdown mean outcome, the second and third columns show the (unscaled) estimate and standard
      error of the impact of access to telemedicine on the outcome, and the fourth column shows the estimate as a percent of the pre-lockdown
      mean. Diagnostic tests refer to urine test for UTI, electrocardiogram (ECG) for AMI, and X-ray for fractures. Prescriptions refer to specific
      antibiotics for UTI, aspirin and nitroglycerin for AMI, and opioids for fractures. Section 4.3 and Appendix B describe the sample construction,
      variable definitions, and empirical specifications in detail.
                                   Table 5: Robustness and Heterogeneity

                                                                                             Overall Cost and Use of
                                                Index Visit and Episode Outcomes
                                                                                             Primary Care Episodes
                                                            7-Day
                                    Prescrip-     Lab                 30-Day    30-Day       Overall      Overall
                                                            Follow-
                                      tion       Referral              Cost    Utilization    Cost         Use
                                                             Ups
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)

    A. Specification
      Main Specification             -5.0%        0.0%       8.2%     -5.1%        -1.2%      -5.7%      3.5%
                                     (0.2%)       (0.5%)    (0.6%)    (2.3%)       (0.2%)     (1.9%)     (0.3%)
      Alternative Access Measure     -6.1%        -0.1%     11.0%     -3.2%        -1.2%      -5.6%      5.5%
                                     (0.5%)       (1.1%)    (0.9%)    (2.7%)       (0.2%)     (2.8%)     (0.3%)
      Alternative Post Period        -4.4%        -1.1%      2.4%                                        3.5%
                                     (0.4%)       (0.7%)    (0.7%)                                       (0.2%)
    B. Deferrability
      More Deferrable                -4.3%        -1.1%      9.4%     -6.1%        -1.0%      -9.7%      -0.2%
                                     (0.4%)       (0.9%)    (0.9%)    (2.7%)       (0.2%)     (2.8%)     (0.4%)
      Less Deferrable                -5.7%        4.8%       6.1%     -1.3%        -1.4%      3.1%       9.7%
                                     (0.6%)       (1.5%)    (1.3%)    (4.4%)       (0.3%)     (3.1%)     (0.5%)
    C. Age Group
      Child (0-18)                   -3.2%        -7.1%     10.9%     -9.6%        -1.2%      -3.4%      1.2%
                                     (0.7%)       (1.9%)    (1.7%)    (4.8%)       (0.4%)     (5.2%)     (0.5%)
      Adult (19-64)                  -7.0%        -0.4%      7.1%     -8.9%        -1.8%      -9.3%      0.1%
                                     (0.5%)       (1.0%)    (1.0%)    (3.4%)       (0.2%)     (3.1%)     (0.4%)
      Senior (65+)                   -2.5%        1.7%       6.3%      0.1%        -0.1%      -6.1%      -3.8%
                                     (0.5%)       (1.2%)    (1.4%)    (4.1%)       (0.2%)     (3.6%)     (0.8%)
    D. Gender
      Male                           -4.2%        -0.2%      9.3%     -4.4%        -0.9%      -7.5%      3.4%
                                     (0.5%)       (1.1%)    (1.1%)    (3.8%)       (0.3%)     (3.7%)     (0.4%)
      Female                         -5.7%        0.1%       7.3%     -5.8%        -1.5%      -3.7%      3.6%
                                     (0.4%)       (0.9%)    (0.9%)    (2.8%)       (0.2%)     (2.8%)     (0.4%)
    E. SES
      Low                            -3.0%        0.8%       3.8%     -15.4%       -1.1%      -14.4%     -1.5%
                                     (0.7%)       (1.7%)    (1.5%)    (4.8%)       (0.3%)     (5.2%)     (0.6%)
      Medium                         -3.8%        -2.6%      8.7%      4.6%        -0.8%      6.8%       7.7%
                                     (0.5%)       (1.3%)    (1.2%)    (3.6%)       (0.3%)     (3.4%)     (0.5%)
      High                           -4.1%        -3.3%      8.3%     -3.5%        -0.6%      -0.9%      7.2%
                                     (0.6%)       (1.2%)    (1.3%)    (4.2%)       (0.3%)     (3.6%)     (0.5%)


Table shows estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) of the impact of access to telemedicine
( from the model specified in equation (2)) for different key outcome (in columns) and for different
specifications (in rows). Estimates are scaled as a percent of each outcome's pre-lockdown mean.
Each panel summarizes the results for a different analysis, as follows: Panel A compares the study's
main specification with a specification using an alternative measure of telemedicine access, based on
comparing top and bottom terciles of utilizers, rather than above- and below-median utilizers. The
sample consists of all primary care episodes of patients affiliated with primary care doctors in the
top and bottom terciles of telemedicine utilization during the lockdown period. Panel B repeats our
main analyses using the main study sample, separately for outcomes of visits that are more or less
deferrable. Panels C­E repeat our main analyses separately for different subsamples defined by age
group, gender, and tercile of socioeconomic rank (defined based on the average income at the patient
place of residence). Section 5 and Appendix A discuss in detail the specifications and definitions.
Appendix Table A7 shows descriptive statistics for each of the subsamples.




                                                            34
Appendix A                  Sample and Variable Definitions

A.1      Construction of the Main Sample
Our main sample consists of all primary care episodes of patients that were affiliated with
active primary care physicians. This section describes the sample construction, which in-
volved three main steps: (i) sample all active primary care physicians, (ii) sample all their
affiliated patients, (iii) sample all episodes for these patients.

Active Physicians. We sampled all Clalit physicians who serve as primary care providers;
specifically, family physicians and pediatricians. We then sampled all remote and in-person
primary care visits conducted by these primary care providers between January 7, 2019,
and June 7, 2020 (these physicians are salaried by--and work exclusively for--Clalit, so
we observe their universe of patient encounters). We included in the sample only active
physicians, defined as physicians who performed at least 50 visits in the lockdown period (an
average physician sees more patients within a single week). This resulted in the exclusion of
a small number of inactive physicians that account for less than 1% of all visits. This sample
has 4,293 active primary care physicians.

Physician-Patient Affiliation. We sampled all patients affiliated with any one of these
4,293 active physicians. We consider a physician to be the main primary care provider
of a patient if the patient saw this physician the most times in the pre-lockdown period
(January 2019 through February 2020).13 If the patient visited multiple doctors the same
(maximal) number of times, we pick as the primary provider the physician whom the patient
saw last during that period. We exclude from the sample 10% of Clalit members who had
no physician visits throughout the pre-lockdown period, for whom affiliation thus defined
is indeterminate. These excluded members account for only 2% of total baseline cost of
services. This sample has 4.313 million patients.

Primary Care Episodes. For each sampled patient, we extract all primary care visits
that occurred during the study period of January 7, 2019, to June 7, 2020, either in person
or remotely. Our focus is new primary care episodes, so we exclude visits that had any
encounters with physicians, hospitals, or labs during the 14-day period preceding the visit
because such visits likely reflect follow-up encounters that are part of an ongoing episode.
The remaining non-follow-up visits account for 44% of all visits. We refer to each one of
  13
    Clalit maintains a large network of salaried primary care physicians. Patients in Clalit are free to visit
any in-network physician, but they are encouraged to stick to one physician for managing their care.

                                                    A.1
these (new) visits as the index visit of a care episode and attribute all services utilized in
the 30-day period subsequent to this index visit to this episode. For consistency across our
different analyses, we include in our main sample only episodes that had non-missing control
variables (the list of which is described below), resulting in the exclusion of a small number
of observations that missed one or more covariates. The resulting sample consists of 12.198
million primary care episodes involving 3.655 million unique patients. This excludes 0.4
million members who, during the study period, did not have any new primary care episodes.

Study Periods. We split our main sample into three periods based on the timeline of
the COVID-19 outbreak and mitigation measures in Israel. All periods begin on a Monday
and their lengths are multiples of 7 days. First is the pre-lockdown period, between January
7, 2019 (the first Monday of 2019) and March 1, 2020, when the first COVID-19 case was
identified in Israel. Second is the lockdown period between March 2, 2020, and May 10,
2020, when lockdown restrictions easing went into effect. Third is the post-lockdown period
of relative normalcy between May 11, 2020, and June 7, 2020, when the number of daily
cases started climbing again. We assign each primary care episode to a study period based
on the date of the index visit.

A.2     Construction of Additional Samples
Sample Used for Studying Total Healthcare Cost and Utilization. To estimate
the impact of telemedicine access on overall care utilization, we sample, for the 4.313 million
patients for whom we have determined a physician affiliation, all healthcare utilization that
occurred between May 11 and June 7, 2019, (an alternative, shorter pre-lockdown period) and
between May 11 and June 7, 2020 (the same post period as in the main sample). We restricted
this sample to cover a shorter baseline (pre-COVID) period because extracting detailed cost
data for the entire member population over extended periods of time is computationally
demanding. We selected the timing of this shorter sampled pre period to match exactly the
time of year of the post period to minimize the scope for differences between the periods
that are related to seasonality in healthcare use.
    For these same patients and periods, we also measure cost and use directly associated
with primary care episodes, as defined in Appendix Section A.3. The resulting sample covers
1.178 million episodes involving 1.067 million unique patients.

A.3     Variable Definitions
Utilization and Total Cost. We observe payments for all services detailed in encounter-
level claims data (including inpatient admissions, emergency department visits, treatments

                                             A.2
and diagnostic services provided in outpatient clinics, both within and outside hospitals,
and prescription drug purchases). The spending measures represent actual payments made
by Clalit, not list charges. Even hospitals owned by Clalit are separate financial entities,
as they serve both Clalit and non-Clalit patients, so hospital charges in all case reflect
actual payments, not transfer prices. The only exception is office-based consults provided
by physicians in Clalit-owned clinics, for which there is no actual charge, as physicians are
salaried. For these visits, we (and Clalit) impute per-visit charges based on customary
charges by non-employed providers. During the period of our study, these charges were the
same for in-person and remote visits. Our total cost measure is computed by adding up, for
each patient, the costs of all healthcare activities during the relevant period. Our overall
utilization outcome is an indicator variable that assumes the value of 1 if the patient utilized
any service during the period, and 0 otherwise.
    Our measures of utilization and total cost over an entire period include all events that
started during the period, regardless of when they ended. Our measures of overall utilization
and cost associated with primary care episodes during a period include all events that started
within 30 days of an index primary care visit (including the index visit itself), regardless
of when they ended. We never double-count costs: in a small number of cases when there
are overlapping primary care episodes within the same period (namely, two episodes with
index visits that are more than 14 days but less than 30 days apart), our measure for the
overall cost of primary care episodes during the period is the sum of the cost of all events
that started between the index date of the first episode through 30 days after the index date
of the last episode.
    We also observe cost and use separately for each of the following service categories:
prescription drug purchases, primary care physician visits (remote and in-person), specialist
visits, lab tests and imaging procedures, visits to outpatient facilities, emergency department
visits (ED), inpatient admissions through the ED (inpatient urgent), inpatient admissions
not through the ED (inpatient elective), and all other covered services.

Visit and Follow-Up Outcomes. For each primary care visit, we observe the diagno-
sis codes entered by the physician in the visit summary, drugs that were prescribed by the
physician to the patient on the date of the visit (regardless of whether the prescription was
ever filled by the patient), and referrals made on the date of the visit to each of the fol-
lowing providers: physician specialists and surgeons; imaging, including X-ray, ultrasound,
computed tomography (CT) scans, electrocardiogram (ECG), mammogram, electromyog-
raphy (EMG), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); and emergency department (ED).
We group all other non-physician referral targets, the most common of which are physical


                                              A.3
therapists and dietitians, under the label Other.
   To determine the 7-day follow-up outcomes, we calculate the number of physician visits
made by the patient in the 7 days following the index visit, with both primary care physicians
and specialists. We separately count follow-up visits by whether they were with the same
physician who handled the index visit or with other physicians and separately, by the follow-
up visit setting: remote or in-person.

Control Variables. We use the following variables as visit-level controls: patient gender,
patient age, Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Group concurrent weight, number of diagnosed
chronic conditions, the visit location (subdistrict), and category of diagnosis. This section
describes these variables in detail.
    The patient age is the patient five-year age group at the time of the visit. ACG concurrent
weight is a risk score that is calculated on a quarterly basis using a commercial classifier.14
We exclude 2% of episodes with missing ACG scores. Chronic condition counts are based
on indicators for 123 chronic condition obtained from a database maintained by Clalit. The
ten most common conditions are hyperlipidemia, smoking (as documented in EMR; smoking
is a health behavior that is predictive of future healthcare utilization and spending and is
thus treated for this purpose like a chronic condition), hypertension, obesity, arthropathy,
diabetes, malignancy, ischemic heart disease, arrhythmia, and asthma. The visit location is
observed at the level of subdistrict, an administrative division of Israel into 70 geographic
areas, each with a similar number of covered members. To determine the diagnostic category
of a visit, we group the first diagnosis code of each visit into one of the following 16 diagnosis
categories: mental health; endocrine, immune, or lymphatic; urinary/renal; reproductive;
brain/neurological; dental; administrative; heart and blood Vessels; digestive; respiratory;
muscles and skeleton; ear, nose, and throat; eyes; skin; injury/wound/trauma; and other.
The association between diagnoses and categories was determined by uploading the English
description of the 500 most common diagnoses, which together cover over 90% of cases in
our sample, to multiple Amazon Mechanical Turk workers who were asked to classify them,
based on Google searches, to the most appropriate category. In case of a disagreement,
the most commonly selected category was assigned. We exclude the 8.5% of cases with no
associated diagnostic category.
    In descriptive analysis and when analyzing heterogeneity, we also use the patient socioe-
conomic status (SES). SES is calculated based on the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
  14
     ACG is a risk-scoring system that is used by both commercial insurers and non-commercial healthcare
organizations worldwide (as well as by Clalit) to describe or predict a population's past or future healthcare
utilization and costs. For more information, see the Johns Hopkins ACG System Version 11.0 Technical
Reference Guide (2014).


                                                    A.4
socioeconomic classification of the patient municipality of residence. These classifications
are based on national income tax records.


Appendix B                 Sample and Variables Used for Analyzing
                           Diagnostic Accuracy
Sample Construction
To evaluate the impact of telemedicine on diagnostic accuracy, we analyze the diagnostic pro-
cess of three medical conditions: urinary tract infection (UTI), acute myocardial infarction
(AMI), and bone fracture. UTI is an infection in any part of the urinary system--kidneys,
ureters, bladder, or urethra. Most infections involve the lower urinary tract--the bladder
and the urethra. An infection limited to the bladder can be (just) painful and annoying,
whereas a UTI that spreads to the kidneys can result in serious complications. A urine test is
commonly used to diagnose of a UTI. Antibiotics are usually the first line treatment.15 AMI,
a potentially fatal condition, occurs when the flow of blood to the heart is blocked. Although
some heart attacks strike suddenly, many people have warning signs and symptoms hours,
days, or weeks in advance, and some people who have heart attacks have only mild symp-
toms. The first diagnostic test for AMI is an electrocardiogram (ECG).16 Fractures--broken
bones--are caused mainly by trauma or osteoporosis (a disorder that involves a reduction in
bone density) and are commonly diagnosed using X-ray imaging. Common treatments for
fractures include immobilization and pain management.
    To account for the endogeneity of the diagnosis itself--particularly, for the possibility that
physicians may be less accurate in remote settings--we sample each target condition with
all related conditions that share similar symptoms and are therefore part of its differential
diagnosis. In consultation with a Clalit physician with clinical experience in family medicine,
we created a list of all differential diagnoses associated with each target condition. Appendix
Table A1, Appendix Table A2, and Appendix Table A3 show the respective lists of target
and differential diagnoses that were used in the construction of each sample. For brevity, we
refer to these samples by the name of the target condition (e.g., the UTI sample refers to
the sample of UTI and all related differential diagnoses).
    For each set of target condition and related differential diagnoses, we sampled all non-
follow-up primary care visits that occurred between May 11, 2019, and June 7, 2019, and
  15
     Source:     Urinary Tract Infection - Diagnosis and Treatment - Mayo Clinic.
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/urinary-tract-infection/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20353453.
Accessed March 2021.
  16
     Source: Heart Attack - Diagnosis and Treatment - Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/heart-attack/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20373112.


                                                  A.5
between May 11, 2020, and June 7, 2020 for which the physician recorded at least one
of the diagnoses in the visit summary. If members had multiple such visits in the pre
or post period, we only consider the member's first visit in each period. We include only
physicians who conducted at least one in-person and one remote visit during the post period.
Our resulting samples have 14,800 observations for UTI, 10,100 observations for AMI, and
8,500 observations for fractures. Appendix Table A4 shows detailed summary statistics that
specify all risk factors, diagnostics, and outcomes we use for each of the subsamples, which
are discussed in detail in the next section.

Condition-Specific Variables
When focusing on specific medical conditions, in addition to (and sometimes in place of)
the controls we used in our main analyses, we include controls for risk factors and outcomes
that are specific to each target condition. This section describes these variables in detail.

Risk Factors. Controls specific to the UTI sample include an indicator for any UTI di-
agnosis in the last year and the quantile (1­5) of number of months in the last year with
a UTI diagnosis. Controls specific to the AMI sample include an indicator for whether the
member is identified as currently smoking, an indicator for whether he has received any
prescription for antihypertensive drugs since 2010, the last recorded systolic blood pressure
reading, the last recorded total cholesterol value, the last recorded high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol value, and an indicator for a past diagnosis of diabetes. Controls specific
to the fractures sample include an indicator for a current diagnosis of osteoporosis and four
indicators for the part of the body to which the diagnosis relates (head, leg, arm, and torso).

Coding of Diagnostic Codes. In order to assess the diagnostic certainty of physicians,
we consider two outcomes related to the visits' associated diagnosis codes: the number of
diagnosis codes recorded for each index visit and the share of these diagnoses that represent
symptoms, as opposed to true diagnoses or administrative or medical procedures. To calcu-
late these, we took the full set of diagnoses from the visits in each sample and categorized the
top 150­200 diagnoses, depending on the sample, as symptoms, diagnoses, administrative
procedures, or medical procedures. Our categorization covers 75­85% of diagnosis codes for
visits in each of the samples. The total number of diagnosis codes is the number of catego-
rized diagnosis codes in the visit. The symptom share is calculated by dividing the number
of codes categorized as symptoms divided by the total number of categorized codes.




                                              A.6
Diagnosis Rates. We observe the rates of diagnosis of each of the target conditions,
based on ICD9 codes recorded in visit summaries. Target diagnosis codes for each sample
are listed in Panel A of Appendix Table A1, Appendix Table A2, and Appendix Table A3.
We separately measure diagnosis rates during index visits and during the entire episode.
We consider a diagnosis to have occurred during a visit if at least one target ICD9 was
recorded. We consider a diagnosis to have occurred during an episode if it occurred during
any encounter with a physician in a community setting (remotely or in-person) that took
place over the 30-day period starting on the date of the index visit, including the index visit
itself.

Diagnostic Procedures. We observe the following condition-specific diagnostic proce-
dures: for UTI, a urine culture (urine test); for AMI, an electrocardiogram (ECG); for
fractures, an X-ray. We measure both referral rates to these tests during the index visit and
performance rates of the procedures over the 30-day period starting with the index visit.
For urine cultures performed during the episode, we also observe the test outcome, namely,
whether the culture was positive for significant microbial growth, defined as 100,000 colony
forming unites (CFUs) per milliliter, the accepted threshold.

Prescription Drugs. We observe the following prescriptions that are related to the target
conditions: antibiotics that are used for the treatment of UTI, aspirin and nitroglycerin for
AMI, and any opioid prescription for fractures. We measure index-visit prescriptions as
prescriptions made by the index physician on the index date. We measure episode-related
prescriptions as prescriptions made by any physician during the 30 days starting with the
index date. We date prescriptions to the time they are prescribed by a physician, regardless
of whether and when they are filled by the patient.

Other Outcomes. For all samples, we consider the same 7-day follow-up outcomes we
used in our main analysis. We also considered the following outcomes: an indicator for a
referral to the emergency department in the index visit, an indicator for visiting the ED
on the index date or the day after, an indicator for visiting the emergency department on
the index date or 30 days following the index date, an indicator for visiting an urgent care
center (UCC) on the index date or the 30 days following the index date, and the total cost
of healthcare services utilized during the 30-day period starting with the index visit.




                                             A.7
Appendix C              Sample and Variables Used for Analyzing
                        Deferrability
To analyze the deferrability of index visits, we sample all non-follow-up primary care visits
that occurred between March 2 and May 10, 2020 (the same lockdown period as in the main
sample) and March 2 and May 10, 2019 (the same period in the previous year). We then
sample all ICD9 diagnosis codes that appeared on these visits' summaries, excluding the 1%
least-common diagnosis codes (each of which appeared fewer than 100 times in either 2019
or 2020). For each diagnosis code, we calculate a deferrability score, defined as the ratio of
the number of visits with this code in the 2020 and 2019 sample periods. The median ICD9
code saw a drop of 31% in utilization during the lockdown period, relative to the same period
in 2019. We classify all ICD9 codes with a greater drop as more deferrable, and those with
a smaller drop as less deferrable. Finally, we classify each visit as more or less deferrable
based on the least deferrable code on that visit. Namely, if a visit has two diagnosis codes,
one more deferrable and one less deferrable, we classify it as less deferrable.


Appendix D              Analysis Using an Alternative Post-Lockdown
                        Period
To check the robustness of our results to the timing of the post period--right after the first
COVID-19 lockdown in Israel--we reproduce key results using the exact same empirical
specification but with a later post-lockdown period. As an alternative post-lockdown period
we use the most recent data currently available from 2021, focusing on the period after
a massive vaccination campaign in Israel has lead to full suppression of COVID-19 and
complete reopening of the economy. We find that most results remain very similar. This
section describes this exercise in detail.

Sample and Variable Definitions
To construct the alternative sample we used the same inclusion and exclusion definitions
as our main sample, but with the much later post-lockdown period spanning the period
between April 5, 2021 and May 30, 2021. In the interim period between our original and
alternative post-lockdown periods, Israel experienced two substantial waves of COVID-19
that were much more severe than the first wave, followed by a massive and successful vacci-
nation campaign that essentially ended the COVID-19 epidemic in Israel. At the start of our
alternative post-lockdown period, more than 90% of the adult population was fully vacci-
nated, and the sharp reduction COVID-19 cases that ensued from the vaccination campaign

                                             A.8
were nearly fully realized. Consequently, Israel has relaxed all restrictions except for indoor
masking (which was also eliminated shortly after, in June 2021). The unemployment rate,
which peaked at 21% in the thick of the pandemic, dropped to below 8%.
    Appendix Figure A10 shows descriptive statistics on telemedicine use, COVID-19 cases,
and primary care volume during the original study periods and leading up to our alternative
post-lockdown period. Two facts emerge that motivate the focus on the alternative post-
lockdown period. First, while there is a clear correlation between COVID-19 cases and
telemedicine use throughout 2020­2021, telemedicine use also exhibits a ratchet effect: it
remains at a much higher level than the pre-period baseline during both periods we observe
during which Israel had nearly zero COVID-19 cases, including after the apparent end of
the epidemic. In both our original and alternative post-lockdown periods, about 20% of
new primary care episodes start remotely. Second, unlike the first post-lockdown period,
which was preceded by a very sharp decrease in utilization of primary care (and healthcare
services more generally) that was associated with the first COVID-19 lockdown, the rest of
2020 and the first half of 2021, saw a normalization of the pandemic and much higher rates
of primary care utilization. Therefore, we argue that our alternative post period provides a
useful context to study post-COVID-19 telemedicine use, and is less susceptible to concerns
regarding the impact of COVID-19 and the disruption to healthcare utilization brought by
it.
    Using the alternative post-lockdown period, we consider the impact of increased access
to telemedicine on the following outcomes: overall demand for primary care (defined as the
probability of a non-followup primary care visit during the post period), in-visit actions
during the index primary care visit, and physician follow-ups in the 7-day period following
an index primary care visit. Because hospital claims become available for research with a
six months lag, our spending measure for May 2021 are still incomplete, and thus we cannot
calculate episode and overall spending.
    We use the same empirical specification as in our main analysis. In particular, we use the
same classification of physician propensity to use telemedicine, based on the (first) lockdown
period. Patients affiliated with high adopters were much more likely to have remote visits
in the alternative post-lockdown period: 30% of their primary care visits were conducted re-
motely, compared to only 12% for patients of low adopters. We also use the same pre period,
with the appropriate adjustments. For the study of the impact of access to telemedicine on
visit outcomes and 7-day physician followups, we use the exact same pre period as in our
main analysis. For the study of the impact of access to telemedicine on primary care uti-
lization, we compare primary care episodes that started during an alternative post-lockdown
period against episodes that started during the same date range in 2019.


                                             A.9
Results
Table 5 and Appendix Figure A11 show estimates for the impact on different outcomes of
increased access to telemedicine in the alternative post-lockdown period. Greater access
to telemedicine is associated with a 3.5% increase in the share of members who have a
primary care episode during the alternative post-lockdown period--nearly identical to the
3.5% increase estimated using the original post period. Similar to the original post period,
increase access to telemedicine is associated with 4.4% lower rate of prescriptions during
the index visit, and not associated with any significant increase in referrals. The estimated
impacts on 7-day physician visits (+2.4%), visits with the same physician (+2.6%), and in-
person visits (-4.9%) maintain the same sign as in our main analysis, though the magnitude
of theses effects is smaller. Overall, the stability of our results over different periods suggests
that they are not driven by idiosyncratic shocks specific to either period.




                                              A.10
      Appendix Figure A1: Remote Medicine Relative Use, by Diagnostic Category

                                                               Visit Setting (Odds Ratio)
                                          In-Person                                         Remote 
                                            0.5                         1                      1.5
                            Mental Health
        Endocrine, Immune, or Lymphatic
                            Urinary/Renal
                             Reproductive
                        Brain/Neurological
                                   Dental
                                    Other
                            Administrative
                Heart and Blood Vessles
                                 Digestive
                               Respiratory
                   Muscles and Skeleton
                     Ear, Nose, or Throat
                                     Eyes
                                      Skin
                    Injury/Wound/Trauma

Figure shows the relative propensity of patients to use telemedicine (remote) versus in-person care for
different categories of medical conditions. That is, using the post-lockdown sample of index (non-follow-
up) primary care visits, the figure shows for each diagnostic category, the odds ratio (OR) of remote to
                        x/(1-x)
in-person visits (i.e., y /(1-y) , where x is the share of all remote visits that fall within the category and y
is the share of all in-person visits that fall within the category). An OR of one (marked by the dashed
line) means that a category accounts for the same share of remote and in-person visits; categories
with an OR greater than one are overrepresented in remote visits; categories with an OR smaller than
one are underrepresented in remote visits. The sample construction is described in Section 2.2. The
classification of visits is described in Appendix A.




                                                     A.11
 Appendix Figure A2: Flexibly Estimated Time Trends in Additional Visit Outcomes, by
Physician Telemedicine Use During the Lockdown Period

                                A. Mean Weekly Levels
                                      ED Referral                        Imaging Referral                Other Referral

                                                                  High
                                                                                            0.075
   Fraction of Visits




                                                         0.10
                        0.010
                                                                  Low
                                                                                            0.050

                        0.005                            0.05
                                                                                            0.025



                        0.000                            0.00                               0.000
                               Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr          Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr            Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr
                              2019             2020            2019             2020              2019             2020



                              B. Flexible DD Estimates
                                     ED Referral                         Imaging Referral                Other Referral
                         20                               20                                 20
   % of Baseline




                         10                               10                                 10


                          0                                0                                  0


                        -10                              -10                                -10


                        -20                              -20                                -20
                           Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr          Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr            Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr
                          2019             2020            2019             2020              2019             2020


 Figure shows, using the sample of all visits starting new primary care episodes, flexibly estimated
 time trends for all visit outcomes that were not included in Figure 4. Panel A shows raw (unadjusted)
 weekly means for visits of patients affiliated with high telemedicine adopters (High) and low telemedicine
 adopters (Low). Panel B shows flexible difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of high access
 to telemedicine from a version of equation (2) with the same fixed effects and controls but with fully
 flexible week dummies (and the same week dummies interacted with a dummy for High). The figure
 shows the estimates of week dummies interacted with dummy for High relative to the (omitted) last
 week of the pre-lockdown period. The 95% confidence interval is shown in dark gray. For comparability,
 estimates and their confidence intervals are expressed as a share (percent) of each mean outcome in
 the pre-lockdown period. The shaded light gray rectangles mark the lockdown period, which we only
 use for the measurement of telemedicine adoption but otherwise exclude from the analyses. Outcomes
 are not mutually exclusive. See Section 2.2 for detailed variable definitions.



                                                                         A.12
 Appendix Figure A3: Flexibly Estimated Time Trends in Physician Follow-Ups, by Physi-
cian Telemedicine Use During the Lockdown Period

                              A. Mean Weekly Levels
                                    All Follow-Ups                    With Index Physician                 In-Person
                        0.4                              0.4                                  0.4
   Fraction of Visits




                        0.3                              0.3                                  0.3


                        0.2                              0.2                                  0.2
                                                               High

                                                               Low
                        0.1                              0.1                                  0.1


                        0.0                              0.0                                  0.0
                          Jan Apr    Jul   Oct Jan Apr     Jan Apr        Jul   Oct Jan Apr     Jan Apr   Jul   Oct Jan Apr
                         2019                  2020       2019                      2020       2019                 2020


                              B. Flexible DD Estimates
                                    All Follow-Ups                    With Index Physician                 In-Person
                         20                               20                                   20


                         10                               10                                   10
   % of Baseline




                          0                                0                                    0


                        -10                              -10                                  -10


                        -20                              -20                                  -20
                           Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr          Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr              Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr
                          2019             2020            2019             2020                2019             2020


 Figure shows, using the sample of all visits starting new primary care episodes, flexibly estimated
 time trends for 7-day physician follow-up visits. Panel A shows raw (unadjusted) weekly means for
 visits of patients affiliated with high telemedicine adopters (High) and low telemedicine adopters (Low).
 Panel B shows flexible difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of high access to telemedicine
 from a version of equation (2) with the same fixed effects and controls but with fully flexible week
 dummies (and the same week dummies interacted with a dummy for High). The figure shows the
 estimates of week dummies interacted with dummy for High relative to the (omitted) last week of the
 pre-lockdown period. The 95% confidence interval is shown in dark gray. For comparability, estimates
 and their confidence intervals are expressed as a share (percent) of each mean outcome in the pre-
 lockdown period. The shaded light gray rectangles mark the lockdown period, which we only use for
 the measurement of telemedicine adoption but otherwise exclude from the analyses. Outcomes are not
 mutually exclusive. See Section 2.2 for detailed variable definitions.



                                                                         A.13
                              Appendix Figure A4: Placebo Analyses

                          A. In-Visit Actions                                        B. 7-Day Follow-Ups

           Prescription                 q
                                                                        In-Person                   q
          Lab Referral                  q

    Physician Referral                  q
                                                             With Index Physician                   q
      Imaging Referral                  q

        Other Referral                  q
                                                                   All Follow-Ups                   q
           ED Referral              q

                          -20 -10       0        10   20                             -20 -10        0   10   20


                          C. 30-Day Cost                                           D. 30-Day Utilization
           All Services                 q                          Any Service                  q
                 Drugs                           q                        Drugs                  q
         Primary Care                 q                           Primary Care                  q
    Labs and Imaging                 q                       Labs and Imaging                  q
             Specialist               q                               Specialist                q
            Outpatient                       q                       Outpatient                  q
                    ED              q                                        ED                q
      Inpatient Urgent         q                               Inpatient Urgent            q
     Inpatient Elective                      q                Inpatient Elective                q
                 Other                      q                             Other                 q

                          -20 -10       0        10   20                           -20 -10      0       10   20

Figure shows placebo analyses. For each set of outcomes, we reproduce our main difference-in-
differences estimates using equation (2), replacing the actual study sample with a "placebo" sample
in which the pre period is January­February 2019 and the post period is January­February 2020.
Because this placebo post period ended before widespread adoption of telemedicine began, we expect
null results. Indeed, for nearly all outcomes, we cannot reject the null of no effect of (future) access
to telemedicine on outcomes. Deviations are few and small in magnitude, possibly due to random
variation of the outcomes. For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the
pre-period mean of each outcome.




                                                      A.14
Appendix Figure A5: Robustness: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Index
Visit Outcomes Using Alternative Access Measure

                     A. In-Visit Actions                                                                    B. 7-Day Follow-Ups


     Prescription                              q
                                              q
                                                                                                     All                                                      q
                                                                                             Follow-Ups                                                            q
             Lab                                          q
         Referral                                         q

       Physician                                  q
        Referral                             q                                                                                                            q
                                                                                              With Index
                                                                                              Physician                                                       q
        Imaging                         q
        Referral                   q

           Other                               q
         Referral                             q                                                                                   q
                                                                                              In-Person
                                                                                                                                  q
             ED                                    q
         Referral                             q

                     -20               -10                0                    10    20                     -20            -10                0                   10    20
                              Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                                       Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)


                            Access Measure q Alternative q Main                                                    Access Measure q Alternative q Main

                            C. 30-Day Cost                                                                         D. 30-Day Utilization

           All Services                               q                                           Any Service                                     q
                                                          q                                                                                       q
                Drugs                                 q                                                    Drugs                          q
                                                      q                                                                                   q
         Primary Care                                                 q                          Primary Care                                             q
                                                                       q                                                                                      q
     Labs and Imaging                                     q                                  Labs and Imaging                             q
                                                          q                                                                               q
             Specialist                                       q                                     Specialist                                q
                                                               q                                                                              q
            Outpatient                                q                                             Outpatient                                q
                                                              q                                                                                q
                      ED                                  q                                                  ED                           q
                                                           q                                                                              q
      Inpatient Urgent                                q                                       Inpatient Urgent                                        q
                                                                           q                                                                          q
     Inpatient Elective             q                                                        Inpatient Elective                       q
                             q                                                                                                q
                    Other                    q                                                             Other                          q
                                        q                                                                                                 q

                             -20             -10                  0             10   20                             -20          -10              0                10   20
                                   Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                                       Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)


                              Access Measure q Alternative q Main                                                    Access Measure q Alternative q Main

 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit and episode outcomes,
 using an alternative measure of telemedicine access that is based on defining high and low access based
 on the top and bottom terciles of adopters; for ease of comparison, our main specification that is based
 on a definition of access that is based on above- and below-median adopters is also shown (see legend).
 The sample includes all new primary care episodes. Each row shows estimate of  from equation (2)
 for a different outcome. This coefficient captures the difference in differences in the change between
 the pre- and post-lockdown periods between patients with high and low access to telemedicine. For
 ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the
 outcome during the pre-lockdown period. Panels A and B show outcomes of the first visit of each
 episode. Panels C and D show outcomes for services utilized during the 30-day period following the
 index visit. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive.
 Estimates and confidence intervals with values above 20% or below -20% are winsorized. Section 5.1
 discusses in more detail the sample and variable definitions.



                                                                                      A.15
 Appendix Figure A6: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Visit Outcomes,
Follow-Ups, and 30-Day Cost and Utilization, by Deferrability of Diagnoses

                          A. In-Visit Actions                                                   B. 7-Day Follow-Ups

        Other Referral                         q
                                               q

                                         q                                                                                            q
      Imaging Referral               q                                         All Follow-Ups
                                                                                                                                          q
           ED Referral                   q
                                                   q


     Physician Referral                       q
                                             q
                                                                                                                q
           Prescription                      q                                     In-Person
                                              q                                                                      q

          Lab Referral                                         q
                                                       q

                          -20        -10               0           10   20                      -20          -10             0            10   20
                           Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                         Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                                Deferrability          q More q Less                                  Deferrability          q More q Less


                          C. 30-Day Cost                                                            D. 30-Day Utilization

           All Services                                q                            Any Service                              q
                                             q                                                                               q
                Drugs              q                                                      Drugs                          q
                                                 q                                                                       q
         Primary Care                                      q                       Primary Care                                      q
                                                           q                                                                          q
     Labs and Imaging                                      q                   Labs and Imaging                           q
                                               q                                                                         q
             Specialist                                 q                             Specialist                             q
                                                       q                                                                     q
            Outpatient                                     q                          Outpatient                         q
                                           q                                                                                  q
                   ED                              q                                         ED                          q
                                                       q                                                                         q
      Inpatient Urgent                                         q                Inpatient Urgent                                      q
                                         q                                                                                    q
     Inpatient Elective                                    q                   Inpatient Elective                    q
                           q                                                                                        q
                 Other                 q                                                   Other                         q
                                        q                                                                                q

                          -20        -10               0           10   20                          -20        -10               0        10   20
                           Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                           Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                                Deferrability          q More q Less                                      Deferrability       q More q Less


 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit and episode outcomes,
 separately by the deferrability of the medical diagnosis associated with the index visit (see legend).
 The sample includes all new primary care episodes. Each row shows estimate of  from equation (2)
 for a different outcome. This coefficient captures the difference in differences in the change between
 the pre- and post-lockdown periods between patients with high and low access to telemedicine. For
 ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the
 outcome during the pre-lockdown period. Panels A and B show outcomes of the first visit of each
 episode. Panels C and D show outcomes for services utilized during the 30-day period following the
 index visit. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive.
 Estimates and confidence intervals with values above 20% or below -20% are winsorized. Section 5.1
 discusses in more detail the sample and variable definitions.




                                                                        A.16
 Appendix Figure A7: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Visit Outcomes,
Follow-Ups, and 30-Day Cost and Utilization, by Patient Age

                           A. In-Visit Actions                                                               B. 7-Day Follow-Ups

                                                         q
        Other Referral                               q
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                            q
      Imaging Referral                       q                                              All Follow-Ups                                               q
                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                         q
           ED Referral                       q
                                                             q

                                                      q
     Physician Referral                              q
                                                       q
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                         q                                      In-Person                          q
           Prescription                          q
                                                         q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                     q
          Lab Referral                                           q
                                                 q

                           -20             -10                   0             10   20                         -20         -10                   0           10       20
                                 Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                                    Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)


                           Age Group q Child
                                       (0-18)
                                              q
                                                Adult
                                                (19-64)
                                                        q
                                                          Senior
                                                          (65+)                                                Age Group q Child
                                                                                                                           (0-18)
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                    Adult
                                                                                                                                    (19-64)
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                              Senior
                                                                                                                                              (65+)


                  C. 30-Day Cost                                                                         D. 30-Day Utilization
            All                                          q                                       Any                                         q
                                   qq                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                           q
      Services                                                                                Service
        Drugs                                q           q                                     Drugs                               qq       q
                   q
       Primary                                                q                              Primary                                                 q
                                                             q
                                                             q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                     q
          Care                                                                                  Care
     Labs and                                    q                                          Labs and                                       q
                                       q         q                                                                             q
                                                                                                                               q
      Imaging                                                                                Imaging
                                              q q                                                                                     q
     Specialist                              q                                              Specialist                              q q
     Outpatient                        q q                        q                         Outpatient                         q q
                                                                                                                                                 q

            ED                          q        qq                                                ED                          q       q             q
      Inpatient                                      q                                       Inpatient                                      q
                       q                                                  q                                           q                                               q
        Urgent                                                                                 Urgent
      Inpatient                                                          q                   Inpatient                         q
                   q
                   q                                                                                                 q              q
       Elective                                                                               Elective
         Other                         q         q                                              Other                              qq
                   q                                                                                                           q
                  -20             -10                    0                    10    20                   -20             -10                0                10       20
                            Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                                     Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)


                    Age Group q Child
                                (0-18)
                                       q
                                         Adult
                                         (19-64)
                                                 q
                                                   Senior
                                                   (65+)                                                   Age Group q Child
                                                                                                                       (0-18)
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                Adult
                                                                                                                                (19-64)
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                          Senior
                                                                                                                                          (65+)

 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit and episode outcomes,
 for patients of different ages at the time of the first visit (see legend). The sample includes all new
 primary care episodes. Each row shows estimate of  from equation (2) for a different outcome. This
 coefficient captures the difference in differences in the change between the pre- and post-lockdown peri-
 ods between patients with high and low access to telemedicine. For ease of comparison, all coefficients
 are represented as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome during the pre-lockdown
 period. Panels A and B show outcomes of the first visit of each episode. Panels C and D show outcomes
 for services utilized during the 30-day period following the index visit. Outcomes are sorted by their
 pre-lockdown mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive. Estimates and confidence intervals with
 values above 20% or below -20% are winsorized. Section 5.2 discusses in more detail the sample and
 variable definitions.




                                                                                     A.17
 Appendix Figure A8: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Visit Outcomes,
Follow-Ups, and 30-Day Cost and Utilization, by Patient Gender

                            A. In-Visit Actions                                                          B. 7-Day Follow-Ups

        Other Referral                               q
                                                      q

                                                q                                                                                             q
      Imaging Referral                  q                                             All Follow-Ups
                                                                                                                                                  q
           ED Referral                                      q
                                                    q


     Physician Referral                              q
                                                     q
                                                                                                                          q
           Prescription                             q                                     In-Person
                                                     q                                                                        q

          Lab Referral                                      q
                                                            q

                            -20         -10                     0        10   20                         -20        -10               0           10   20
                             Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                              Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                                  Gender             q Male q Female                                            Gender        q Male q Female


                  C. 30-Day Cost                                                                   D. 30-Day Utilization
            All                             q                                              Any                                q
      Services                               q                                          Service                               q
         Drugs                                   q                                        Drugs                           q
                                  q                                                                                        q
       Primary                                              q                           Primary                                           q
          Care                                              q                              Care                                           q
      Labs and                                  q                                      Labs and                           q
       Imaging                                   q                                      Imaging                           q
     Specialist                                         q                             Specialist                              q
                                                        q                                                                     q
     Outpatient                                                     q                 Outpatient                                  q
                   q                                                                                                          q
            ED                              q                                               ED                        q
                                                            q                                                                         q
      Inpatient                                  q                                     Inpatient                                  q
        Urgent                          q                                                Urgent                                           q
      Inpatient    q                                                                   Inpatient                q
       Elective                                                     q                   Elective                      q
         Other          q                                                                 Other                           q
                                                 q                                                                            q

                  -20             -10                   0               10    20                   -20          -10               0           10       20
                        Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                                 Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                             Gender             q Male q Female                                                Gender     q Male q Female


 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit and episode outcomes,
 for patients of different genders (see legend). The sample includes all new primary care episodes.
 Each row shows estimate of  from equation (2) for a different outcome. This coefficient captures the
 difference in differences in the change between the pre- and post-lockdown periods between patients
 with high and low access to telemedicine. For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as
 a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome during the pre-lockdown period. Panels A
 and B show outcomes of the first visit of each episode. Panels C and D show outcomes for services
 utilized during the 30-day period following the index visit. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown
 mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive. Estimates and confidence intervals with values above 20%
 or below -20% are winsorized. Section 5.2 discusses in more detail the sample and variable definitions.




                                                                               A.18
 Appendix Figure A9: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Visit Outcomes,
Follow-Ups, and 30-Day Cost and Utilization, by Socioeconomic Status

                          A. In-Visit Actions                                                          B. 7-Day Follow-Ups

                                              q
        Other Referral                        q
                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                          q
      Imaging Referral                q                                             All Follow-Ups                                                q
                                                  q
                                                                                                                                          q
                                                           q
           ED Referral                    q
                                                               q

                                              q
     Physician Referral                       q
                                                               q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                  q                                     In-Person                             q
           Prescription                           q
                                                   q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                  q
          Lab Referral                            q
                                                       q

                          -20         -10              0               10   20                         -20         -10                0           10   20
                              Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                           Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                               SES    q Low q Medium q High                                                  SES    q Low q Medium q High


                  C. 30-Day Cost                                                                 D. 30-Day Utilization
            All                           q                                              Any                                   q
                          q                                q                                                                  qq
      Services                                                                        Service
                                        q                                                                                     q
         Drugs                        q q                                               Drugs                                q
                                                                                                                             q
       Primary                                       q                                Primary                                             q
          Care                                    q q                                    Care                                       q     q
      Labs and                                                                       Labs and
                               q                  qq                                                                 q        qq
       Imaging                                                                        Imaging
                                                 q                                                                               q
     Specialist                               q q                                   Specialist                                qq
                                       q                                                                                       q q
     Outpatient                       q q                                           Outpatient                           q
            ED                        q           qq                                      ED                         q   qq
      Inpatient    q                                                                 Inpatient                        q q
                          q                                        q                                                                          q
        Urgent                                                                         Urgent
      Inpatient                               q                                      Inpatient                                            q
                   q                                                        q                                  q q
       Elective                                                                       Elective
                                                                   q                                                         qq q
         Other                qq                                                        Other

                  -20           -10               0                10       20                   -20          -10                 0               10   20
                        Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                               Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)

                          SES      q Low q Medium q High                                                SES    q Low q Medium q High


 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit and episode outcomes,
 for patients of different terciles of a socioeconomic status score defined based on the average income
 at the patient place of residence (see legend). The sample includes all new primary care episodes.
 Each row shows estimate of  from equation (2) for a different outcome. This coefficient captures the
 difference in differences in the change between the pre- and post-lockdown periods between patients
 with high and low access to telemedicine. For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as
 a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome during the pre-lockdown period. Panels A
 and B show outcomes of the first visit of each episode. Panels C and D show outcomes for services
 utilized during the 30-day period following the index visit. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown
 mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive. Estimates and confidence intervals with values above 20%
 or below -20% are winsorized. Section 5.2 discusses in more detail the sample and variable definitions.




                                                                             A.19
 Appendix Figure A10: Share of Visits Provided Remotely, COVID-19 Cases, and Average
Primary Care Utilization 2020­2021

                                (A) Share of Primary Care Visits Provided Remotely
                           60




                                                                                                          Lockdown III
                                                              Post Period




                                                                                                                                      Post Period
                                                                                            Lockdown II




                                                                                                                                      Alternative
                                                                                                                         Adults 80%
                                                 Lockdown I




                                                                                                                         Vaccinated
                                 Pre Period




                                                               Original
                           50
        Remote Share




                           40

                           30

                           20

                           10

                            0
                             Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                        Jul   Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                       Jul
                            2020                                                                      2021


                                (B) Positive COVID-19 Tests
                        10000


                         7500
        Total Number




                         5000


                         2500


                            0
                             Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                        Jul   Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                       Jul
                            2020                                                                      2021


                                (C) Visits Per Physician
                           30
        Daily Average




                           20



                           10



                            0
                             Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                        Jul   Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                       Jul
                            2020                                                                      2021


 Figure shows different statistics for the period leading up to our alternative post-lockdown period.
 Gray-shaded areas refer to lockdown periods and the areas between the two vertical dashed lines refer
 to this study's original and alternative post-lockdown periods (original: May 11, 2020 to June 7, 2020;
 alternative: April 5, 2021 to May 30, 2021). For details, see Section 2.2 and Appendix D. Panel A
 shows the daily percent of primary care visits provided remotely. Panel B shows the daily number of
 new confirmed COVID-19 cases. Panel C shows the daily number of visits (both remote and in person)
 performed by primary care physicians in our study sample. All data series were smoothed using 7-day
 moving average. Partial series start when data are first available. Data source: Clalit Health Services
 (Panels A and C) and Israel's Ministry of Health (Panel B and information about lockdown periods
 and vaccination rates).



                                                                                     A.20
 Appendix Figure A11: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Index Visit
In-Visit Actions and 7-Day Follow-Ups, Alternative Post-Lockdown Period
                  (A) In-Visit Actions                                       (B) 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
                                     -4.4%
            Prescription                q
                (0.573)                                                                                          2.4%
                                                                             All Follow-Ups
                                        -1.1%                                                                        q
           Lab Referral                     q
                                                                                      (0.308)
                (0.254)
                                            1.6%
      Physician Referral                         q
                (0.085)                                                                                          2.6%
                                        -1.1%                           With Index Physician                         q
       Imaging Referral                     q
                (0.082)
                                            1.1%
         Other Referral                         q
                (0.060)                                                                                  -4.9%
                                     -5.0%                                        In-Person                  q
            ED Referral                 q
                (0.009)
                           -20    -10        0       10     20                                  -20   -10        0       10          20
                             Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)                                     Coefficient (% of Baseline Mean)


 Figure shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on visit outcomes using the
 alternative post-lockdown period of April­May 2021. Each row shows the difference-in-differences
 estimate for the impact of increased access to telemedicine ( from equation (2)) for a different outcome.
 For ease of comparison, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean
 of the outcome during the pre-lockdown period (shown in parenthesis). In Panel B, all coefficients are
 represented as a percent of the mean of all follow-ups (0.308). The sample includes all new primary
 care episodes that took place in the pre-lockdown period of January 2019­February 2020 and the
 alternative post-lockdown period of April­May 2021. Outcomes shown are for the first visit of each
 episode. Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive.
 Appendix D discusses the sample details.




                                                                 A.21
Appendix Table A1: Target Conditions and Differential Diagnoses for the UTI Sample

              ICD9 Code        Diagnosis                            Number of Visits
                    (1)        (2)                                           (3)

              A. Target Conditions
               599.0     Urinary Tract Infection                                    5,532
               595.0     Cystitis Acute                                               173
               595       Cystitis                                                     164
               590.1     Pyelonephritis Acute                                          57
              B. Differential Diagnoses
                788.1     Dysuria                                                   3,941
                788.3     Urinary Incontinence                                      1,728
                788.4     Urinary Frequency                                         1,068
                600.0     Prostatic Enlargement                                     1,016
                788.0     Renal Colic                                                 714
                616.1     Vaginitis                                                   574
                600.9     Prostatic Hyperplasia                                       415
                788.2     Urine Retention                                             155
                597       Urethritis                                                   68
                614       Pelvic Inflammatory Disease                                  39
                597.8     Meatitis                                                     17
                616.3     Bartholins Abscess                                           15
              All                                                                  15,727

The table shows the distribution of diagnoses in visits that are included in our sample of UTI and
related conditions. Panel A shows data for diagnoses that we define as the target condition (UTI).
Panel B shows data for diagnoses that we define as related differential diagnoses. See Appendix B for
details of the sample construction and variable definitions. The sum of visits is greater than the sample
size because some visits record multiple diagnoses.




                                                  A.22
Appendix Table A2: Target Conditions and Differential Diagnoses for the AMI Sample

          ICD9 Code       Diagnosis                                     Number of Visits
               (1)        (2)                                                    (3)

          A. Target Conditions
           410       Myocardial Infarction                                               226
           410.4     Myocardial Infarction Inferior NOS                                   14
           410.0     Myocardial Infarction Anterolateral                                  11
          B. Differential Diagnoses
            786.5     Chest Pain                                                        5,439
            530.1     Reflux Esophageal                                                 2,508
            486       Pneumonia                                                         2,448
            053.9     Herpes Zoster                                                       773
            413.9     Dyspnea Effort                                                      689
            485       Bronchopneumonia                                                    458
            511.8     Pleural Effusion NOS                                                 73
            162.3     Malignant Neoplasm Lung                                              72
            415.1     Pulmonary Embolism                                                   51
            483       Pneumonia Mycoplasma                                                 47
            533       Peptic Ulcer Site Unspecified                                        44
            420       Pericarditis                                                         38
            860       Pneumothorax Traumatic                                               32
            053.1     Post Herpetic Neuralgia                                              28
            530.0     Achalasia                                                            26
            480       Pneumonia Viral                                                      21
            483.1     Chlamydia                                                            19
            422.9     Myocarditis Acute Unspecified                                        18
            511.9     Pleural Effusion Unspecified                                         18
            511       Pleurisy                                                             13
            875       Laceration Chest                                                     10
          All                                                                          13,119

The table shows the distribution of diagnoses in visits that are included in our sample of AMI and
related conditions. Panel A shows data for diagnoses that we define as the target condition (AMI).
Panel B shows data for diagnoses that we define as related differential diagnoses. See Appendix B for
details of the sample construction and variable definitions. The sum of visits is greater than the sample
size because some visits record multiple diagnoses.




                                                  A.23
Appendix Table A3: Target Conditions and Differential Diagnoses for the Trauma Sample

         ICD9 Code     Diagnosis                                         Number of Visits
              (1)      (2)                                                      (3)

         A. Target Conditions
          813.0     Fracture Radius                                                    251
          816.0     Fracture Finger                                                    237
          805       Fracture Vertebral Column                                          183
          813.4     Fracture Radius Distal                                             133
          824       Fracture Ankle                                                     131
          825.2     Fracture Metatarsal(s) Closed                                      115
          807.0     Fracture Ribs Closed                                                95
          823.0     Fracture Tibia                                                      83
          812       Fracture Humerus                                                    81
          820       Fracture Hip                                                        74
          807       Fracture Rib                                                        72
          825       Fracture Metatarsal                                                 64
          820.2     Fracture Femur Intertrochanteric Closed                             63
          814.0     Fracture Scaphoid Closed                                            58
          802.0     Fracture Nose                                                       56
          812.0     Fracture Humerus Greater Tuberosity Closed                          54
         B. Differential Diagnoses
           845.0     Ankle Sprain                                                     1,058
           847.0     Whiplash Injury                                                    690
           879.8     Wound Open                                                         620
           859.0     Head Trauma                                                        593
           873.4     Laceration Face                                                    342
           883       Laceration Fingers                                                 335
           892       Laceration Foot                                                    279
           882       Laceration Hand                                                    266
           836.0     Meniscus Tear Medial Current                                       138
           831       Shoulder Dislocation                                               103
           891       Laceration Knee Leg And Ankle                                      103
           873.6     Laceration Mouth                                                    64
           844.0     Sprain Knee                                                         62
           845.1     Sprain Foot                                                         61
           848.1     Temporomandibular Joint Strain                                      60
           847.2     Strain Lumbar                                                       55
         All                                                                          9,415

We suppressed cells with fewer than 50 observations from this table (we did include them in the
analysis). The table shows the distribution of diagnoses in visits that are included in our sample of
bone fractures and related conditions. Panel A shows data for diagnoses that we define as the target
condition (bone fractures). Panel B shows data for diagnoses that we define as related differential
diagnoses. See Appendix B for details of the sample construction and variable definitions. The sum of
visits is greater than the sample size because some visits record multiple diagnoses.




                                                A.24
              Appendix Table A4: Patient Characteristics, Specific Conditions

                                                                  UTI       AMI       Fracture
                                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)

         A. All Conditions
          Age                                                      43.6       53.3         35.2
          Female                                                  0.669      0.506        0.414
          ACG                                                      1.46       1.84
          Number of Chronic Conditions                            0.155      0.201        0.122
         B. UTI
           UTI in Last Year                                       0.204
           Number of UTI Months in Last 5 Years                    2.08
         C. AMI
           Smoker                                                            0.183
           Systolic BP                                                       123.6
           Total Cholesterol                                                 176.6
           HDL Cholesterol                                                    48.4
           History of Anti Hypertensives                                     0.433
           History of Diabetes                                               0.293
         D. Fracture
          History of Osteoporosis                                                         0.066
          Head Injury                                                                     0.077
          Torso Injury                                                                    0.148
          Arm Injury                                                                      0.234
          Leg Injury                                                                      0.183
         Number of Physicians                                     3,309 2,570             2,801
         Number of Visits                                        14,877 10,105            8,550

Table shows summary statistics for all control variables that we use in the analysis of specific conditions.
The different columns show data for the three samples: UTI, AMI, and bone fractures. These samples
include each target condition and related differential diagnoses. Panel A shows risk-factors that are
common to all conditions and used as controls in all regressions. Panels B­D show risk factors (used as
controls) that are specific to each condition. Sample construction and variable definitions are discussed
in Appendix B.




                                                   A.25
        Appendix Table A5: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Utilization, by Age, Gender, and Socioeconomic
       Status

                                                                                                                   Total                Total Cost
                                                     Any Healthcare                 Any Primary
                                                                                                                 Healthcare             of Primary
                                                       Utilization                  Care Episode
                                                                                                                 Cost (NIS)         Care Episodes (NIS)
                                              Est.     (S.E.)     %          Est.     (S.E.)     %       Est. (S.E.)     %         Est.   (S.E.)       %
                                               (1)        (2)    (3)          (4)        (5)    (6)       (7)    (8)    (9)        (10)     (11)     (12)
              A. Specification
               Main Specification           0.0014 (0.0007)     0.3%       0.0063 (0.0005)     3.5%       -14    (7) -3.0%           -6      (2)    -5.7%
               Alternative Access Measure   0.0024 (0.0008)     0.5%       0.0098 (0.0006)     5.5%       -21    (9) -4.4%           -6      (3)    -5.6%
              B. Age Group
                Child (0­18)                -0.0031 (0.0012) -0.8%         0.0023 (0.0009) 1.2%           -10    (8) -6.3%           -2      (3)    -3.4%
                Adult (19­64)               -0.0056 (0.0009) -1.1%         0.0002 (0.0007) 0.1%           -13    (8) -3.1%           -9      (3)    -9.3%
                Senior (65+)                -0.0113 (0.0014) -1.3%        -0.0073 (0.0014) -3.8%            1   (29) 0.1%           -15      (9)    -6.1%
              C. Gender




A.26
                Male                        0.0021   (0.0009)   0.4%       0.0058   (0.0007)   3.4%       -14   (10) -2.9%           -8      (4)    -7.5%
                Female                      0.0007   (0.0009)   0.1%       0.0066   (0.0007)   3.6%       -13    (8) -2.8%           -4      (3)    -3.7%
              D. SES
               Low                          -0.0064 (0.0012) -1.5%        -0.0026 (0.0010) -1.5%          -14   (10) -3.9%          -14      (5)   -14.4%
               Medium                        0.0091 (0.0011) 1.6%          0.0140 (0.0009) 7.7%            -6   (12) -1.1%            8      (4)     6.8%
               High                          0.0105 (0.0012) 1.8%          0.0126 (0.0010) 7.2%            -8   (13) -1.5%           -1      (4)    -0.9%

         The table shows alternative estimates for the impacts of increased access to telemedicine on utilization and total cost of care for specific
         subsamples. Cells show estimates of  from equation (2) for different outcomes, the standard errors (in parentheses), and the estimates scaled
         as a percent of pre-lockdown mean for each outcome. We have four outcomes: any healthcare utilization is any service use; any primary care
         episode refer to care episodes starting with a primary care visit that had no other encounters in the 14 days preceding it. Total healthcare
         cost is the sum of costs of all services during period. Total cost of new primary care episodes includes all services utilized within 30 days of the
         index visit data. The sample includes all members, including those with zero utilization. Each row shows results for a different specification or
         subsample. Baseline repeats our main specification. Robustness reproduces the results with an alternative definition of access to telemedicine,
         discussed in Section 5.1. Panels A­C show results for subsamples defined by gender, age, and SES groups. These are discussed in Section 5.2.
 Appendix Table A6: The Impact of Increased Access to Telemedicine on Total Cost of Care
and Utilization, by Deferrability of Diagnoses in Index Visit

                                         Pre-
                                                   Estimated                Percentage
                                       Lockdown                  (S.E.)
                                                    Impact                   Impact
                                         Mean
                                           (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)

                   A. Any Primary Care Episode
                    More Deferrable  0.111    -0.0003            (0.0004)     -0.3%
                    Less Deferrable  0.068     0.0066            (0.0003)      9.8%
                   B. Total Cost of Primary Care Episodes (NIS)
                     More Deferrable     72        -7        (2)              -9.7%
                     Less Deferrable     32         1        (1)               3.1%

 The table shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on utilization and total cost
 of care by deferrability of the index condition. Each panel shows estimates of the impact of access to
 telemedicine ( from the model specified in equation (2)) for a different outcome: any primary care
 episode is an indicator variable for whether the member had any care episodes starting with an index
 primary care visit that had no other encounters in the 14 days preceding it. Total cost of new primary
 care episodes is the sum of all services utilized within 30 days of such index visit. Each row shows
 an estimate for a different subset of visits, based on how deferrable the index visit diagnosis is. We
 consider diagnoses with an above-median drop during lockdown as more deferrable and the rest as less
 deferrable. Appendix C discusses the details of the deferrability definition and sample construction.




                                                  A.27
             Appendix Table A7: Patient Characteristics, Different Subsamples

                                             Age Group                    Gender                  SES
                                    Child      Adult     Senior   Female       Male      Low     Medium    High
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)            (5)   (6)       (7)      (8)

    A. Patient Characteristics
     Female                          0.482      0.576     0.578    0.290       0.291     0.546     0.551   0.548
     Age                               7.4       41.2      74.7     39.0        35.4      33.9      38.6    40.0
     ACG                             0.538      0.978     2.084    1.082       1.022     0.982     1.112   1.075
     Number of Chronic Conditions    0.432      2.347     6.899    2.639       2.629     2.259     2.867   2.801
    B. In-Visit Actions
      Prescription                   0.458      0.502     0.581    0.517       0.488     0.547     0.496   0.461
      Lab Referral                   0.241      0.325     0.386    0.327       0.292     0.264     0.329   0.346
      Physician Referral             0.067      0.101     0.121    0.090       0.100     0.074     0.105   0.105
      Imaging Referral               0.037      0.097     0.140    0.089       0.085     0.068     0.095   0.099
      Other Referral                 0.060      0.063     0.076    0.062       0.067     0.047     0.070   0.080
      ED Referral                    0.009      0.007     0.007    0.007       0.008     0.009     0.007   0.006
    C. Number of 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
      All Follow-Ups              0.309   0.347           0.375    0.353       0.327     0.321     0.350   0.354
      With Index Physician        0.146   0.176           0.206    0.179       0.164     0.162     0.178   0.179
      Not With Index Physician    0.163   0.171           0.169    0.174       0.162     0.159     0.172   0.176
      Remote                      0.059   0.057           0.059    0.063       0.052     0.031     0.065   0.080
      In-Person                   0.251   0.290           0.316    0.290       0.275     0.289     0.284   0.274
    D. 30-Day Cost Outcomes (NIS)
      All Services                  319    643    1260     643     685     637                       676     676
      Drugs                          50    130     277     129     139     114                       139     152
      Inpatient Urgent               48    106     331     111     156     131                       138     123
      Primary Care                   84     90      98      91      87      90                        89      88
      Inpatient Elective             27     93     181      82      99     108                        83      76
      Labs and Imaging               29     84     118      83      62      62                        78      83
      Outpatient                     16     54     119      56      54      49                        55      62
      Specialist                     20     37      58      38      33      30                        38      40
      ED                             18     25      23      22      23      24                        22      19
      Other                          27     24      56      31      31      29                        34      31
    Number of Visits           166,606 283,875 105,156 304,567 251,070 193,777                   200,068 161,318
    Remote Share of Visits        0.151  0.193   0.208   0.194   0.169   0.103                     0.197   0.263

Table shows patient, visit, and episode characteristics for different subsamples used in the analysis
of heterogeneity. The sample includes the post-lockdown period; its construction is discussed in Sec-
tion 2.2. Costs are in current New Israeli Shekels (NIS).




                                                        A.28
Appendix Table A8: The Impact of Access to Telemedicine on Visit and Episode Outcomes

                                              Pre-
                                                         Estimated               Percentage
                                            Lockdown                 (S.E.)
                                                          Impact                  Impact
                                              Mean
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)

               A. In-Visit Actions
                Prescription                   0.573      -0.0286     (0.0013)     -5.0%
                Lab Referral                   0.254      -0.0001     (0.0012)      0.0%
                Physician Referral             0.085      -0.0039     (0.0007)     -4.6%
                Imaging Referral               0.082      -0.0079     (0.0007)     -9.5%
                Other Referral                 0.060      -0.0027     (0.0006)     -4.5%
                ED Referral                    0.009      -0.0003     (0.0003)     -3.5%
               B. Number of 7-Day Physician Follow-Ups
                 All Follow-Ups           0.308     0.0253            (0.0017)      8.2%
                 With Index Physician     0.147     0.0210            (0.0011)     14.3%
                 Not With Index Physician 0.160     0.0044            (0.0012)      2.7%
                 Remote                   0.018     0.0417            (0.0004)    228.0%
                 In-Person                0.289    -0.0164            (0.0016)     -5.7%
               C. 30-Day Utilization
                 All Services                  0.855      -0.0104     (0.0015)     -1.2%
                 Drugs                         0.673      -0.0214     (0.0023)     -3.2%
                 Primary Care                  0.422       0.0159     (0.0023)      3.8%
                 Labs and Imaging              0.342      -0.0143     (0.0024)     -4.2%
                 Specialist                    0.248      -0.0034     (0.0018)     -1.4%
                 Outpatient                    0.080      -0.0013     (0.0011)     -1.7%
                 ED                            0.031      -0.0007     (0.0007)     -2.2%
                 Inpatient Urgent              0.009       0.0001     (0.0003)      1.0%
                 Inpatient Elective            0.006      -0.0005     (0.0003)     -8.1%
                 Other                         0.268      -0.0082     (0.0023)     -3.1%
               D. 30-Day Cost (NIS)
                All Services                     565       -28.84    (13.1588)     -5.1%
                Drugs                            118        -7.13     (5.3432)     -6.0%
                Primary Care                      86         1.73     (0.2720)      2.0%
                Labs and Imaging                  58        -1.93     (1.2268)     -3.3%
                Specialist                        30         0.06     (0.2982)      0.2%
                Outpatient                        44        -2.26     (2.4474)     -5.2%
                ED                                24        -0.56     (0.5830)     -2.3%
                Inpatient Urgent                 112        -5.95     (8.5119)     -5.3%
                Inpatient Elective                70       -10.38     (6.7054)    -14.9%
                Other                             24        -2.42     (1.7725)    -10.1%

 Table shows the estimated impacts of increased access to telemedicine on different outcomes. The
 sample includes all new primary care episodes. Each panel shows estimates of the impact of access to
 telemedicine ( from the model specified in equation (2)) for a different set of outcomes. For ease of
 comparison, all coefficients are represented as a percent of the baseline mean--the mean of the outcome
 during the pre-lockdown period (shown in parentheses). Outcomes are sorted by their pre-lockdown
 mean. Outcomes are not mutually exclusive.




                                                  A.29
