                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE CAUSAL EFFECT OF HEAT ON VIOLENCE:
   SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF UNMITIGATED HEAT AMONG THE INCARCERATED

                                       Anita Mukherjee
                                      Nicholas J. Sanders

                                      Working Paper 28987
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28987


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We are grateful to Alan Barreca, Teevrat Garg, Joshua Goodman, Benjamin Hansen, Kosali
Simon, Justin Sydnor, and seminar participants at the 2021 AEA Annual Meeting, especially our
discussant Jillian Carr and session chair Janet Currie; the 2021 Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists meeting; the 2019 Heartland Environmental and Resource Economics
Workshop; and the University of Wisconsin-Madison Health Economics Working Group. We
gratefully acknowledge Audrey MacAfee and Lynn Mullen at the Mississippi Department of
Corrections for providing raw extracts of inmate data, and Zihan Hu and Youngjae Hwang for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Anita Mukherjee and Nicholas J. Sanders. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Causal Effect of Heat on Violence: Social Implications of Unmitigated Heat Among the
Incarcerated
Anita Mukherjee and Nicholas J. Sanders
NBER Working Paper No. 28987
July 2021
JEL No. I1,K38,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

Correctional facilities commonly lack climate control, producing a setting absent endogenous
responses to hot weather like avoidance, adjustment, and mitigation. We study daily weather
variation across the state of Mississippi, and show that high temperatures increase intense
violence among the incarcerated. Days with unsafe heat index levels shift both the intensive and
extensive margins of violence, raising daily violent interactions by 20%, and the probability of
any violence by 18%. Our setting cleanly identifies the effect of heat on violence, and highlights
previously unobserved social costs of current facility infrastructure. Rising global temperatures
could substantially increase violence absent adjustment.


Anita Mukherjee
5279 Grainger Hall
975 University Ave
Madison, WI 53706
anita.mukherjee@wisc.edu

Nicholas J. Sanders
Cornell University
MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
njsanders@cornell.edu
         "I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
         The day is hot; the Capulets, abroad;
         And if we meet we shall not escape a brawl,
         For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring"
                                                                             (Romeo and Juliet1 )

1       Introduction

      We address the causal relationship between heat and violence using daily data from
correctional facilities in the state of Mississippi. We find that high ambient temperatures
increase both the number of violent events and probability of any violence. The lack of
temperature control in Mississippi facilities, plus a population that cannot relocate on hot
days, illustrates policy implications regarding prison reform; incarcerated individuals are reg-
ularly subject to environments that raise direct health concerns and contribute to additional
convictions and extended sentences via induced intra-facility criminal behavior. Our results
avoid common confounders in the heat and violence literature with a unique situation where
daily accommodations are not endogenous to heat. This setting causally links higher tem-
peratures to more violence, enabling a more accurate understanding of the potential costs
of rising global temperatures.
      A combination of climate change and aging infrastructure means a prison population of
over 2.2 million people in the United States (US) is exposed to rising temperatures with
no opportunity for mitigation. Excessive heat in prisons drives a current constitutional
battle regarding treatment of prisoners under the Eighth Amendment, which forbids cruel
and unusual punishment (Blinder, 2016). Though judges have ruled in support of requiring
temperature control for incarcerated individuals, many state regulations continue to exclude
prisons from temperature control mandates. For example, a recent Texas law requires county
jails to hold inmates in temperatures between 65 and 85 degrees Fahrenheit (F), but does not
extend that requirement to the large state prisons.2 While localities may cite cost issues in
1
    From Romeo and Juliet, by William Shakespeare, Act 3 Scene 1.
2
    The bill, H.B. No. 936, is here: https://capitol.texas.gov/tlodocs/86R/billtext/html/HB00936I.htm.


                                                      1
addressing temperature mitigation, some may withhold air conditioning (A/C) in prison as
a policy tool to appear "tough on crime".3 Yet, prior studies show broad public support for
prison A/C in hot climates (Lenz, 2002). The lack of temperature control raises important
social cost issues, as prisoners experience a disproportionate share of chronic illnesses that
interact with heat, making temperature a problematic medical concern for this population
(Skarha et al., 2020; Chammah, 2017; Bavafa and Mukherjee, 2019).
    We find that very hot days result in more acts of prison violence, increasing both the
number and probability of these acts.4 Effects arise on days with average temperatures of 80F
degrees or higher (80F+), all of which have maximum heat index levels considered unsafe at
some point in the day, and some reaching over 120F. Intensely hot days increase daily prison
violence by approximately 20%, or an average of 0.02 events, compared to a baseline rate
of approximately 0.1. The probability of any violent act increases by 0.9 percentage points,
an increase of approximately 18% on a baseline of five percentage points. These are severe
violent events with substantial social costs, comprised of killing or physically assaulting
another individual resulting in serious injury. The system typically processes these acts as
new crimes, generating extended sentences for those instigating violence.
    Violence in this context has a policy solution of mitigation in the form of A/C or
more modern prison structures enabling temperature control. Reducing such violence would
help correctional facilities serve their purpose of delivering court-assigned enforcement while
avoiding additional incarceration costs. Based on our findings, unmitigated exposure to heat
generates an additional 44 cases of intense violence per year in the Mississippi correctional
system alone. Implications for prison policy extend beyond Mississippi, as according to data
provided by the Prison Policy Initiative (PPI), as of 2019, 13 generally "hot" states do not
have universal A/C in their systems: Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Ken-
3
  See "Texas spent $7 million to fight against A/C in a prison. It may only cost $4 million to install"
  (The Texas Tribune, Aug. 29, 2018, by Jolie McCullough). In Louisiana, lawmakers spent over $1 million
  fighting the implementation of A/C systems that cost $225,000 (The Press Herald, June 13, 2016, by
  Michael Kunzelman).
4
  To date, evidence on the impact of heat in prisons has been limited to monthly analyses and mortality
  (Haertzen et al., 1993; Motanya and Valera, 2016).


                                                   2
tucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Texas, and Virginia
(Jones, 2019).
      Our results contribute to the study of temperature and violent and destructive behavior
in more general conditions, with a unique setup that largely avoids common confounders
in the literature: avoidance behavior, mitigation, reporting bias, and income effects. By
definition, prison limits both mitigation and avoidance behavior; prisoners cannot leave on
hot days, and no correctional facility in our analysis provides any form of A/C to incarcerated
individuals over the studied time period (Holt, 2015). And while evidence suggests that there
is increased violence in police-civilian interactions on hot days (Annan-Phan and Ba, 2019),
in studies of temperature and violence using traditional crime statistics, temperature itself
can drive both criminal activity and observance of such activity. Heat can cause police to
alter patrol behavior, and potential witnesses (and victims) may remain indoors (Carr and
Doleac, 2018). Heilmann, Kahn and Tang (2021) use detailed police report data from the
city of Los Angeles to show that police behavior changes for some crimes, and that the extent
of change can vary by neighborhood income. Garg, McCord and Montfort (2020) find more
direct income effects, showing conditional cash transfers in Mexico substantially reduce the
relationship between temperature and homicide rates.
      In our setting, correctional facility guards responsible for incident reports must be in
the facility monitoring inmates regardless of temperature, and potential witnesses (other
inmates) must also remain present.5 Finally, our study design avoids interactions between
temperature and income. Income is an important factor in the study of both conflict and
climate, and separating the link between resources and violence is difficult when addressing
questions of temperature. In our case, a lack of significant financial employment for the
currently incarcerated means that resources offer limited explanation to the link between
5
    Temperature may still impact guard effort, with two caveats. First, guards have access to temperature-
    controlled break rooms, introducing a source of heat mitigation. Second, our focus on more severe violent
    acts reduces guard ability to dismiss and/or not report outcomes. Heat may also cause guards to instigate
    or escalate violent behavior. We cannot separately estimate the role of this channel, but the net effect
    remains the same for both estimation and policy purposes.



                                                       3
temperature and behavior. Jointly, these conditions mean that we can identify a relation-
ship between heat and violence, which is relevant for other contexts with limited scope for
mitigation and avoidance, such as in developing countries, lower-income areas, and regions
without stable electricity grids.
      Prior literature has found convincing correlations between temperature and crime, though
the magnitude of effect is difficult to identify because of the aforementioned endogeneity in
mitigation and avoidance. Several papers document a link between temperature and violent
crime in the US (Ranson, 2014; Jacob, Lefgren and Moretti, 2007; Mares and Moffett, 2019).
Colmer and Doleac (2021) use this correlation to show that states with lenient gun laws
exhibit higher rates of gun violence in response to higher temperatures. In a laboratory
setting, Alm°
            as et al. (2019) find that heat, or "thermal stress", increases one's willingness
to destroy another person's assets. The evidence on temperature and crime is linked to
the heat-aggression hypothesis, which, for example Larrick et al. (2011) show is evident in
baseball players who exhibit more hostility in hot temperatures.6
      As we show in Sections 2 and 3, our detailed data allow us to use daily variation from
annual weather patterns to identify effects. After presenting our main results in Section 4,
we demonstrate the robustness of our findings in Section 5. In Section 6, we show that heat
effects appear unique to matters of intense violence, with no such effects for less harmful
acts or other forms of facility misconduct, and that current temperatures play a larger role
than cumulative effects. In Section 7, we use back of the envelope estimates to extend the
impacts of heat in prison beyond our sample. We further discuss the policy implications of
our results in Section 8.

2        Data

      Inmate Violence and Population
      We use incident-level inmate misconduct data from the Mississippi Department of Cor-
6
    Other environmental factors shown to be connected to crime include pollen (Chalfin, Danagoulian and
    Deza, 2019), daylight (Doleac and Sanders, 2015), and pollution (Herrnstadt et al., 2017).



                                                    4
rections (MDOC). The data span 1/1/2004 through 12/31/2010, and contain the universe of
all infractions within the state correctional system. Infractions are standardized across loca-
tions within the MDOC system, and are described clearly in the state's Inmate Handbook.7
Inmates have an incentive to avoid these infractions because they can result in reduced
privileges, and parole boards view them unfavorably when deciding on early release. The
MDOC explicitly states in the Handbook that "inmates who violate rules can receive disci-
plinary actions to include detention and loss of visitation, phone and canteen privileges, loss
of Earned Time or custody reduction." The violent acts we study would also be processed
as new crimes, resulting in separate court-assigned punishment. Guards are tasked with
reporting all infractions as they occur.
       Our data includes 36 facilities located around the state, yielding substantial within-state
geographic variation in temperature for any given day. There are eight large state prisons,
which we later analyze separately, and a mix of regional prisons and jails. We group inci-
dents into five broad categories: violence, aggressive behavior, disobedience, refusal to work,
and riotous behavior. Appendix B provides the full list of incidents and their categoriza-
tion. We focus on the violent incident category, including: "killing or assaulting anyone",
"fighting (except for self-defense)", and "assaultive action against any person resulting in
serious physical injury". For each incident, the data provide the date, facility, and detail for
categorization. This combination of incident type and location is unique to the Mississippi
prison data, critical to our study as we link the incident to daily temperature metrics while
controlling for facility-specific fixed effects.
       Our facilities average 65 intensely violent acts per year, though events are not uniformly
distributed across days or facilities. Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the histogram of counts of
violent acts by facility/day cell. Panel (b) shows the histogram of average population by
facility, ranked from largest to smallest.8 Many facility/day cells have no violent acts, and
7
    Available here: https://www.mdoc.ms.gov/Inmate-Info/Pages/Rule-Violations.aspx
8
    Population data are at https://www.mdoc.ms.gov/Admin-Finance/Pages/Daily-Inmate-Population.aspx,
    last accessed May 4th, 2021. We limit analysis to facilities with both infraction and population data, the
    latter being the limiting factor. We repeated analysis including all facilities regardless of population data


                                                         5
                   Figure 1: Count of Facility-Day Observation by Indicated Range

    (a) Share Facility/Day Cells by Counts of Violence              (b) Average Population by Facility Size Rank
     1
                                                                   4000


     .8
                                                                   3000

     .6

                                                                   2000
     .4


                                                                   1000
     .2



     0                                                                0
              0      1                2               3   4+              0      10             20          30     40
                         Violent Acts by Facility-Day                                  Facility Size Rank




Notes: Panel (a) plots the fraction of facility/day observations by their raw count of violent acts, where "4+"
includes all observations with a value of four or larger; Panel (b) plots the daily average reported population
for each facility, ordered from largest to smallest.


some facilities in our data have relatively small populations while others are large. The daily
population minimum is 44, and the maximum is 5,706, and the average facility population
across all 2004-2010 ranges from 81 to 4,309.
          Temperature
          We combine incident data with daily information on temperature, assigning temperatures
to facilities using the county in which they are located. Our 36 correctional facilities cover 29
counties -- 22 counties have unique facility-to-county matches, and the remaining seven each
have two facilities. We use the PRISM weather data, aggregating at the county/day level and
including daily minimum and maximum, along with daily rainfall.9 As PRISM weather data
are partially imputed, we repeat analysis using Global Surface Summary of the Day data
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). These data are at
the weather station/day level, and also include minimum and maximum daily temperatures.
We also provide estimates using specific location of the facility, based on the latitude and
    with similar results.
9
    These data come from Schlenker and Roberts (2009), with updates for later years provided by Wolfram
    Schlenker.




                                                               6
Figure 2: Minimum and Maximum Temperatures and Maximum Heat Index for all Days
with Average Temperature 80F+

                (a) Distribution of Temperatures (F)                                                                             (b) Estimated Heat Index (F)
      .2                                                                                                              130




                                                                             Estimated Maximum Daily Heat Index (F)
                                                                                                                      120
     .15

                                                                                                                      110

      .1
                                                                                                                      100


     .05                                                                                                               90


                                                                                                                       80
      0                                                                                                                     80      82      84          86        88           90   92
           60        70          80          90            100     110                                                                   Average Daily Temperature (F)
                                 Temperature (F)
                                                                                                                                         Caution             Extreme Caution
                          Daily Minimum            Daily Maximum                                                                         Danger              Extreme Danger




Notes: Panel (a) shows the distribution of daily minimum and maximum temperatures for all days in our
data with an average daily temperature of 80F+. Histograms show the frequency of daily minimum and
maximum temperatures at the county level, conditional on the average temperature of the day being 80F+,
where we calculate averages using min+  2
                                          max
                                              . Temperature data are from the PRISM data set: see Section
2 for details. Panel (b) shows the maximum heat index estimated for each day with an average daily
temperature of 80F+. We describe estimation of the heat index in Appendix C. Data on humidity are from
the NOAA quality controlled data sets (USCRN/USRCRN from Diamond et al. (2013)) for the two available
stations in Mississippi. Shaded regions show the heat-index-related classifications of possible harm according
to the NOAA.


longitude of its address, to assign facility-level temperature.10 We use the average of the
daily minimum and maximum as our measure of daily temperature. Appendix Figure A-1
shows that all three measures yield similar distributions of average daily temperature.

3          Methods

       We first convert our continuous temperature data into bins, following the literature on
the nonlinear effects of temperature on human health (Desch^
                                                           enes and Greenstone, 2011;
Barreca et al., 2016; Heutel, Miller and Molitor, 2020). We construct seven bins by degrees
in Fahrenheit: less than 30F, 30-39F, 40-49F, 50-59F, 60-69F, 70-79F, and 80F and above
(80F+). About 62 days in a year (17%) fall in the 80F+ range. Panel (a) in Figure 2 shows
the distribution of maximum and minimum temperatures for days averaging 80F+, which
10
     We create a temperature estimate using all stations within 50 miles of the county centroid or facility
     address, weighted by 1/distance.


                                                                         7
can get very hot during the day, with an average maximum temperature of 93F. Standard
temperature measurements fail to account for humidity, which can increase the stress effects
of heat. The heat index, or "feels like" temperature, captures how temperatures feel in the
presence of humidity, which is high in Mississippi.11 The heat index is classified in four levels
related to the danger of heat stroke, heat exhaustion, and heat cramps: caution (80-90F),
extreme caution (90-103F), danger (103-124F), and extreme danger (125F or above).12 For
days averaging 80F+, many observations involve time in the most dangerous categories, with
potentially even higher temperatures indoors.13
      Appendix Table A-1 shows means and standard deviations for the share of days by
temperature bins, as well as the number of violent acts per day and the probability of any
violent act. Across our 36 facilities and seven years of data, we have 92,052 facility-day
observations. The average number of violent acts per day is 0.096, with a standard deviation
of 0.564. The average probability of a violent act is 0.050, with a standard deviation of
0.217. The average share of days in the 80F+ range is approximately 17%, though this
varies substantially by geography. Figure 3 shows counties containing correctional facilities
in our data, split into quintiles by share of days with an average temperature of 80F+,
ranging from approximately 9% to 25%. Markers show locations of facilities: circles indicate
a single facility at that location, and diamonds indicate two locations sharing the same
address (e.g., a main facility and a satellite facility on the same grounds).
      Our semi-parametric model estimates:

                                                                     J
                                                                           T M EAN
     yf,t = a + w + f + f  t + 1 rainc,t + 2 rainsqc,t +                   j       T M EANc,t +     f,t .   (1)
                                                                    j =1



The dependent variable y is either (a) the number of violent acts in facility f on day t,
11
   See Appendix C for our method for calculating the heat index.
12
   The classifications are from: https://www.weather.gov/ama/heatindex
13
   Alexi Jones of the PPI notes, "Prisons are often built of heat-retaining materials which can increase
   internal prison temperatures [. . . ] Because of this, temperatures inside prisons can often exceed outdoor
   temperatures"(Clarke, 2019). In Appendix E, we provide several examples of reports of extreme indoor
   heat in prisons and the potential associated health consequences.


                                                      8
                 Figure 3: Facility Locations and Share of 80F+ Days per Year




                          (.21,.25]
                          (.19,.21]
                          (.17,.19]
                          (.15,.17]
                          [.09,.15]
                          No data




Notes: Temperature ranges split the 29 included counties into quintiles with an average share of days that
are 80F+ per year. Counties without fill are not in our analysis. Markers show facility locations: circles
indicate a single facility at that location, and diamonds indicate two locations sharing the same address (e.g.,
a main facility and a satellite facility on the same grounds).


or (b) a binary variable indicating any violent act in facility f on day t. Fixed effects
capture effects for year (a ), week of year (w ), facility (f ), and facility-specific linear time
trends (f  t). Facility fixed effects are important for many reasons, including the presence of
private prisons which can impact prison conditions and thus the number of inmate infractions
(Mukherjee, 2021). Year fixed effects adjust for common year shocks at the state level.
Week of year effects adjust for common time-of-year effects across the state, such as the


                                                       9
holiday season, which historically occurs during colder times of the year and has higher rates
of facility violence.14 Facility trends allow for potentially correlated relationships between
growing/shrinking prison populations, temperature changes, and baseline violence across
time. We denote variation of weather at the county level using c. The rain control includes
daily rainfall, in centimeters, in both linear and quadratic form in case rainfall correlates
with temperature in a manner affecting behavior. We cluster standard errors at the facility
by calendar month level, as variation in treatment occurs both spatially and over time. As
very few counties have more than one facility, this is approximate to clustering by county by
calendar month. In the Appendix, we explore alternate clustering choices, including Wild
bootstrap to deal with limited clusters, with little effect on statistical significance.
       The main coefficients of interest are those contained within T M EAN . In our basic
specification, this represents six temperature bins: Below 30F, 30-39F, 40-49F, 50-59F, 70-
79F, and 80F+. The omitted bin (and reference category) is 60-69F, as evidence in economics
literature on extreme temperatures and health, including Desch^
                                                              enes and Greenstone (2011),
Barreca et al. (2016), and Heutel, Miller and Molitor (2020), shows that deviations from this
range increase mortality.

4       Results

       Figure 4 shows OLS results from equation (1). The plot presents the outcome of daily
violent acts as both a continuous count of occurrences in Panel (a) and a binary indicator for
any occurrence in Panel (b), with coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals. In both
cases, only the hottest temperature bin is statistically different from the baseline temperature
range. The continuous specification shows a statistically significant 0.03 additional violent
acts on days with average daily temperature in the 80F+ bin, compared to days that are
60-69F. The binary specification shows an 80F+ day means a statistically significant 1.1
percentage point increase in the probability of any violent infractions compared to moderate
14
     Judicial expert William Sturgeon notes that "prison populations will often become `antsy, angry, sad and
     remorseful' around [holidays]" (The Washington Times, Dec. 10, 2014, by Phillip Swarts).



                                                      10
Figure 4: Impact of an Additional Day in the Average Temperature Range on Violent Acts
Relative to 60-69F

                                                                         (a) Count                                                                                                                (b) Binary
 Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                          Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)
                                                                                                                                                                          .02
                                                 .04



                                                                                                                                                                          .01
                                                 .02



                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                   0




                                                 -.02                                                                                                                     -.01




                                                 -.04                                                                                                                     -.02
                                                  Below 30F   30-39F   40-49F    50-59F    60-69F    70-79F   80F+                                                         Below 30F   30-39F   40-49F    50-59F    60-69F    70-79F   80F+
                                                                   Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                      Daily Average Temperature Bin Range



Notes: Coefficient estimates are from an OLS regression including indicators for average daily temperature
falling in the indicated temperature range, with 60-69F as the omitted bin. We also plot 95% confidence
intervals. Regressions include facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-specific linear
time trends and controls for daily rainfall. Counts use the number of violent acts per day as the outcome,
while binaries use an indicator for any violent act in a given day. We cluster standard errors at the level of
facility by calendar month.


days. Appendix Figure A-2 shows similar patterns emerge when we aggregate weather data
using GHCN data by county (Panel (a)) or facility (Panel (b)).
                                                 We also re-estimate our model grouping lower temperature ranges (with no statistically
or economically significant differences) and further splitting upper temperature ranges. Ap-
pendix Figure A-3 uses below 70F as the omitted group, testing for effects using average
temperature in bins of 70-74F, 75-79F, 80-84F, and 85F and above. Results support that
effects happen mostly on days where the temperature averages 80F and above, and while
the coefficients on 80-84F and 85F+ days are not statistically different from each other, the
magnitudes suggest that the hottest days have the largest effects. Appendix Figure A-4
shows a cubic spline model and approximate 95% confidence intervals, centered at 65F as
the baseline rate and knots every 10F from 30-90F. This yields a similar shape, with rapidly
increasing temperature effects beginning at approximately 80F.
                                                 For simplicity of exposition and expansions, we now replace indicator bins with a sole


                                                                                                                     11
indicator for 80F or above, making all cooler temperatures the baseline omitted group:


              i   i   i
       yf,t = a + w + f + i      i           i             i
                          f  t + 1 rainc,t + 2 rainsqc,t +  (T  80F +)c,t +
                                                                                        i
                                                                                        f,t ,   (2)


where the i superscript indicates the coefficients can vary from those in equation (1). Table 1
shows results from equation (2). We begin discussion with Panel (a), which shows estimates
on the count of violent acts. The mean of this dependent variable is 0.097, with a standard
deviation of 0.58.
   The coefficient on days with an average temperature 80F+ is 0.015 in Column 1, which
contains only facility and year fixed effects, and in Column 2, which adds rainfall controls.
Given our baseline mean, this implies that a facility day averaging 80F+ contains 16% more
violent acts compared to a day averaging 79F or below. In Column 3, we add week of year
fixed effects, and in Column 4, we add facility-specific linear time trends. The coefficient of
interest increases to 0.020 in both specifications, implying an effect size of around 20%. In
all specifications, results for hot days are statistically significant with p < 0.01.
   Panel (b) of Table 1 reports regression estimates using a linear probability model (LPM)
with the binary outcome of whether there was any violent act in the facility on a given day.
This allows us to consider the extensive margin of violent behavior and is less subject to
potentially outlier events involving many individuals (resulting in a reported incident for
each involved inmate). The mean of this variable is 0.05, with a standard deviation of 0.22.
The coefficient on days averaging 80F+ is 0.005 in Columns 1 and 2, with p < 0.05. The
estimate increases to 0.009 in Columns 3 and 4 with p < 0.01. Week of year effects play an
important role here, with the total effect starting at a 0.4 percentage point (8% of mean)
increase in the first two columns and rising to a 0.9 percentage point (18% of mean) effect
in the final two. This is possibly due to the "holiday" effect mentioned earlier, as many
relevant US holidays driving increased violence occur in colder times of the year.
   Appendix Table A-2 repeats Column 4 of Table 1 with altered standard error methods.



                                                12
                Table 1: OLS Estimates of Count and Occurrence of Violent Acts

                               (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)


Panel (a): Count
 Avg. Temp 80F+              0.015***             0.015***             0.020***             0.020***
                              (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.007)              (0.007)

 Dep. Variable Mean           0.096                0.096                0.096                0.096
Panel (b): Binary
 Avg. Temp 80F+              0.005**              0.005**              0.008***             0.009***
                             (0.002)              (0.002)               (0.003)              (0.003)

 Dep. Variable Mean           0.050                0.050                0.050                0.050
 Facility FE                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Year FE                       Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Rainfall Controls             No                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Week of Year FE               No                   No                   Yes                  Yes
 Facility Trends               No                   No                   No                   Yes
 Clusters                      432                  432                  432                  432
 Observations                 92,052               92,052               92,052               92,052


Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Outcome in Panel (a) is count of violent acts at the facility-
day level. Outcome in Panel (b) is the binary indicator for any act of violence at the facility-day level.
Bottom rows indicate fixed effects and controls in each regression. Data span 2004-2010. Temperature
values estimated at the county level using PRISM weather data. We cluster standard errors at the level of
facility by calendar month.



Panel (a) shows results for the count of acts, while Panel (b) shows results for the LPM.
We show just the p-value from a test of statistical significance on the "80F+" coefficient.
Column 1 clusters standard errors by county, given common temperature assignment for
facilities within counties. Column 2 uses a Wild bootstrap, stratified at the county level with
10,000 replications, to address the possible issue of just 29 clusters in Column 1 (Cameron
and Miller, 2015). Clustering at the county level gives the count model a p-value of 0.045
with bootstrapping, and 0.053 without. For the LMP, respective p-values are 0.014 and
0.007.




                                                    13
5     Robustness

     We first re-estimate the results of Table 1 for the subsample of only larger correctional
facilities, those with a realized capacity greater than 500 inmates, our 8 largest facilities.
We do so to reduce noise that smaller facilities might contribute in the estimation. Among
larger facilities, the average facility-day count of violent acts is 0.43, and the related binary
outcome has a mean of 0.22. Appendix Table A-3 shows these results. Though coefficient
magnitudes are larger, implied relative effect sizes are approximately the same as those in
the main analysis due to higher baseline rates and counts at larger correctional facilities. As
an alternate test for the role of facility size, Appendix Table A-4 repeats Table 1 using acts
per 1,000 prisoners as the outcome, weighted by daily facility population. Effects remain
statistically and economically significant. An 80F+ day increases rates by 0.036 violent acts
per 1,000 facility population, an increase of approximately 20% of the mean rate of 0.176, in
line with our main estimates.15 We also re-estimate equation (2) with a more flexible series
of time effects. Appendix Table A-5 repeats our main model with variations in time and
region fixed effect interactions. In all cases, for both counts and our binary LPM, results are
effectively unchanged.
     We next re-estimate the outcomes in Table 1 using nonlinear models. We use a Poisson
model for the count in Panel (a) and a logit model for the binary outcome in Panel (b).
Results are in Appendix Table A-6, and Appendix Figure A-5 shows the analog coefficient
graphs. The Poisson model suggests an impact of 0.20 on the 80F+ category. Interpreting
this as a semi-elasticity, and using our baseline of approximately 0.1 acts, this is an increase
of around 0.03 acts. The logit estimate is 0.30 for the coefficient on 80F+, which translates
to a marginal increase of 0.012 percentage points.16 Thus, nonlinear models arrive at similar
conclusions in terms of sign, magnitude, and statistical significance.
     Even after controlling for region and time fixed effects, unobserved factors may correlate
15
   In 2008, Mississippi passed a law designed to reduce prison overcrowding. Appendix Section D-1 shows
   this policy had little effect on the heat and violence relationship.
16
   We obtain this using the "margins" command in Stata 15.


                                                  14
with both violence and heat at the daily level. To test for such effects, we conduct two
placebo tests of timing of hot days. The dependent variable is the count of violent acts
in a given day, following the setup of Column 4 in Panel (a) of Table 1.17 We first shift
each day's temperature observation within facility forward or backward by up to 28 days,
and re-estimate our regression. Panel (a) of Figure A-6 shows the coefficients from nine
different regressions, ranging from "shifted backward 28 days" (-28) to "shifted forward 28
days" (+28) and including the true observation, which we notate with "0". We only observe
statistically and economically significant effects when the indicator is assigned to the true
date. As an extreme case, we next randomly reassign all 80F+ days across time and location
1,000 times and re-estimated equation (3) for each simulated dataset. Panel (b) of Figure
A-6 shows the distribution of the 1,000 regression coefficients as the kernel density, and the
"true" estimate, shown by the vertical line. Our estimate is far to the right of the placebo
distribution of timing estimates, which are centered at zero.

6       Additional Considerations
6.1       Nonviolent Incidents

       There are other possible incident reports in our data, ranging from our extreme cases to
basic minor infractions such as refusing to make one's bed. Here we consider the nonviolent
incidents (including what we call "aggressive behavior", which are less extreme cases of
aggression such as threatening another or a fight without injury), addressing three policy
and mechanism questions. First, while these are less socially costly events, they still represent
additional conflict within the prison system. Second, if heat makes guards, on the margin,
more likely to generally report incidents, or shifts guard absenteeism, nonviolent data should
reflect this as well. Third, if heat alters how guards treat prisoners and increases general
conflict, it could show up in less extreme interactions.
17
     The new regression equation is given by:
                     ii   ii   ii
              yf,t = a  + w  + f  + ii     ii          ii            ii
                                    f  t + 1 rainc,t + 2 rainsqc,t +  (False T  80F +)c,t +
                                                                                                  ii
                                                                                                  f,t ,   (3)

     where the superscript ii again indicates coefficients can vary from prior equation models.


                                                       15
      Appendix Figure A-7 shows no other infraction or incident categories have patterns indi-
cating effects of hot days. We show results for four other large categories covering all other
incidents: aggressive behavior (omitting our cases of more extreme violence), refusing to
work, inciting a riot or demonstrating, and general disobedience. In each case, we reproduce
our semi-parametric coefficient graph, using both count of occurrences and the LPM. While
some count results are negative and statistically different from zero in lowest average temper-
ature ranges (a rare occurrence in our data), none of the LPM models have any statistically
significant effects. There are two suggestive results of note. First, while no coefficient in
aggressive behavior is statistically significant, the coefficients on the upper temperature val-
ues are positive and show a pattern similar to more extreme violent acts, particularly in the
LPM. Second, general disobedience has suggestively-sized negative economic effects, though
none are statistically significant. One possibility is that increases in violent acts represent
an escalation of otherwise nonviolent infractions or incidents absent higher heat, meaning
some of our additional violent acts "replace" less dangerous disobedience outcomes.
6.2     Cumulative Effects

      It is possible that, while we observe violent acts on a specific day, the outcome is the
result of buildup across several days of intense heat. Repeated hot nights driving poor sleep,
for example, could escalate what would have been a less serious altercation into a violent
act, giving heat a "cumulative" effect. To test if such effects exist in our data, we conduct
three separate analyses of heat buildup. Appendix Table A-7 shows results, based on our
model with year, week of year, and facility effects with facility-specific linear time trends.
Our outcome is the count of violent events, and treatment is an indicator for temperature
80F+.
      In Column 1, we include a variable with the count of days in the prior week that were also
over 80F, which we also interact with our main indicator. This allows today's temperature
to have an effect that may be higher or lower depending on the number of days in the past
week that were also hot. Neither the "days in the last week" variable nor its interaction are


                                                16
economically or statistically significant, and their joint significance has a p-value of 0.91. We
then try controls for spans of consecutive days. Column 2 shows indicators for consecutive
days of 80F+, ranging from two to five. No indicators beyond our main coefficient of inter-
est are statistically or economically significant, and the joint test of all lagged cumulative
indicators yields a p-value of 0.88. Both modifications suggest that temperature on the day
of the event plays a much larger role than any prior days or overall cumulative effects.
    We also examine temporal displacement of violence, to test if hotter days shift rather
than increase violent acts. If an inmate was planning to instigate a violent act, perhaps
the temperature-aggression relationship moves that planned event earlier. To test this hy-
pothesis, we aggregate results to the weekly level, including "number of 80F+ days in the
week" as our regressor of interest, with number of violent acts in the week as the dependent
variable. Results in Column 3 show that each 80F+ average temperature day in a week
increases weekly violent acts by 0.018 (with a p-value of 0.058), which is very close to our
initial daily estimate of 0.02, and in line with increases rather than shifts of violence.

7    Estimating Additional Violence due to Lack of Temperature
     Control

    Our analysis implies that unmitigated exposure to days with temperature averaging 80F+
cause an additional 44 violent acts per year across the inmate population in our data. To
derive this number, we use the estimates per 1,000 prisoners from Column 4 of Appendix
Table A-4, where an additional day with temperatures 80F+ causes an additional 0.04 violent
acts per 1,000 prisoners. We multiply this estimate by the daily number of prisoners in each
facility on days they experience with temperatures of 80F+.
    Extrapolation of estimates to the entire US requires substantial assumptions, including:
(1) the Mississippi incarcerated population is representative of the US incarcerated popula-
tion, and (2) none of the incarcerated individuals in the US have access to climate control
sufficient to negate effects. With these in mind, we construct a nationwide estimate by first
collecting data for all incarcerated individuals in the US, using the Correctional Facility

                                               17
Locator from the Prison Gerrymandering Project.18 This dataset identifies all correctional
facilities counted in the 2010 Census, along with their associated county and an estimated
facility population as of 2010. We match these facilities to the PRISM county-level weather
data for 2010, and aggregate to county-level totals of incarcerated individuals. This allows
us to find the number of incarcerated individuals on a given day in 2010 experiencing county-
level temperature estimates of 80F+. These data suggest that in 2010, there were 110 million
prisoner-days in the 80F+ range. Based on 0.04 additional violent acts per 1,000 prisoners,
unmitigated heat could generate an additional approximate 4,000 violent acts per year in
correctional facilities nationwide.

8       Conclusion

       We demonstrate a link between intense heat and intense violence among the incarcerated
in the Mississippi correctional system. A day with an average temperature above 80F raises
both the count of daily violent acts and the probability of any violent act by approximately
20% of baseline. Our results identify heat's effect on inmate violence, an important link
addressing a constitutional issue on which there is little empirical study. Heat (especially
in the midst of climate change, which has steadily increased temperatures in many parts of
the country) is relevant in considering the geographic placement of inmates in the US. Our
finding that hotter days drive increased violence suggests significant returns to providing
temperature control in correctional facilities. These effects can have important downstream
consequences for both the inmates perpetrating violence and their victims. For example,
inmates pushed to commit violent acts are more likely to experience delayed release, harsher
prison conditions, or new criminal sentences. Chen and Shapiro (2007) show that harsher
prison conditions (such as those we document here) increase recidivism, which means that
what appear to be cost-saving measures such as foregoing A/C might unintentionally in-
crease net social costs through longer and repeated prison sentences. There are potential
welfare gains from reducing exposure to heat in prison, from both a constitutional and fiscal
18
     Available at https://www.prisonersofthecensus.org/locator2010/ as of April 26, 2021.


                                                      18
perspective, and our research highlights the social costs resulting from a captive population
without the ability to mitigate heat.
       We add to the growing body of literature showing that exposure to unmitigated high
temperatures has detrimental effects on social well-being, including increased mortality and
medical costs, losses in labor productivity, and decreased cognition.19 Mounting evidence
suggests that high temperatures also increase violent and criminal activity, but many studies
encounter common identification challenges: avoidance and mitigation behavior, observation
and recording bias, and resource/income effects. Our study presents an environment devoid
of these common endogenous confounders. All correctional facilities in our data lack tem-
perature control for inmates across the time of our analysis, meaning mitigation is limited,
and prisoners are similarly limited in their ability to alter their daily routines. The highly
structured prison environment minimizes the issue of recording and reporting bias, as all
prisoners and guards must be present in the facilities regardless of temperature, and the
lack of gainful in-facility employment options remove income effects. Thus, our estimates
represent a more direct effect of heat on violence than many other settings.
       If our findings extend to a non-incarcerated population, they suggest that the net effect
of climate warming on global violence is positive. We find that while intensely hot days
increase violence, very cold days do not have such an effect. This implies that increased
violence in areas where the probability of hot days is rising is not offset by a drop in violence
in areas that may experience fewer cold days. The extent to which regions can adapt to
rising temperatures will play a large role in their ability to reduce these effects. As Heutel,
Miller and Molitor (2020) note, regional infrastructure can make adaptation more or less
difficult, and the US should expect the detrimental effects of increased heat will be larger in
the Northeast, where infrastructure is designed to address issues of cold, and less problematic
in the South, which has long dealt with higher temperatures. Such adaptation will not be
19
     For an overview of recent economics work on temperature, health, and productivity, see Heal and Park
     (2016). For recent examples of temperature, cognition, and learning, see Park et al. (2020), Park (2020)
     and Garg, Jagnani and Taraz (2020).



                                                      19
readily feasible, however, for those lacking temperature control infrastructure.
   To some degree, our estimates also extend to the large share of the world population
without access to direct temperature control. While prisoners are not a representative pop-
ulation in many aspects, the limited ability to adjust to uncomfortable climate is much
more widespread. As recently as 2018, 40% of households in China did not have A/C. That
number is over 80% in Mexico and Brazil, and around 95% in India (International Energy
Agency, 2018). Our results indicate billions of people worldwide face temperature conditions
conducive to increased violence.



References
Alm°
   as, Ingvild, Maximilian Auffhammer, Tessa Bold, Ian Bolliger, Aluma
 Dembo, Solomon M Hsiang, Shuhei Kitamura, Edward Miguel, and Robert
 Pickmans. 2019. "Destructive behavior, judgment, and economic decision-making under
 thermal stress." NBER Working Paper 25785.

Annan-Phan, S´ ebastien, and Bocar A. Ba. 2019. "Hot Temperatures, Aggression, and
 Death at the Hands of the Police: Evidence from the US." Working paper.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S
 Shapiro. 2016. "Adapting to climate change: The remarkable decline in the US
 temperature-mortality relationship over the twentieth century." Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 124(1): 105­159.

Bavafa, Hessam, and Anita Mukherjee. 2019. "The burgeoning health care needs of
 aging prisoners." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109: 182­86.

Blinder, Alan. 2016. "In US jails, a constitutional clash over air-conditioning." The New
  York Times.

Cameron, A Colin, and Douglas L Miller. 2015. "A practitioner's guide to cluster-
 robust inference." Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 317­372.

Carr, Jillian B., and Jennifer L. Doleac. 2018. "Keep the kids inside? Juvenile curfews
 and urban gun violence." Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(4): 609­618.

Chalfin, Aaron, Shooshan Danagoulian, and Monica Deza. 2019. "More sneezing,
 less crime? Health shocks and the market for offenses." Journal of Health Economics,
 68: 102230.

Chammah, Maurice. 2017. ""Cooking Them to Death": The Lethal Toll of Hot Prisons."
 The Marshall Project.

                                             20
Chen, M. Keith, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2007. "Do harsher prison conditions reduce
 recidivism? A discontinuity-based approach." American Law and Economics Review,
 9(1): 1­29.

Clarke, Matthew. 2019. "As Climate Changes, High Temperatures Plague Prisons and
  Jails." Prison Legal News.

Colmer, Jonathan, and Jennifer L. Doleac. 2021. "Access to guns in the heat of the
 moment: The effect of gun laws on violent crime." Working paper.

Desch^
     enes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. "Climate change, mortality, and
 adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctuations in weather in the US." American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4): 152­85.

Diamond, Howard J, Thomas R Karl, Michael A Palecki, C Bruce Baker, Jesse E
 Bell, Ronald D Leeper, David R Easterling, Jay H Lawrimore, Tilden P Mey-
 ers, Michael R Helfert, et al. 2013. "US Climate Reference Network after one decade
 of operations: Status and assessment." Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
 94(4): 485­498.

Doleac, Jennifer L., and Nicholas J. Sanders. 2015. "Under the cover of darkness:
 How ambient light influences criminal activity." Review of Economics and Statistics,
 97(5): 1093­1103.

Garg, Teevrat, Gordon C. McCord, and Aleister Montfort. 2020. "Can Social Pro-
 tection Reduce Environmental Damages?" IZA Discussion Paper.

Garg, Teevrat, Maulik Jagnani, and Vis Taraz. 2020. "Temperature and human cap-
 ital in India." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists,
 7(6): 1113­1150.

Haertzen, Charles, Lino Covi, Karen Buxton, and Henry Richards. 1993. "Sea-
 sonal changes in rule infractions among prisoners: A preliminary test of the temperature-
 aggression hypothesis." Psychological Reports, 72(1): 195­200.

Heal, Geoffrey, and F. Jisung Park. 2016. "Reflections--temperature stress and the
 direct impact of climate change: a review of an emerging literature." Review of Environ-
 mental Economics and Policy, 10(2): 347­362.

Heilmann, Kilian, Matthew E. Kahn, and Cheng Keat Tang. 2021. "The urban
 crime and heat gradient in high and low poverty areas." Journal of Public Economics,
 197: 104408.

Herrnstadt, Evan, Anthony Heyes, Erich Muehlegger, and Soodeh Saberian.
 2017. "Air pollution as a cause of violent crime." Working paper.

Heutel, Garth, Nolan H. Miller, and David Molitor. 2020. "Adaptation and the
 mortality effects of temperature across US climate regions." Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 1­33.

                                           21
Holt, Daniel. 2015. "Heat in US prisons and jails: Corrections and the challenge of climate
 change." Working paper (SSRN 2667260).
International Energy Agency. 2018. "The Future of Cooling: Opportunities for energy-
  efficient air conditioning." available at https://bit.ly/3vm1UO7.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren, and Enrico Moretti. 2007. "The dynamics of criminal
  behavior evidence from weather shocks." Journal of Human Resources, 42(3): 489­527.
Jones, Alexi. 2019. "Cruel and unusual punishment: When states don't provide air condi-
  tioning in prison." Prison Policy Initiative.
Larrick, Richard P., Thomas A. Timmerman, Andrew M. Carton, and Jason
  Abrevaya. 2011. "Temper, temperature, and temptation: Heat-related retaliation in
  baseball." Psychological Science, 22(4): 423­428.
Lenz, Nygel. 2002. ""Luxuries" in prison: The relationship between amenity funding and
  public support." Crime & Delinquency, 48(4): 499­525.
Mares, Dennis M., and Kenneth W. Moffett. 2019. "Climate change and crime revis-
 ited: An exploration of monthly temperature anomalies and UCR crime data." Environ-
 ment and Behavior, 51(5): 502­529.
Motanya, Njideka C., and Pamela Valera. 2016. "Climate change and its impact on the
 incarcerated population: A descriptive review." Social Work in Public Health, 31(5): 348­
 357.
Mukherjee, Anita. 2021. "Impacts of private prison contracting on inmate time served
 and recidivism." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 13(2): 408­38.
Park, R. Jisung. 2020. "Hot temperature and high stakes performance." Journal of Human
 Resources.
Park, R. Jisung, Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. 2020.
 "Heat and learning." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(2): 306­39.
Ranson, Matthew. 2014. "Crime, weather, and climate change." Journal of Environmental
 Economics and Management, 67(3): 274­302.
Rothfusz, Lans P. 1990. The heat index equation (or, more than you ever wanted to
 know about heat index). Vol. 9023, Fort Worth, Texas: National Oceanic and Atmospheric
 Administration, National Weather Service, Office of Meteorology.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear temperature effects in-
  dicate severe damages to US crop yields under climate change." Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594­15598.
Skarha, Julianne, Meghan Peterson, Josiah D. Rich, and David Dosa. 2020. "An
  overlooked crisis: Extreme temperature exposures in incarceration settings." American
  Journal of Public Health, 110(S1): S41­S42.

                                            22
A-1      Additional Exhibits
                                 Table A-1: Summary Statistics

                                                                    (1)


                            Share of Facility-Days by Bin
                             Under 30F                             0.008
                                                                  [0.086]
                             30-39F                                0.058
                                                                  [0.235]
                             40-49F                                0.139
                                                                  [0.346]
                             50-59F                                0.173
                                                                  [0.378]
                             60-69F                                0.185
                                                                  [0.389]
                             70-79F                                0.265
                                                                  [0.441]
                             80F+                                  0.172
                                                                  [0.377]
                            Violent Outcomes
                             Violent Acts per Day                  0.096
                                                                  [0.564]
                             Prob. Violent Act                     0.050
                                                                  [0.217]
                             Facilities                             36
                             Counties                               29
                             Observations                         92,052

Notes: Table reports means with standard deviations in brackets. Data span seven years from 1/1/2004 to
12/31/2010.




                                                 A-1
                Table A-2: Inference from Alternate Standard Error Estimation

                                                   (1)                                    (2)
                                               County Level                           County level:
                                                                                     Wild Bootstrap


Panel (a): Count
 p-value on Avg. Temp 80F+                          0.053                                 0.045
Panel (b): Binary
 p-value on Avg. Temp 80F+                          0.014                                 0.007

Notes: All estimates done using OLS. Estimates follow Column 4 of Panel (a) of Table 1, but with different
standard error methods. Column 1 clusters at the county level. Column 2 performs a wild bootstrap,
stratified at the county level, using 10,000 replications and Rademacher weights.



  Table A-3: Estimates of Count and Occurrence of Violent Acts: Larger Facilities Only

                                   (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)


Panel (a): Count
 Avg. Temp 80F+                 0.066***             0.065***              0.085***               0.085***
                                 (0.025)              (0.025)               (0.029)                (0.030)

 Dep. Variable Mean               0.405                0.405                 0.405                 0.405
Panel (b): Binary
 Avg. Temp 80F+                 0.020**               0.020**              0.034***               0.035***
                                (0.009)               (0.009)               (0.011)                (0.012)

 Dep. Variable Mean               0.207                0.207                 0.207                 0.207
 Facility FE                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Year FE                           Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Rainfall Controls                 No                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Week of Year FE                   No                   No                    Yes                   Yes
 Facility Trends                   No                   No                    No                    Yes
 Clusters                          96                    96                   96                     96
 Observations                    20,456                20,456               20,456                 20,456

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Sample is limited to facilities with a minimum monthly
population of 500. Outcome in Panel (a) is count of violent acts at the facility-day level. Outcome in Panel
(b) is the binary indicator for any act of violence at the facility-day level. Bottom rows indicate fixed effects
and controls in each regression. Data span 2004-2010. Temperature values estimated at the county level
using PRISM weather data. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar month.



                                                      A-2
                 Table A-4: OLS Estimates of Violent Acts per 1,000 Prisoners

                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                (4)


 Avg. Temp 80F+                0.027***              0.027***            0.035***             0.036***
                                (0.009)               (0.009)             (0.011)              (0.011)

 Dep. Variable Mean              0.176                 0.176                 0.176              0.176
 Clusters                        432                   432                 432                  432
 Observations                   91,961                91,961              91,961               91,961

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Estimates follow Panel (a) of Table 1, with two changes: (1) the
dependent variable is scaled to reflect the count of violent acts per 1,000 prisoners, and (2) the regressions
weight by facility daily population. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar month.




Table A-5: OLS Estimates of Count and Occurrence of Violent Acts ­ Alternate Fixed
Effects

                                               (1)                     (2)                      (3)


Panel (a): Count
 Avg. Temp 80F+                             0.018***                0.019***                 0.014**
                                             (0.007)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)
Panel (b): Binary
 Avg. Temp 80F+                             0.007***                0.008***                 0.005*
                                             (0.003)                 (0.003)                 (0.003)
 Facility FE                                   Yes                     No                      No
 Week of Year FE                               No                      Yes                     No
 Year by Month FE                              Yes                     Yes                     No
 Facility by Month FE                          No                      Yes                     No
 Facility by Year FE                           No                      Yes                     No
 Facility by Month by Year FE                  No                      No                      Yes
 Clusters                                     432                     432                      432
 Observations                                92,052                  92,052                   92,052

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Outcome in Panel (a) is count of violent acts at the facility-
day level. Outcome in Panel (b) is the binary indicator for any act of violence at the facility-day level.
Bottom rows indicate fixed effects and controls in each regression. Data span 2004-2010. Temperature
values estimated at the county level using PRISM weather data. We cluster standard errors at the level of
facility by calendar month.




                                                      A-3
      Table A-6: Nonlinear Model Estimates of Count and Occurrence of Violent Acts

                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)


Panel (a): Count (Poisson)
 Avg. Temp 80+F                           0.155***           0.153***           0.202***            0.200***
                                           (0.050)            (0.050)            (0.056)             (0.056)

 Dep. Variable Mean                         0.096              0.096              0.096               0.096
 Clusters                                   432                432                 432                432
 Observations                              92,052             92,052              92,052             92,052
Panel (b): Binary (Logit)
 Avg. Temp 80F+                           0.138**             0.138**           0.229***            0.229***
                                          (0.057)             (0.057)            (0.071)             (0.071)

 Dep. Variable Mean                         0.053              0.053              0.053               0.053
 Facility FE                                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Year FE                                     Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Rainfall Controls                           No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Week of Year FE                             No                 No                 Yes                 Yes
 Facility Trends                             No                 No                 No                  Yes
 Clusters                                   408                408                 408                408
 Observations                              86,938             86,938              86,938             86,938

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Outcome in Panel (a) is count of violent acts at the facility-day
level, which we estimate using a Poisson count model. Outcome in Panel (b) is the binary indicator for any
act of violence at the facility-day level, which we estimate using a logit model -- clusters and observations
vary across models, as the logit does not estimate effects for facilities with zero violent acts across the period.
Bottom rows indicate fixed effects and controls in each regression. Data span 2004-2010. Temperature values
estimated at the county level using PRISM weather data. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility
by calendar month.




                                                       A-4
                              Table A-7: Tests for Cumulative Effects

                                                         (1)                 (2)             (3)
                                                               Daily Count               Weekly Count



 Avg. Temp 80F+                                        0.022**            0.028**
                                                       (0.011)            (0.011)
 # of Avg. Temp 80F+ Days Last Week                     -0.001
                                                       (0.002)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ X                                       -0.000
 # of Avg. Temp 80F+ Days Last Week                    (0.003)

 Avg. Temp 80F+ for Last 2 Days                                            -0.012
                                                                          (0.015)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ for Last 3 Days                                            0.009
                                                                          (0.016)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ for Last 4 Days                                            -0.003
                                                                          (0.020)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ for Last 5 Days                                            -0.005
                                                                          (0.017)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ (Weekly Count)                                                               0.018**
                                                                                             (0.009)
 Joint Test p-value                                    0.901                0.863                .
 Observations                                          91,800              92,052             13,104

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Models follow the fixed effects setup of Column 4 of Table 1.
Column 1 adds the count of days with 80F+ in the past 7 days, plus an interaction between the indicator for
80F+ and the count of days 80F+ in the last 7 days. Column 2 includes indicators for number of consecutive
days, leading up to the current day, with 80F+. In each case, we include the p-value of the test of joint
significance for the additional cumulative control variables. Column 3 provides results at the weekly level,
where we sum both counts of violence and days of 80F+ within a calendar week. We reestimate our initial
model, replacing prison trends by day with prison trends by week. We cluster standard errors at the level
of facility by calendar month.




                                                   A-5
Figure A-1: Temperature Distribution for Various Average Temperature Construction Meth-
ods


                .04




                .03




                .02




                .01




                 0
                        20              40                 60            80              100
                                             Average Daily Temperature

                              County PRISM             County GHCN            Facility GHCN



Notes: Distributions are average temperatures, at the indicated level, in the 2004-2010 period of our data.
"County PRISM" refers to PRISM weather data aggregated to the county level. "County GHCN" refers
to the NOAA Global Historical Climatology Network series of weather stations, aggregated to the county
level using all monitors within 50 miles of a county centroid and weighted by 1/distance. "Facility GHCN"
refers to the NOAA Global Historical Climatology Network series of weather stations, aggregated to the
facility level using all monitors within 50 miles of a prison location based on reported address and weighted
by 1/distance. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar month.




                                                     A-6
Figure A-2: Count of Violence Regression Coefficients by Temperature Bin Using Alternate
Temperature Measures

                                                                          (a) County GHCN                                                                                                        (b) Facility GHCN
 Effect of One Additional Day in Bin (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                        Effect of One Additional Day in Bin (and 95% CI)
                                                    .04                                                                                                                    .04



                                                    .02
                                                                                                                                                                           .02



                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                             0



                                                    -.02
                                                                                                                                                                           -.02



                                                    -.04
                                                                                                                                                                           -.04

                                                     Below 30F   30-39F     40-49F   50-59F   60-69F    70-79F   80F+                                                       Below 30F   30-39F     40-49F   50-59F   60-69F    70-79F   80F+
                                                                      Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                    Daily Average Temperature Bin Range



Notes: Coefficient estimates marked with filled circles are from a regression including indicators for average
daily temperature falling in the indicated temperature range, with 60-69F as the omitted bin, and include
95% confidence intervals. Empty diamond markers show estimates from our main model using county-level
PRISM data. Regressions include facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-specific
linear time trends and controls for rainfall. Counts use the number of violent acts per day as the outcome.
"County GHCN" refers to the NOAA Global Historical Climatology Network series of weather stations,
aggregated to the county level using all monitors within 50 miles of a county centroid and weighted by
1/distance. "Facility GHCN" refers to the NOAA Global Historical Climatology Network series of weather
stations, aggregated to the facility level using all monitors within 50 miles of a facility location based on
reported address and weighted by 1/distance. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar
month.




                                                                                                                    A-7
Figure A-3: Impact of an Additional Day in Average Temperature Range on Violent Acts
Relative to Below 70F -- Finer Upper Range Cuts

                                                               (a) Regression Coefficients                                 (b) Share of Days by Avg. Temp
  Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                .6

                                                  .06




                                                  .04                                                           .4



                                                  .02

                                                                                                                .2

                                                    0




                                                  -.02                                                          0
                                                   Below 70F      70-74F        75-79F         80-84F   85F+         Below 70F   70-74F        75-79F        80-84F    85F+
                                                                  Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                            Daily Average Temperature Bin Range



Notes: Panel (a) shows coefficient estimates from a regression including indicators for average daily tem-
perature falling in the indicated temperature range, with below 70F as the omitted bin, and include 95%
confidence intervals. Regressions include facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-
specific linear time trends and controls for rainfall. Counts use the number of violent acts per day as the
outcome. Panel (b) shows the average share of days in each relevant bin per year. We cluster standard errors
in both panels at the level of facility by calendar month.




                                                                                                          A-8
Figure A-4: Impact of Average Daily Temperature on Violence, Relative to 65F: Cubic
Spline



                                            .1




                                          .05
                 Effect Relative to 65F




                                            0




                                          -.05




                                           -.1
                                                 20   30   40      50      60        70   80   90
                                                             Average Temperature (F)



Notes: The plotted estimate is the predicted number of violent events relative to those predicted to occur at
a temperature of 65F, and include 95% confidence intervals of the prediction in red. We base this prediction
off a cubic spline regression, with knots at each 10F degree point from 30F to 90F. Regressions include
facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-specific linear time trends -- we omit controls
for rainfall to facilitate graphing predicted effects. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by
calendar month.




                                                                 A-9
                                                                              Figure A-5: Nonlinear Regression Coefficients by Temperature Bin

                                                                          (a) Poisson Count Model                                                                                                       (b) Logit Binary Model
 Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                                      Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)
                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                                                      .5

                                                                  .2



                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                  -.2



                                                                  -.4


                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                  -.6
                                                                  Below 30F 30-39F     40-49F   50-59F       60-69F   70-79F   80F+                                                   Below 30F      30-39F       40-49F       50-59F       60-69F   70-79F   80F+
                                                                                  Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                         Daily Average Temperature Bin Range



Notes: Coefficient estimates are from a regression including indicators for average daily temperature falling
in the indicated temperature range, with 60-69F as the omitted bin, and include 95% confidence intervals.
Regressions include facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-specific linear time trends
and controls for rainfall. Counts use the number of violent acts per day as the outcome, which we estimate
using a Poisson model. Binary uses an indicator for any violent act in a given day, which we estimate using
a logit model. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar month.




                                                                                                             Figure A-6: Falsification Tests

                                                                   (a) Shifting Dates Within Facility                                                                                              (b) Random Dates and Locations
 Change due to an Additional 80F+ Day (and 95% CI)




                                                     .04
                                                                                                                                                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                      Frequency of Estimate




                                                     .02



                                                                                                                                                                                      40


                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                     -.02                                                                                                                              0
                                                            -28         -21     -14     -7      0        7       14      21     28                                                          -.02        -.01               0              .01        .02      .03
                                                                                       Days of Temp Shift                                                                                                                      Estimate




Notes: Panel (a) shows estimates from 9 separate regressions, with assignment of 80F+ days shifted forward
or backward by the indicated number of days. Panel (b) shows the distribution of 1,000 regression estimates
on random assignment of 80F+ days; the vertical line shows the estimate using the correctly assigned days.
In all cases, regressions include facility, year, and week of year fixed effects, as well as facility-specific linear
time trends and controls for rainfall. See Section 5 for details.



                                                                                                                                 A-10
Figure A-7: Impact of an Additional Day in Average Temperature Range on Indicated Acts
Relative to 60-69F

                                                                           (a) Aggressive Behavior: Count
                                      Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)                                                                                                                            (b) Aggressive Behavior: Binary




                                                                                                                                                                                          Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)
                                                                                      .06                                                                                                                                                  .02




                                                                                      .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .01


                                                                                      .02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0

                                                                                            0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.01
                                                                                      -.02
                                                                                       Below 30F       30-39F        40-49F     50-59F     60-69F     70-79F   80F+                                                                         Below 30F    30-39F      40-49F    50-59F     60-69F    70-79F   80F+
                                                                                                                Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                                           Daily Average Temperature Bin Range


                                                                                                  (c) Disobedience: Count                                                                                                                             (d) Disobedience: Binary
                                      Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                          Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)
                                                                                      .3                                                                                                                                                   .04




                                                                                      .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .02

                                                                                      .1




                                                                                       0                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                      -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.02
                                                                                      Below 30F        30-39F       40-49F      50-59F     60-69F     70-79F   80F+                                                                         Below 30F    30-39F      40-49F    50-59F     60-69F    70-79F   80F+
                                                                                                                Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                                           Daily Average Temperature Bin Range


                                                                                            (e) Refusal to Work: Count                                                                                                                       (f) Refusal to Work: Binary
                                      Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                                          Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                      .1                                                                                                                                                   .015



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .01

                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                      -.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.005


                                                                                      -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.01
                                                                                      Below 30F        30-39F       40-49F      50-59F     60-69F     70-79F   80F+                                                                          Below 30F   30-39F       40-49F    50-59F    60-69F    70-79F   80F+
                                                                                                                Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                                               Daily Average Temperature Bin Range


                                                                                       (g) Riotous Behavior: Count                                                                                                                         (h) Riotous Behavior: Binary
                  Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                                                                                      Change Due to One Additional Day (and 95% CI)




                                                                                                .01                                                                                                                                        .01




                                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                       .005




                                                                                                -.01                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                -.02                                                                                                                                      -.005




                                                                                                -.03                                                                                                                                       -.01
                                                                                                 Below 30F 30-39F      40-49F     50-59F    60-69F    70-79F   80F+                                                                         Below 30F    30-39F      40-49F    50-59F    60-69F    70-79F    80F+
                                                                                                                  Daily Average Temperature Bin Range                                                                                                         Daily Average Temperature Bin Range




Notes: Regressions follow the LPM model in Panel (b) of Figure 4, but use alternative acts as the outcome
of interest. Titles indicate relevant act. See Section 6.1 for details and Appendix B for categorization of
different acts.




                                                                                                                                                                A-11
B-1          Incident Categorization
Incident category                                                                 Count       Incident category                                                                 Count
                                              Violent                                                                          Disobedience (continued)
Killing or assaulting anyone                                                         4,560    Unauthorized possession money, etc.                                                  565
Fighting, except self-defense                                                        3,739    Failure to conform to grooming standards                                             535
Assaultive action against any person resulting in serious physical injury            1,367    Lying to an employee                                                                 502
Murder                                                                                2       Unauthorized possession of items                                                     481
Total                                                                               9,668     Smuggling of contraband items into, out of, or within the institution                389
                                      Aggressive Behavior                                     Unauthorized giving/accepting of money or anything of value                          377
Threatening another                                                                  3,922    Making or drinking intoxicants                                                       375
Physical action against another person (no serious injury)                           1,862    Preparing/ conducting gambling                                                       343
Setting a fire                                                                       1,081    Negligent or deliberate destruction, alteration or defacing of state, personal,      304
                                                                                              or community property
Making threatening or intimidating statements                                        775      Tattooing or piercing self or others or allowing self to be tattooed or pierced      291
Deliberately or negligently causing a fire                                           304      Unauthorized contact with the public                                                 265
Involvement in distruptive, assaultive, or criminal gang activity                    250      Miscellaneous contraband                                                             242
Inflicting injury to self (self-mutilation)                                          153      Violating the institutional dress code or grooming standards                         230
Arrest for criminal activity while on 72-hour leave                                   7       Escape, attempting or planning                                                       229
Total                                                                               8,354     Unauthorized communication with any member of the public, staff, or                  221
                                                                                              between inmates
                                         Disobedience                                         Informal resolution                                                                  218
Refusing to obey staff order                                                        28,001    Forging/ altering of articles                                                        182
Engaging in sexual act                                                              14,682    Pursuing or developing a relationship that is unrelated to correctional              168
                                                                                              activities with a non-inmate
Unauthorized possession of contraband                                               10,986    Violations of mail, telephone, or visiting regulations                               162
Unauthorized possession - drug/alcohol related                                       8,814    Improper or unauthorized use of state equipment or materials                         148
Refusing or failing to obey an order of staff                                        8,025    Giving or receiving anything of value to or from another                             134
Violate - conditions of release                                                      7,578    Malingering/ feigning illness                                                        124
Using abusive or obscene language                                                    7,208    Bribing (offering to) staff                                                          123
In unauthorized area w/o permission                                                  7,204    Tampering with physical evidence or hindering an investigation                       120
Not standing/ interfering with count                                                 4,922    Unauthorized removal of food or untensils from any food service area                 119
Unauthorized use of drugs or intoxicants or testing positive for either              4,718    Extortion                                                                             81
Possession of major contraband                                                       4,465    Violating a condition of any outside work assignment                                  75
Inappropriate sexual behavior with another person or indecent exposure               4,442    Engaging in extoration or blackmail, bribery, loan sharking, collection, or           73
                                                                                              incurring debt
Interfering with security                                                            4,397    Unauthorized possession of utensils                                                   65
Not following safety/ sanitation regulations                                         4,151    Refusing to submit to a search                                                        62
Destroying property                                                                  3,717    Misuse of equipment, etc.                                                             55
Abusive, disrespectful, vulgar, obscene or threatening language, gestures or         3,485    Gambling                                                                              49
actions
Being in a restricted or unauthorized area                                           3,257    Escape                                                                                48
Failure to abide by the statement of conditions of release                           2,666    Faking illness or injury                                                              45
Possession serious contraband                                                        2,318    Unauthorized possession of clothing                                                   40
Being loud, boisterous or disorderly                                                 2,301    Breaking or entering into another inmate's locker, room, cell, or living unit         38
Stealing                                                                             2,071    Absconding supervision for probation or parole                                        32
Refusing or failing to comply                                                        1,902    Littering                                                                             31
Disruptive behavior or disorderly conduct which threatens the orderly                1,737    Using mail to obtain money, goods, or services by fraud                               14
running of the facility
Detention notice                                                                     1,686    Total                                                                              162,681
Providing false information                                                          1,308                                          Refusal to Work
Refusing or failing to submit to a drug urinalysis test                              1,244    Refusing to work                                                                    13,614
Tattooing or self-mutilation                                                         1,168    Refusing or failing to carry out work assignment                                     7,168
Attempting/violating miscellaneous offenses in Ch. 13, Articles 1-34                 1,151    Total                                                                               20,782
Violation of phone, etc. Privileges                                                  976                                            Riotous Behavior
Failure to abide by any published institutional schedule or documented               963      Demonstrating/encouraging                                                            1,270
Interfering with an employee in the performance of their duties                      810      Rioting or encouraging others                                                        171
Negligent or deliberate destruction, alteration or defacing of state, personal,      771      Inciting to riot or rioting                                                          169
or community property
Stealing                                                                             720      Nonviolent demonstration or inciting a nonviolent demonstration                       94
Destroying or tampering with life safety equipment, locking or security              680      Total                                                                               1,704
Failure to clean bed area or pass bed area inspection                                602      Grand Total                                                                       203,189

Notes: Table shows the number of incidents by the five analysis categories for inmates held by the Mississippi Department of Corrections between 2004
and 2010. Exhibit includes the universe of incidents in their original detail from the raw data extract.




                                                                                             B-1
C-1     Heat Index
   The NOAA uses the following baseline equation to estimate the heat index:

      HI = -42.379 + 2.04901523  T + 10.14333127  RH - .22475541  T  RH

            -.00683783  T  T - .05481717  RH  RH + .00122874  T  T  RH

                 +.00085282  T  RH  RH - .00000199  T  T  RH  RH,                     (C-1)

where T indicates temperature in Fahrenheit and RH is relative humidity, a measure of
water vapor present in the air relative to maximum saturation at a given temperature. This
is based upon a multiple regression analysis that Rothfusz (1990) describes in detail. When
temperature falls between 80 and 87 Fahrenheit, and relative humidity is above 85%, we
follow NOAA and modify the estimate by

                 Adjustment = (13 - RH )/4           17 - (T - 95.)   /17.            (C-2)

Other adjustments may be necessary for ranges outside of the temperatures we consider in
our analysis ­ for details, see Rothfusz (1990).
   Our primary weather data do not include relative humidity. Such data are available
for two temperature sensors in Mississippi in the daily U.S. Climate Reference Network
(USCRN). To estimate the heat index, we first use the USCRN data to regress the minimum
daily relative humidity on the maximum daily temperature across the year 2010. We use
the minimum humidity given that as temperatures rise, relative humidity tends to decrease.
This is a result of hotter air being able to hold more moisture, and relative humidity being
a measure of water vapor in the air as the percentage of total possible saturation. This
estimate suggests a one degree F increase in daily maximum temperature correlates with
a 0.4% decrease in minimum daily relative humidity. We then use this to predict relative
humidity in our PRISM data for any given daily maximum. We use the formula above to
calculate a maximum heat index for each day in our data with average temperature over 80
degrees, using the maximum daily temperature and the regression-estimated humidity.


                                             C-1
D-1     Population Effects and the Parole Policy of 2008
   In 2008, the Mississippi Senate passed Senate Bill 2136, a substantial parole reform
aimed at curbing the rising prison population. The bill brought forward parole eligibility
for nonviolent and single-offense prisoners after serving 25% of their sentence, a decrease
from 85%. The bill was signed into law April 7th, 2008, and applied to all new sentences
and retroactively to all current sentences. The policy resulted in a marked decrease in the
prison population, aligning with a decrease in prison violence. Panel (a) of Appendix Figure
D-1 shows the trend in average acts per prisoner (solid line) and total facility population
(dashed line). Panel (b) shows similar trends for the probability of any violent act. The
vertical line indicates the date the Governor of Mississippi approved the bill, which coincides
almost perfectly with a change in overall patterns of violent acts per prisoner. While this
speaks to the link between facility population and violence, how it changed the heat-violence
relationship remains an open question. With fewer inmates, there might be closer supervision
of inmate conflict, or fewer opportunities for problematic interactions. Overcrowding might
also contribute to any effects of heat, which is important from a policy perspective.
   To test if reducing the prison population changed the relationship between temperature
and violent acts, we allow the effect of hot days to vary by before and after the passage of
the bill by interacting our temperature indicator with an indicator for post-April 7th, 2008.
Table D-1 presents our results. Column 1 is the OLS count estimate, Column 2 repeats the
OLS count estimate as per-prisoner, weighted by facility population, and Column 3 is our
LPM. In each case, the interaction term with post-reform is not statistically different from
zero, though across all models the total economic effect is smaller by about one-third post-
bill. Reducing the number of inmates in prison appears to reduce violent acts, and may also
reduce the impact of temperature on violent acts, but we lack the precision to specifically
identify such effects.




                                             D-1
                                 Figure D-1: Counts and Probabilities of Violence Across Prison Reform

                             (a) Probability of Any Violent Act                                                                                                               (b) Acts per 1,000 Prisoners
                     .08                                                                 21000                                                                                                                                          21000
                                                                                                                                                             .25




                                                                                                                              Violent Acts Per 1,000 Prisoners
                                                                                         20500                                                                                                                                          20500




                                                                                                 Sample Prison Population
                     .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sample Facility Population
                                                                                                                                                                 .2
 Prob. of Violence




                                                                                         20000                                                                                                                                          20000
                     .04
                                                                                                                                                             .15
                                                                                         19500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19500

                     .02
                                                                                         19000                                                                   .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19000


                      0                                                                  18500
                                                                                                                                                             .05                                                                        18500
                      1/1/2004 1/1/2005 1/1/20061/1/2007 1/1/2008 1/1/20091/1/2010 1/1/2011
                                                      Time                                                                                                       1/1/2004 1/1/2005 1/1/2006 1/1/2007 1/1/2008 1/1/2009 1/1/2010 1/1/2011

                                   Prob. of Violence           Incarcerated Population                                                                                       Rate per 1,000 Prisoners         Incarcerated Population




Notes: Figures show trends in violent acts alongside incarcerated population for all prisoners in our sample.
Panel (a) shows the binary indicator for the probability of any violent act at the facility-day level. Panel
(b) shows the rate of violent acts per 1,000 population at the facility-day level. Vertical line indicates the
signing of the Mississippi prison reform bill altering parole processes. See Section D-1 for details.




                                  Table D-1: OLS Estimates of Differential Effects Across Parole Reform

                                                                                          (1)                                                                                   (2)                                       (3)
                                                                                         Count                                                                            Count per 1,000                                Binary


 Avg. Temp 80F+                                                                          0.023**                                                                                 0.040***                              0.010***
                                                                                         (0.010)                                                                                  (0.014)                               (0.004)
 Avg. Temp 80F+ X Post Bill                                                               -0.006                                                                                   -0.010                                -0.004
                                                                                         (0.010)                                                                                  (0.015)                               (0.004)
 Post Bill                                                                                -0.008                                                                                   -0.016                                 0.002
                                                                                         (0.019)                                                                                  (0.032)                               (0.005)
 Observations                                                                            92,052                                                                                    91,961                                92,052

Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Models follow the fixed effects setup of Column 4 of Table 1.
Post Bill refers to the period beginning on April 7th, 2008, when a parole reform bill passed and lessened
requirements for parole consideration for a subset of Mississippi inmates. Column 1 is the OLS count of
violent acts at the facility-day level, and Column 2 is the OLS count of violent acts per 1,000 prisoners at the
facility-day level, weighted by facility population. Column 3 is the linear probability model of any violent
act at the facility-day level. Observations in Column 2 are lower due to a small number of facility/day cells
without recorded population. We cluster standard errors at the level of facility by calendar month.




                                                                                                                            D-2
E-1     Accounts of Extreme Heat in Correctional Facilities
  Below are examples of reported accounts of heat in correction facilities.


      "I'd be in a cell for 23 hours a day and it was so hot in there I would put my
      hand to the wall and it would get burned."

      "There was no ventilation system so my cellmate and me would take turns sleep-
      ing on the floor. You'd clean the floor, throw water down so it was like a puddle
      and lie down on it on a sheet. Everything would be completely dry in the morn-
      ing. The summers were just miserable."


           Milman, O. (2019, Jul 2). `People are in danger': the prisoners feeling
           the effects of the US climate crisis. The Guardian.

           https://bit.ly/35sC0xu


      "The spokesperson said that inmates have "the ability to access water throughout
      the day" and that ice and water coolers are refilled continuously -- contradicting
      the accounts of inmates who said that ice rations are often reduced and sometimes
      outright denied, that in some facilities they are given no ice or cold water for days
      at a time, that ice is so scarce that inmates will buy it off each other, and that
      inmates residing in a given cell block are given ice water to pass down the row of
      cells, which often leads to violence and hoarding of the vital resource."


           Speri, A. (2016, Aug 24). "Deadly Heat" in U.S. Prisons is Killing
           Inmates and Spawning Lawsuits. The Intercept.

           https://bit.ly/3pVipj7


      "It routinely feels as if one's sitting in a convection oven being slowly cooked
      alive. There is no respite from the agony that the heat in Texas prisons inflicts."




                                              E-1
     Jones, A. (2019, Jun 18) Cruel and unusual punishment: When states
     don't provide air conditioning in prison. Prison Policy.

     https://bit.ly/3gqtPbu


"Lance Lowry, a former prison guard in Texas who now works with the guards
union, says the corrections officers have many of the same heat-sensitive health
conditions as prisoners -- obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, even mental
illness. "Officers frequently suffer from heat cramps and a lot of heat illnesses,"
Lowry says."

"Former Texas warden Keith Price, now a professor of criminology and sociology
at West Texas A&M University, said that it's important to accommodate heat-
sensitive prisoners, but that inmates also need to acknowledge that prison is not
a five-star hotel. "You know, they don't get to go get a cheeseburger whenever
they want to, either," Price said. "So, I mean, you know there's a certain amount
of things that you give up when you become incarcerated"

     Roth, Alisa. (2014, Jul 24) Do Heat-Sensitive Inmates Have A Right
     To Air Conditioning? National Public Radio.

     https://n.pr/3iHx2Vw


"However, one prisoner said the fans are sometimes turned off for punishment,
and are taken away after September 1. In other cases, prisoners have reported
being denied ice and cool showers during the summer months, while even in prison
units that have air conditioning, staff have set thermostats at temperatures in
the 80s."

     Clarke, M. (2019, Oct 7) As Climate Changes, High Temperatures
     Plague Prisons and Jails. Prison Legal News.

     https://bit.ly/3gpBrLe

                                       E-2
"Jeff Edwards, a plaintiffs lawyer in Austin, brought the class action suit involving
the Pack Unit and is representing eight families whose loved ones died in hot
prisons. They include Rodney Adams, a Dallas man sentenced to four years
for driving while intoxicated who started convulsing shortly after arriving at the
Gurney Unit in east Texas in 2012. He died less than two days after his arrival
-- his body temperature had reached 109.9."

     Chammah, M. (2017, Oct 11) "Cooking Them to Death": The Lethal
     Toll of Hot Prisons. The Marshall Project.

     https://bit.ly/3xrCPTd


"A surge in violence in Georgia prisons over the past few weeks has left at least
two inmates dead and dozens of others injured, put staff in danger and forced
the lock-down of as many as eight of Georgia's 33 prisons. Contributing to the
dangerous climate inside the state's prisons have been the heat in prisons without
air conditioning, the prevalence of cellphones that sell for as much as $500 in the
hands of thousands of inmates (8,800 confiscated in the first six months of this
year) and the growing presence of violent gangs that increased their numbers last
year alone by an estimated 4,200."

     Cook, R. (2015, Aug 23) Georgia prisons: Gangs, rising violence, thou-
     sands of cellphones. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

     https://bit.ly/3cIbJQ7




                                        E-3
