                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            RENTS AND INTANGIBLE CAPITAL:
                                   A Q+ FRAMEWORK

                                         Nicolas Crouzet
                                         Janice C. Eberly

                                       Working Paper 28988
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28988


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Francois Gourio and Thomas Philippon for comments on earlier work that led to this
paper, and Tom Winberry for helpful discussions. We also thank Andrea Eisfeldt and Ernest Liu,
our formal discussants, and seminar participants at the IMF, the Q group, the University of
Michigan, the Women in Macro conference, the Yale Junior Finance conference, the Danish
Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Northwestern Kellogg, the London Business
School, the Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, the Jackson Hole Finance
Conference, and the Chicago Booth Finance Workshop. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rents and Intangible Capital: A Q+ Framework
Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly
NBER Working Paper No. 28988
July 2021
JEL No. D25,D4,E22,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

In recent years, US investment has been lackluster, despite rising valuations. Key explanations
include growing rents and growing intangibles. We propose and estimate a framework to quantify
their roles. The gap between valuations -- reflected in average Q -- and investment -- reflected
in marginal q-- can be decomposed into three terms: the value of installed intangibles; rents
generated by physical capital; and an interaction term, measuring rents generated by intangibles.
The intangible-related terms contribute significantly to the gap, particularly in fast-growing
sectors. Our findings suggest care in a pure-rents interpretation, given the rising role of
intangibles.


Nicolas Crouzet
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
n-crouzet@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Janice C. Eberly
Department of Finance
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eberly@kellogg.northwestern.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28988
1       Introduction
Recent research highlights two apparently contradictory, medium-run facts about the US
economy: returns to business capital, and corporate profits more generally, have been either
stable or growing (Gomme et al., 2011); yet investment has been lackluster, in particular
relative to corporate valuations (Guti´
                                      errez and Philippon, 2017; Alexander and Eberly, 2018).
Ceteris paribus, investment theory would predict a rise in investment in response to higher
returns to capital and corporate valuations.
    In neoclassical models, the divergence between returns and investment can be cast as a
rising gap between the average value of business capital, or Tobin's average Q, and its marginal
value, or Tobin's marginal q. We directly observe rising average Q in the data, via market
values, while marginal q is a shadow value measured implicitly by lackluster investment. A
gap between the average value of capital and its marginal value can arise and grow for a
number of reasons. Two leading explanations have recently emerged: intangible capital and
rents.
   Over the last several decades, intangible capital has grown as a share of investment and as
a share of assets (Corrado et al., 2005, 2009). A shift toward intangibles in production could
cause physical investment to appear low relative to valuations. Typical measures, such as
Tobin's average Q, increasingly underestimate the true stock of assets, and thus increasingly
overstate the incentive to invest in physical capital (Guti´
                                                           errez and Philippon, 2017; Alexander
and Eberly, 2018; Crouzet and Eberly, 2019).
   Alternatively, the gap between average Q and marginal q may be explained by market
power. Rising market power and its corresponding rents can account for a stable or rising
rate of return on assets despite a falling user cost of capital. Rising rents also reduce the
marginal return to additional capital, consistent with a weaker incentive to invest. Several
recent papers indeed document a rise in the measured capital share over the last three decades,
which, along with declining required returns to capital, is consistent with higher rents (Barkai,
2020; Guti´errez and Philippon, 2018a).
    From a positive perspective, both intangibles and rents have the potential to explain the
divergence between returns and investment. However, the normative implications of the two
mechanisms may dier. Rising intangibles reflect supply-side changes in the organization of
production (Haskel and Westlake, 2018), with no clear implications for welfare. By contrast,
rising rents could be associated with deadweight losses, for instance if they are due to price
markups (De Loecker et al., 2020) or wage markdowns (Benmelech et al., 2018).1
    1
     The normative implications of rising rents and reduced competition can however depend on the economic
environment. Among many others, Aghion et al. (2005), for instance, provide an example of a model in which
reduced competition may be associated with increased innovation.
                                                    1
   Any normative or policy conclusion drawn from the divergence between investment and
returns thus requires a careful assessment of which of the two mechanisms is most relevant
in practice. However, most of the literature has considered each of these mechanisms in
isolation, which tends to overstate their respective explanatory power. The goal of this paper
is to assess them jointly, and in doing so, to provide a quantitative estimate of the role of
each in the divergence between returns and investment. To do this, we extend the Q-theory
model (Hayashi, 1982; Abel and Eberly, 1994) to simultaneously allow for the presence of
economic rents and the accumulation of a stock of intangible assets. We call this model the
"Q+" framework.
   Using this framework, we make two main contributions. First, from a theoretical perspec-
tive, we show that the gap between average Q and marginal q for physical capital, which we
call the "investment gap", can be decomposed into three distinct terms: a term capturing
rents to physical capital, a term capturing the value of installed intangible capital, and a term
capturing rents to intangible capital. The last element of this decomposition, an interaction
term that is new to our analysis, is particularly important: it clarifies the fact that rising
rents and rising intangibles cannot be meaningfully analyzed in isolation, as their interaction
contributes to the gap between investment and returns. Moreover, this decomposition is very
general, as our framework nests a number of existing investment models.
    Second, we show that this interaction term is empirically important to the recent rise
in the investment gap. Importantly, we show how each term in our decomposition can be
quantified using data on profits, investment, valuations, and estimates of the intangible capital
stock within the structure of the model. In aggregate data, the interaction term accounts for
between one-quarter and one-half of the investment gap, depending on how broad the definition
of intangibles is. In addition, our approach leads to lower estimates of the increase in total
rents than existing work. As we show, this is equivalent to a smaller estimate of the decrease
in total user costs of capital. This occurs because while including intangibles raises valuations,
it also boosts the user cost of capital due to higher depreciation rates (hence reducing rents).
    Finally, we move beyond the aggregate data, recognizing that economy-wide increases in
rents and intangibles may be driven by composition eects across sectors. In fact, we find
that the aggregate investment gap is driven by fast-growing industries, such as Healthcare
and Tech. Moreover, these industries' investment gaps are mostly explained by intangibles,
even when intangibles are narrowly measured. We also show that among the subsectors of
Healthcare, Tech, and Manufacturing, only a subset experienced rising rents, and those that
did generally also experienced a rise in intangible intensity. Taken together, these empirical
results suggest that the investment gap in these industries reflects a change in the factors of
production, rather than unequivocal and broad evidence of rising market power.

                                                2
   In Section 2, we develop and analyze the "Q+" framework. The gap between average Q
and marginal q, which we call the "investment gap", is our main focus. We show how this
gap can be decomposed into three distinct terms: a term capturing rents to physical capital,
a term capturing the value of installed intangibles, and a term capturing rents to intangible
capital. The first two terms would obtain, respectively, in a model without rents (but with
intangibles), and in a model without intangibles (but with rents). When both are present
in the model, a third term appears, which captures the economic rents earned by intangible
capital. The model demonstrates how these can be identified separately from rents earned
by physical capital. The result is independent of the specifics of exogenous processes and of
capital adjustment cost and revenue functions, so long as they satisfy simple homogeneity
assumptions. We also provide versions of the framework in which each of these terms can
be solved in closed form. These analytical expressions clarify the key forces driving the
eects of rents, intangibles, and their interaction. In particular, rents on intangible capital
are the present value of markups multiplied by an appropriately defined user cost, which
takes into account adjustment costs. This user cost is large for intangible capital because
intangibles depreciate quickly, foreshadowing our findings on the quantitative importance of
rents generated by intangibles.
   In Section 3, we apply this decomposition to aggregate data, after showing how to esti-
mate the components of the investment gap using moments of corporate profits, investment,
valuations, and estimates of the intangible stock. We begin with data from US national ac-
counts, which are broader in coverage, but provide a narrower definition of intangibles, as
they focus on R&D capital. Two periods stand out with large investment gaps: the 1965-1975
decade, and the post-1990 period. Most interestingly, the composition of the gap is dierent
between these two periods: whereas the 1965-1975 gap is mostly driven by rents generated by
physical capital, approximately 40% of the post-1990's gap is due to the intangibles-related
terms. The term capturing rents to intangibles is sizable, accounting for 25% of the gap, with
the direct intangibles eect making up the other 15%. The post-1990's change is driven by
three underlying trends. First, the share of intangibles approximately doubles. Second, the
user costs of intangibles are not only much higher, but also more stable than those of physical
capital. We infer this from the fact that gross intangible investment rates are stable and ele-
vated in the data, which is consistent with high and stable depreciation rates for intangibles
(a finding which is borne out independently by BEA data on intangible depreciation rates).
Third, overall rents increase, though they do so more moderately than suggested by other
recent work. This is driven by dierences in our estimates of the decline in the user cost of
capital, which we explore in detail in Section 3.
    Section 4 examines the investment gap using data on publicly traded firms. While narrower

                                              3
in scope, these data have two advantages: we can use a broader definition of intangible
capital, and we can dis-aggregate results by sector. When we expand intangibles to include the
organization capital stock of firms (rather than just R&D) following Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2013), we find that by 2015, the two intangibles-related terms account for two thirds of the
total investment gap. Including organization capital has relatively little impact on estimated
user costs of intangibles -- they remain elevated --, but it substantially increases the stock of
intangibles, boosting both their direct eect on the investment gap, and the interaction term.
Our estimates of rents as a share of value added are also roughly cut in half. Thus, empirically
plausible amounts of intangible capital can explain the investment gap without requiring high
rents.
   Finally, in Section 4, we also estimate our decomposition at the sectoral level, in order to
assess the extent to which the aggregate investment gap reflects composition eects. We divide
our sample into five broad sectors: Consumer, Services, Tech, Healthcare, and Manufacturing.
In the Manufacturing sector, the investment gap is small, and both rents and intangibles are
declining. By contrast, in the Tech and Healthcare sectors, the investment gap has been
growing rapidly since the 2000's. In both sectors, the primary driver is rents to intangible
capital. In the Consumer sector, results depend on the measurement of the intangible capital
stock. Reported R&D is small, so there is little role for intangibles when they are measured
with this proxy. However, innovation in the consumer sector is not well-measured by R&D
(see Foster et al. 2006 and Crouzet and Eberly 2018). When including organization capital,
most of the gap is estimated to reflect the direct eect of large investment in intangibles in
that sector -- rents on either physical or intangible capital appear to have only modestly
increased. The Service sector is similar in some respects to Consumer, in that R&D is small,
so rents explain most of the gap. However, adding organization capital does not change this
view, as there has been little growth in organization capital in the Service sector; hence, rents
explain most of the gap throughout. Finally, we also study the relationship between rising
rents and rising intangibles across the constituent subsectors of our five broad sectors. We find
that the rise in rents was heterogeneous across subsectors, and within Manufacturing, Tech
and Healthcare, subsectors that experienced a rise in rents also experienced an increase in
intangible intensity. These findings suggest that the rise in rents may be both narrower than
aggregate estimates and also related to changes in the underlying structure of production.
    Our results caution against interpreting the gap as a broad rise in market power. Our
evidence shows that intangibles play a key role, and no single mechanism provides a unified
account of the gap, even across broadly defined sectors. Normative implications should hence
be drawn with care.


                                               4
Related research and contribution Our work first relates to the literature on the impli-
cations of rising intangible capital for macroeconomics and finance, which itself builds on work
measuring intangibles and documenting their rise (Corrado et al., 2005, 2009; Eisfeldt and Pa-
panikolaou, 2013). Closest to our approach are Hall (2001), who links the rise in intangibles
to stock market valuations, and McGrattan and Prescott (2010), who examine the potential
role of intangibles for macro trends in a business cycle model.2 Relative to these papers, we
study medium-run trends, emphasize sectoral heterogeneity, and, most importantly, allow for
market power within our model.
   Second, our work is related to a recent literature on the size and implications of rising
rents. A number of researchers have interpreted the findings of Autor et al. (2020), who
show that industry concentration rose in U.S. industries after 2000, as potential evidence of
market power, and examined profitability and markup data for further evidence.3 Most closely
related to our work are Guti´  errez and Philippon (2018a) and Barkai (2020), who document
a significant increase in pure profit shares and markups, especially after 2000. Barkai (2020),
in particular, does not directly examine investment, but shows that the decline in the labor
share is not oset by a rising capital share; he attributes the resulting gap to pure profits. Our
approach, based on valuations, uncovers a more modest increase in rents than these papers,
a point we expand on in Section 3. Similarly, Basu (2019) reviews the evidence from the
rents literature, and argues that macro trends related to profitability are largely consistent
with historical variation. He points instead to weak investment as the outlier and asks how
to reconcile it with the apparently modest changes in rents. Our paper explains this apparent
divergence as the combined eect of moderate rents with rising intangibles.
    In recent and related research, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019) find that the gap between
measured capital income and estimates of the required compensation of capital is most likely
explained by mismeasurement in the cost of capital. Our approach provides an alternative
measure of the user cost of capital which further supports this view. Most closely related to
our work is Farhi and Gourio (2018), who estimate the contribution of market power, risk
premia, and intangibles to recent macro trends, as well as Corhay et al. (2020), who highlight
the role of declining entry as a source of increasing market power. Relative to their work, our
analysis focuses more specifically on investment and on the role that intangible capital plays
in explaining weak investment relative to valuations.
    A rich literature in corporate finance has discussed potential sources of wedges between
average Q and marginal q, and the performance of investment-Q regressions. Most recently,

   2
    See also Hansen et al. (2005) and Ai et al. (2013).
   3
    De Loecker et al. (2020) and Hall (2019) use firm-level accounting data and industry data, respectively,
and find both high and rising markups.
                                                     5
Peters and Taylor (2017) revisit the relationship between investment and Q when intangibles
are present.4 Belo et al. (2019) also provide decompositions of firm value across types of
capital, including intangibles. We leverage the empirical results of both papers in our analysis,
but also provide a more general framework than either, by allowing for rents, a key element
in the relationship between investment and Q. Section 2 provides further comparisons of our
framework with existing models.
   Our results are also connected to recent findings documenting a decline in investment/cash-
flow sensitivities and questions whether it reflects financing constraints (Chen and Chen,
2012). From the standpoint of our model, a potential interpretation of the results of Chen
and Chen (2012) is that Tobin's Q increasingly captures cash flow eects, through the growing
importance of rents, particularly those associated with intangibles. Relatedly, recent research
by Falato et al. (2020) studies how the growth in corporate cash holdings relates to rising
intangible intensity. They argue that the reduced reliance on physical capital has shrunk
corporate debt capacity, which firms oset by increasing precautionary cash holdings. We
document an additional aggregate and sectoral trend, the increase in rents. This trend, by
increasing the curvature of firms' profits with respect to capital, may have exacerbated the
precautionary motive, further contributing to the growth in cash holdings.
    Finally, this paper is related to our own prior research, and in particular to Crouzet and
Eberly (2019). Relative to that paper, the current paper diers in two important ways. First,
we derive a decomposition of the investment gap that allows for both intangibles and rents. By
contrast, the framework Crouzet and Eberly (2019) does not allow for rents. The addition of
rents delivers one of the key insights of this paper: rents can amplify the eect of intangibles on
the investment gap; or, put dierently, in the more general framework studied in this paper, the
slope coe cient on intangible capital is higher when rents are high. Second, on the empirical
side, this paper uses the structure of the model to quantify the respective contributions of
intangibles, rents, and their interaction, to the growth of the investment gap over the past
three decades. We find that the contribution of the interaction term is substantial, leading us
to estimate that up to 60% of the aggregate investment gap is due to the rise in intangibles.
By contrast, Crouzet and Eberly (2019) provides reduced-form evidence that the investment
gap is higher in industries with higher intangible intensity and higher market power, but does
not allow for an interaction between the two mechanisms. As a result, Crouzet and Eberly
(2019) attributes only about 30% of the gap to intangibles.5

   4
      Related, Andrei et al. (2019) show that the correlation between Q and investment at high frequencies has
recently increased. We focus on the divergence between valuations and investment at longer horizons.
    5
      It is also worth noting that the approach followed in Crouzet and Eberly (2019) is not structural. The
statement, in that paper, that 30% of the gap is attributable to intangibles refers to the incremental explanatory
power of intangibles in reduced-form regressions.
                                                        6
2       Rents, intangibles, and the investment gap: theory
In this section, we derive a general decomposition of the gap between average Q and marginal
q . We call this the "investment gap". For each type of capital employed by the firm, the
investment gap depends on economic rents, the other forms of capital employed by the firm,
and the rents they generate. We provide analytical characterizations of the gap in certain
special cases, relate our results to existing work, and study extensions of our basic framework.
Proofs for the results of this section are in Appendix 1.


2.1     Model
Time t is discrete. A firm uses N dierent capital inputs, collected in a vector Kt = {Kn,t }N
                                                                                            n=1
               6
in production. The firm's operating profits as a function of capital are t (Kt ), where Kt is
an aggregate of the dierent types of capital, given by Kt = Ft (Kt ). Total investment costs,
including adjustment costs on capital, are given by ~ t (Kt , Kt+1 ). We index the functions
Ft , t and ~ t to indicate that they can depend arbitrarily on other unspecified exogenous
variables. The discount factor of the firm is Mt,t+1 . Firm value satisfies:
                                                                        h                   i
              Vtc (Kt ) =      max      t (Kt )    ~ t (Kt , Kt+1 ) + Et Mt,t+1 V c (Kt+1 )
                                                                                 t+1
                               Kt+1
                                                                                                            (1)
               s.t.         K t = F t ( Kt ) ,

where Vtc (.) is the value of the firm including distributions. We make the following assumptions
about the primitives of the problem.
Assumption 1. Ft (Kt ) is homogeneous of degree 1.
                                                                           1
Assumption 2. t (Kt ) is increasing, concave, and homogeneous of degree  1.
                                                                           µ
                                                         P                 
Assumption 3. Investment costs satisfy ~ t (Kt , Kt+1 ) = N
                                                                    Kn,t+1
                                                           n=1 n,t   Kn,t
                                                                            Kn,t , where each
function n,t is strictly increasing and convex.
    The parameter µ plays a central role in our analysis: it indexes the economic rents accruing
to the firm, with µ = 1 corresponding to no rents. We discuss the link between µ and economic
rents in more detail in Section 2.2.
    In Section 2.4, we provide examples of models in the literature which are particular cases
of the general model just described. We also clarify which frictions this model abstracts from,
some of which we tackle in the extensions described in Section 2.5.
    6
      These capital inputs can be broadly understood as any quasi-fixed factor which are costly to adjust and
contribute to the output of the firm over more than one period; for instance, any stock of skilled labor that is
both costly to adjust and does not fully depreciate within the period.
                                                       7
2.2    A decomposition of the investment gap
Our main result on the investment gap uses the following lemma.

Lemma 1. Let:
                                                               @ Vte                 @ t @ Kt
                  Vte = Et Mt,t+1 Vtc
                                    +1 ,         qn,t                 ,     n,t                  .        (2)
                                                             @ Kn,t+1                @ Kt @ Kn,t

Firm value can be written as:
                       N
                       X                                          N X
                                                                  X
            Vte   =          qn,t Kn,t+1     +      (µ       1)             Et [Mt,t+k n,t+k Kn,t+k ] .   (3)
                       n=1                                        n=1 k 1


    This lemma decomposes firm value into two parts.
    The first part is the sum of the value of the installed stocks of each capital type n. This
value is equal to the replacement cost, Kn,t+1 , multiplied by marginal q, qn,t ; the latter will
be dierent from 1 so long as the corresponding capital adjustment costs n,t are strictly
convex. This generalizes the Hayashi (1982, Proposition 1) result to multiple capital inputs;
this generalization was first noted by Hayashi and Inoue (1991), in a model where µ = 1.
   For the second part of equation (3), note that when there is only one type of capital
(N = 1), it boils down to a discounted sum of the terms (µ 1)K,t+k Kn,t+k . Moreover,

                                                             t+k
                                  (µ       1)K,t+k =                   K,t+k ,                            (4)
                                                             Kt+k

so that these terms are dierence between the average and the marginal (revenue) product of
capital. We interpret this dierence as the flow value of rents. When N = 1 the second term
in equation (3) is then simply the present value of future rents. This term is non-zero only
when µ > 1, as first noted by Lindenberg and Ross (1981) and Hayashi (1982, Proposition 2)
in models where N = 1. The magnitude of µ controls the overall size of rents.
    When N > 1, the second term in Equation (3) is the sum of terms of the form:
                                                                            
                                                    t+k                         @ Ft+k
                         (µ     1)n,t+k =                          K,t+k                .                 (5)
                                                    Kn,t+k                     @ Kn,t+k

These terms capture the marginal contribution of capital of type n to overall rents earned by
the firm. The flow value of rents is the gap between the average and the marginal (revenue)
product of capital of type n. The intuition from the N = 1 case thus carries through, with
the added insight that total rents are additively separable across capital types, which will be
useful in quantifying the contribution of each type of capital to overall rents.

                                                         8
Result 1. Define average Q for capital of type n, Qn,j,t , as:

                                                                 Vte
                                                     Qn,t =            .
                                                                Kn,t+1

Then, the investment gap for capital of type n can be written as:
                                              X
             Qn,t    qn,t   =    (µ      1)          Et [Mt,t+k n,t+k (1 + gn,t+1,t+k )]                        (6)
                                              k 1
                                 N
                                 X
                            +           Sm,n,t+1 qm,t                                                           (7)
                                 m=1
                                 m6=n
                                              N
                                              X                 X
                            +    (µ      1)          Sm,n,t+1           Et [Mt,t+k m,t+k (1 + gm,t+1,t+k )] ,   (8)
                                              m=1                 k 1
                                              m6=n


                            Kn,t+k                 Km,t+1
where 1 + gn,t+1,t+k               , and Sm,n,t+1         .
                            Kn,t+1                 Kn,t+1
   The investment gap is the sum of three terms, (6), (7) and (8).
   When there are no rents and a single type of capital (µ = 1 and N = 1), these three terms
are zero. Average Q and marginal q are equal, as in Hayashi (1982, Proposition 1), and there
is no investment gap.
    If there are rents but only one type of capital (µ > 1 and N = 1), only the term (6) is
nonzero. Average Q will overstate marginal q, and the gap is equal to the present value of
flow rents, that is, the term (6). This case includes the Lindenberg and Ross (1981) eect.
    If there are no rents but several types of capital (µ = 1 and N > 1), then for each type
of capital, average Q will still overstate marginal q. Average Q for a specific type of capital
reflects, in part, the value of other types of capital used by the firm, because these other types
of capital contribute to firm value overall. It therefore overstates the true incentive to invest
-- the marginal q -- of that type of capital.7 This omitted capital eect is captured by the
term (7) in the expression of the investment gap.
    If there are both economic rents and several types of capital (µ > 1 and N > 1), the rents
term (6) and the omitted capital term (7) are still non-zero. But additionally, the term (8)
is non-zero. It represents the interaction between the rents and the omitted capital eect. It
captures how rents accruing to other types of capital aect total firm value and, through the
omitted capital eect described above, add to the gap between average Q and marginal q.
This interaction term is larger, the higher the relative importance of other types of capital,
and the higher the rents generated by other types of capital.
   7
       Crouzet and Eberly (2019) also make this point in a model with two types of capital and no rents.
                                                              9
2.3    Balanced growth
We now provide analytical expressions for the investment gap decomposition in a model with
balanced growth. These expressions help build intuition for each of the components of the
gap, and also anticipate our empirical applications.
   Without loss of generality, we focus on the N = 2 case; K1,t is "physical capital," and K2,t
                                                                                                 1     1
                                                                                            1    µ
is "intangible capital". We assume the profit function is t = At   Ktµ , where µ 1. At is
an exogenous process capturing firm fundamentals and growth such that At+1 /At = 1 + g . We
also assume Mt,t+1 = (1 + r) 1 , with g < r. Finally, we assume that the capital aggregator
and the capital adjustment costs are time-invariant, and that investment costs satisfy the
standard conditions:

                                                     0                     00
                           n (1)   =       n,        n (1)    = 1,         n (1)   =   n        0.

Result 2. In balanced growth, the investment gap for physical capital is given by:

                                       µ        1                                  µ       1
                    Q1    q1 =                    R1      +        Sq2      +                R2 S,
                                       r        g                                  r       g
                                                                                                                            (9)
                                                       0
                         Rn  ( r                g)     n (1   + g) +      n (1   + g ),     n = 1, 2 ,

and where marginal q , average Q, and intangible to physical capital ratio, S , are constant.
    In order to build intuition for the elements of Equation (9), consider first the special case
of linear investment costs: n = 0 and n (x) = x 1 + n . In that case,

                                                     Rn = r +        n.


Intuitively, without convex adjustment costs, the firm behaves as though it were renting
capital in perfectly competitive markets, equating the marginal revenue product of each type
of capital to its Jorgensonian user cost, Rn : n,t = n = Rn = r + n . The two rents terms in
decomposition (9) then represent the net markup over the marginal (user) cost of each type
of capital, discounted by the Gordon growth term r g .
    When investment costs are convex ( 1 > 0, 2 > 0), the {Rn } can be interpreted as
"internal" user costs. They satisfy:

                                       Rn = r +           n   +    n rg   + o(g ),

where o(g ) is the little-o Landau notation. The additional term                            n rg     + o(g ) reflect the cost of
continuously adjusting capital along the firm's growth path.
                                                              10
2.4       Discussion
Why is Qn,t           qn,t an "investment gap"? We extend the terminology "investment gap"
used in Guti´ errez and Philippon (2017) and Alexander and Eberly (2018). The first-order
condition for investment is: gn,t = n,t (qn,t 1), where gn,t is the net investment rate, and
              0    1
  n,t (y )    n,t    (1 + y ) 1. When the investment gap is positive (Qn,t > qn,t ), we have
  n,t (qn,t 1) = gn,t  n,t (Qn,t 1) . Investment predicted using average Q will exceed
actual investment; that is, there will appear to be a "gap" the two.

Why not use "Total Q"? Total Q is the ratio of the value of the firm to its total (physical
plus intangible) capital stock (Peters and Taylor, 2017). In our model, it is given by:

                    N
                    X                N
                                     X                            N
                                                                  X              X
Qtot,t      Vte /         Kn,t+1 =         sn,t+1 qn,t +(µ   1)         sn,t+1         Et [Mt,t+k n,t+k (1 + gn,t+1,t+k )]
                    n=1              n=1                          n=1            k 1
                                     |      {z      }
                                           qtot,t

                         P
where sn,t+1 = Kn,t+1 / N   n=1 Kn,t+1 . Define the "total Q investment gap" as Qtot,t      qtot,t .
This gap will be positive when the firm earns rents; moreover, rents can be decomposed
across types of capital. However, we do not focus on Qtot,t qtot,t for one main reason: qtot,t
is not a su cient statistic for total investment, except in specific cases.8 As a result, there is
no mapping from Qtot,t qtot,t to the empirical shortfall in total investment. By contrast, qn,t
is a su cient statistic for investment in capital n, and so the capital-specific investment gap
Qn,t qn,t entirely accounts for the relationship between Qn,t and investment.

How general is the model? Our model puts no restriction on functional forms other than
Assumptions 1-3. It therefore nests a number of existing models; for instance Lindenberg and
Ross (1981), Hayashi (1982), Abel (1983), Abel and Blanchard (1986), Hayashi and Inoue
(1991), case I of Abel and Eberly (1994), and Abel and Eberly (2011), as well as the investment
block of the macroeconomic models in McGrattan and Prescott (2010), Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2019) or Barkai (2020).
    However, it has three limitations. First, it does not allow for non-convex adjustment costs.
Second, it abstracts from financial constraints. The next subsection discusses extensions in this
direction. Third, it assumes that rents, µ, are exogenous. In particular, they do not depend on
past investment, in contrast, for instance, with models of customer capital.9 In this sense, our
results are restricted to "neoclassical" models of the firm, and provide a benchmark against
which the eects of other frictions on the investment gap can be compared.
   8
       Appendix 1.3 shows that perfect substitutability and identical investment costs is one such case.
   9
       See, for instance, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) and Belo et al. (2014).
                                                             11
2.5    Extensions
Uncertainty Closed-form solutions for the investment gap exist when fundamentals are
uncertain; we discuss this in greater detail in Appendix 2.2.
                                                      1     1
                                                  1   µ
Result 3. Assume that N = 2, t = At                       Ktµ , and:
                                       (
                 At+1                       1 + gt    1     w.p. 1
                      = 1 + gt =                                               ,           ~  G(.) i.i.d.
                                                                                           g
                  At                        1+g
                                              ~             w.p.

Moreover, assume that      n (x)   =x         1+      n,   n = 1, 2. Then:

                                       µ     1                                         µ     1
               Q1,t    q1,t =                      (r +    1)    + S +                             (r +   2 )S,    (10)
                                   r        ( gt )                                 r        ( gt )

where the expression for the function  (.) is reported in Appendix 2.2.

    The resulting decomposition is similar to Result 2, except that the Gordon growth term
   1
r  (gt )
         adjusts for the possibility of regime changes in growth rates.10 Key intuitions are similar
to those discussed in Section 2.3: the two rents terms are equal to the present value of flow
rents, with flow rents equal to the net markup over user costs. In Section 5.3, we use Result
3 in order to estimate a version of the model with uncertainty in our empirical applications.

Market power, decreasing returns, and rents Two natural sources of rents are mar-
ket power on the goods market ("pure" rents), and decreasing returns to scale ("quasi" or
"Ricardian" rents). The mapping between µ and these two sources of rents is the following.

Result 4. Suppose that the firm uses flexible inputs that are Cobb-Douglas substitutes with
capital, where  is the capital share. Let  index returns to scale, and let µS be the firm's
markup over the cost of sales. Then:

                                                             µS /      1
                                               µ1+                         .
                                                                 
                                                                                                           µ 1
Moreover, total (pure and quasi-) rents over operating surplus are given by                                 µ
                                                                                                               .

   Appendix 2.3 establishes this result. Importantly, the magnitude of µ does not depend
separately on µS or  , but only on their ratio. Our results can therefore be thought of
through the lens of either type of rent. In Appendix 2.3, we also argue µS and  cannot
be separately identified using only nominal ratios (such as cost shares, surplus ratios, user
  10
     The case = 0 corresponds to constant growth, as in the balanced growth model of Result 2; in that
case,  (gt ) = gt . The case = 1 corresponds to i.i.d. growth rates, with  (gt ) = E [~
                                                                                      g ].
                                                            12
costs, or average returns to capital), as these ratios are all functions of µS / instead of either
parameter independently. This point is also highlighted by Basu (2019). Therefore, in Section
5.5, we will discuss what our estimates of µ imply for the value of "pure" rents under dierent
assumptions about returns to scale.

Heterogeneous rents parameters Our results extend to the case where the rents param-
eters µ is allowed to be dierent across types of capital, as follows.

Result 5. Assume that operating profits are given by a mapping t (Kt ) satisfying:

                                             N
                                             X
                              ~ t ( Kt ) =         µn ~ n,t Kn,t ,    µn   1    8n.                     (11)
                                             n=1


In balanced growth with N = 2, we have:

                                       µ1 1                                    µ2 1
                       Q1     q1 =          R1            +     Sq2    +            R2 S.               (12)
                                       r g                                     r g

    Similar generalizations of Lemma 1 and Result 1 are reported in Appendix 2.4.11 Appendix
2.4 also characterizes a class of operating profit functions satisfying condition (11); it could
capture, for instance, a firm with dierent revenue streams generated by independent divisions,
each using a dierent type of capital. We focus on the version with µ1 = µ2 = µ because
separate identification of each the rents parameters in the case µ1 6= µ2 is more challenging: it
requires data on the marginal revenue product of each type of capital separately. We return
to this issue in Section 5.6.

Link to the production-based asset pricing literature In Appendix 2.5, we study the
dierence between stock returns and returns to investment in each type of capital, following
Cochrane (1991, 1996).12 When N = 1 and µ = 1, the two are equalized, as in Cochrane
(1991). But when N > 1 or µ > 1, they need not be. Moreover, their dierence is driven by
the same three forces as the investment gap: omitted capital; rents; and their interaction.
   An important dierence is that returns depend on changes in firm value, whereas average
Q and marginal q depend on the level of firm value. As a result, the returns gap is more likely
to be informative about high-frequency movements in intangible intensity and rents, while
the investment gap is more likely to be informative about long-run trends.13 For instance, in
  11
     The baseline model explicitly separates capital aggregation from the operating surplus function; it is a
special case of this more general model, with ~ t (Kt ) = t (Ft (Kt )) and µn = µ 8n.
  12
     We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.
  13
     This echoes Cochrane (1991, p.218): "Returns emphasize high frequency aspects of the data that the
models may be better able to capture in the presence of slow moving and unobserved changes in technology."
                                                         13
balanced growth, the dierence between stock returns and returns to investment is zero, as
the two returns are equalized to the discount rate even if N > 1 and µ > 1. By contrast, in
balanced growth the investment gap remains positive, as highlighted by Result 2. Given that
trends are the focus of our paper, we choose to work with the investment gap.

Financing frictions A large literature has shown financial constraints can drive a wedge
between average Q and marginal q (Whited, 1992; Gomes, 2001; Hennessy et al., 2007; Bolton
et al., 2011; DeMarzo et al., 2012). However, the sign and size of this wedge is a matter of
debate, particularly if the firm has market power (Cooper and Ejarque, 2003). In Appendix
2.6, we study the investment gap in versions of the model with two simple financial frictions.
Result 6. Assume that shareholders can raise debt Bt+1 , subject to a collateral constraint of
                                                           (E )                           (E )
the form Bt+1  K1,t+1 . Define marginal qn,t as q1,t  q1,t + t  for n = 1 and qn,t  qn,t for
                       (E )
n = 2, ..., N , where qn,t is the marginal value of an unit of capital to shareholders, and t is
the Lagrange multiplier on the leverage constraint. Then, the decomposition of the enterprise
investment gap for capital n, Qn,t qn,t , is the same as in Result 1.
   This result states that a collateral constraint with respect to physical capital does not
change the expression for the investment gap, so long as one focuses on the enterprise invest-
ment gap, defined as the gap Qn,t qn,t .14 The intuition is that because debt is risk-free,
there is no conflict between creditors and shareholders, and the investment policy chosen by
shareholders also maximizes total enterprise value.
Result 7. Assume that the flow value of dividends to shareholders is given by Kt f (dt ), where
dt = Dt /Kt , Dt is revenue net of investment costs, and f satisfies f (0) = 0, f 0 > 0, f 0 (0) = 1,
and f 00  0. Then, the investment gap has the same expression as in Result 1, replacing the
discount factor Mt,t+k with f 0 (dt+k )Mt,t+k .
      The function f (.) describes equity financing frictions in a reduced-form way: the fact that
f 0 (dt ) < 1 when dt > 0 could capture agency costs of free cash flows (Jensen and Meckling,
1976), while the fact that f 0 (dt ) > 1 when dt < 0 could capture costs of seasoned equity
oerings (Altinkili¸ c and Hansen, 2000).15 These frictions change the way in which shareholders
value future rents, but do not aect the three main elements of the decomposition.16
  14
      Appendix 2.6 shows that, consistent with the prior literature, the investment gap for shareholders, that
                                                                                                (E )
is, the dierence between the ratio of equity value to the stock of physical capital, and qn,t , has a similar
expression as Result 1, with an additional, negative wedge, reflecting the fact that part of the marginal return
to investment, for shareholders, comes from the fact that it relaxes the borrowing constraint.
   15
      We follow Hennessy et al. (2007), except that we allow for f 0 (dt ) < 1 when dt > 0. This makes equity
financing costs matter on the balanced growth path, where dt = d > 0.
   16
      As discussed in Appendix 2.6, two definitions of marginal q are possible, depending on whether one
normalizes marginal q by f 0 (dt ) or not. Result 7 refers to an unadjusted marginal q ; with the latter definition,
the investment gap has an additional wedge, which we characterize in Appendix 2.6.
                                                        14
     Thus, simple frictions to either equity or debt financing do not change the basic insights
of Result 1 regarding the components of the investment gap. However, they can change the
magnitude of these components, as well as the size of the investment gap overall, relative to
the frictionless model. We discuss this point in more detail in Section 5.7.


3         The investment gap in aggregate data
We now show that the investment gap for non-financial corporate businesses has tripled since
1985, driven by the combined eects of rising rents and rising intangibles. This section uses
national accounts data, which has the most coverage, but the narrowest measure of intangible
capital. We broaden the intangibles measure in the next section, drawing on firm-level data.


3.1         Methodology
We use the balanced growth model to construct the investment gap and its components in
the data. We have:

                                               µ        1              µ           1
                               Q1    q1 =                 R 1 + q2 S +               R2 S,             (13)
                                               r        g              r           g

where recall that, neglecting terms of order o(g ), Rn = r + n + n rg , and qn = 1+ n g , n = 1, 2.
We measure Q1 and S directly from data, as described below. However, we infer values for
{µ, r g, R1 , R2 , q1 , q2 } from the following additional observable moments: {ROA1 , i1 , i2 , g },
where ROA1 = t /K1,t is average returns to physical capital, i1 and i2 are gross investment
rates, and g is the net growth rate of total capital K1,t + K2,t .
    We proceed as follows. First, we use the fact that:17

                                                             ROA1
                                                       µ=            .                                 (14)
                                                            R1 + SR2

Intuitively, rents create a wedge between average returns to physical capital and the weighted
average user cost of capital. Second, we have that:

                                      Rn = r           g + in +   n rg,   n = 1, 2 ,                   (15)

where we used the fact that in = g +               n   along the balanced growth path. Finally, substituting



    17
         See Appendix 1 for a formal derivation of this relationship.
                                                             15
Equations (14) and (15) in the investment gap decomposition (13), we obtain:

                                       ROA1       (i1 + Si2 )     1   +S   2 2
                             r    g=                                        g .                         (16)
                                                 Q1                   Q1

This expression for the Gordon growth term r    g only requires estimates of the adjustment
cost parameters. Given the value for r g and other data moments, values of R1 and R2 follow
from Equation (15); and the value of µ follows from Equation (14). Finally, q1 and q2 are
obtained from the values of g and from calibrated values for the adjustment cost parameters
  1 and 2 , which we discuss below.

    The most important feature of this identification approach is that it matches, by construc-
tion, the empirical value of Q1 . It infers the Gordon growth term r g which, given other
moments, ensures that the model produces a value of Q1 consistent with the data. Our use
of valuations, via Q1 , is a natural implication of the model, but also an important point of
departure from the recent literature. We discuss this point in more detail Section 3.3.
    Additionally, we note that our methodology does not make direct use of data estimates
of economic rates of depreciation, n . Instead, we substitute depreciations for gross and net
investment rates, using the relationship n = g + n , n = 1, 2. We choose to use investment
rates in our empirical approach because our main goal is to account for their behavior relative
to valuations. Below, we discuss in more detail the implications of our estimated model for
depreciation rates.


3.2     Aggregate Data
Our sample period is 1947-2017, and we focus our analysis on the non-financial corporate busi-
ness (NFCB) sector.18 Appendix 3 reports details on data sources and data construction. We
construct time series for five of the moments used in the decomposition, {i1,t , i2,t , St , ROA1,t , Q1,t },
using six times series in levels, {K1,t , I1,t , K2,t , I2,t , t , Vt }. These are the operating surplus of
the NFCB sector, the stock of physical capital at replacement cost, investment in physical
capital, the stock of intangibles at replacement cost, investment in intangibles, and the market
value of claims on the NFCB sector.19
   We obtain measures of K1,t , I1,t , K2,t and I2,t from BEA Fixed Assets tables 4.1 and 4.7.
The BEA Fixed Assets tables use perpetual inventory methods to construct the stock of three
specific forms of intangible capital: R&D; own-account software; and artistic originals.20 To
  18
     Appendix 3.7 shows that trends in economy-wide and NFCB average returns to capital are similar.
  19
     We use current-dollar values for all time series in levels, with the exception of our proxy for gt , the
computation of which is described below.
  20
     Related to Footnote 6, we note that investment in R&D capital, in the BEA, is partly estimated using
compensation to R&D workers (Corrado et al., 2005). Thus, one potential re-interpretation of the BEA's
                                                     16
the extent that firms invest in other types of intangibles, results in this section should thought
of as a lower bound on the overall role of intangibles. Section 4 expands the analysis to
organization capital for the subset of publicly traded firms in the NFCB sector.
   Operating surplus t is obtained from NIPA Table 1.14. Consistent with the model, this
series represents the dierence between value added and payments to labor; expenditures
categorized as intangible investment are not treated as intermediates in value added.
    We construct a measure of Vt using Flow of Funds tables L.103 and F.103. In the model, Vt
represents the market value of all net claims on the NFCB sector, both debt and equity. The
Flow of Funds data provide an estimate for the market value of equity of the NFCB sector,
but not for debt. Our approach to estimate the latter is described in detail in Appendix 3.2.
It is similar to the approach of Hall (2001), except that we do not subtract all financial assets
owned by the sector from the gross market value of claims, but only financial assets identified
as liquid in the Flow of Funds.21 Section 5.1 shows that this choice aects the level of the
investment gap, but not its composition.
    We then construct ROA1,t = t /K1,t , i1,t = I1,t /K1,t , i2,t = I2,t /K2,t , St = K2,t /K1,t , and
Q1,t = Vt /K1,t . Additionally, gt is the annual growth rate of the quantity index for private
non-residential fixed assets of the NFCB sector, provided in BEA Fixed Assets table 4.2.22
    We use calibrated values for adjustment costs. We consider three cases: zero adjustment
costs, 1 = 2 = 0; positive adjustment costs; and high adjustment costs. For the positive
adjustment cost case, we choose values of 1 = 3 and 2 = 12, following the estimates of Belo
et al. (2019). For the high adjustment cost case, we choose values 1 = 8 and 2 = 18, at
the high end of existing estimates. In Section 5.2, we discuss the eect of adjustment costs
in more detail. We show that our results regarding the composition of the investment gap
are robust to the choice of adjustment costs, and attribute greater importance to intangibles
when adjustment costs are higher.
   The time series for the resulting six moments, {i1,t , i2,t , St , ROA1,t , Q1,t , gt } are reported in
Appendix Figure 1. The key trends discussed in the introduction are visible in that figure.


stock of R&D intangibles is as a stock of skilled R&D labor. Separating strictly the two would require data
on the composition of R&D costs between labor and other expenses.
   21
      Financial assets are generally subtracted from the gross market value of claims in order to include net
debt, instead of gross debt, in firm value calculations. On the other hand, financial assets can only meaningfully
be counted as negative debt to the extent that they are liquid. Additionally, a large part of non-liquid financial
assets in table L.103 are obtained as a residual, further complicating their interpretation.
   22
      Although the balanced growth model imposes identical growth rates across capital types, the growth rate
of intangibles has generally been higher than that of physical capital, and therefore higher than gt , as reported
in Appendix Figure 3. However, as that figure also shows, they were close the 1970s to the mid-1980s, and
have been close since the early 2000s. Appendix 3.3 describes these time series in more detail, and Appendix
4.1 shows that the results from main decomposition are robust to allowing for heterogeneous growth rates
across capital stocks.
                                                       17
The average return to physical capital increases after 1985, while the physical investment rate
declines. The ratio of intangible to physical capital increases, particularly after 1985. Q1 rises
sharply after 1985, and after a peak in 2000, remains approximately double its value in the
pre-1985 period.
    Finally, we compute the decomposition using moving averages of moments over 7-year
centered rolling windows. This treats each successive window as if it were generated by a
dierent quantitative implementation of the model, allowing us to capture gradual changes
in the investment gap.23 In Section 5.3, we report results obtained by estimating a version of
the model with shocks (instead of the balanced growth model) on split samples using GMM.


3.3     Baseline results
The investment gap and underlying structural changes Figure 1 reports the invest-
ment gap decomposition, Equation (13), for the NFCB sector and R&D intangible capital.
The decomposition emphasizes three main findings.
   First, the investment gap is large during two distinct periods: 1960-1970, and after 1985.
The wedge between average Q and marginal q is therefore not strictly a hallmark of the post-
1980s period. Second, rents attributable to physical capital -- the first term in Equation (13)
-- play a sizable (though somewhat declining) role in explaining the investment gap: they
account 61% of it in 2015, compared to 67% in 1965.24 Third, rents attributable to intangibles
-- the third term in Equation (13) -- have become markedly more important in recent years.
In 2015, 25% of the investment gap reflects the combined eects of high rents and a large
stock of intangibles, compared to 10% in 1965, using the BEA measure of R&D capital only,
the narrow measure of intangibles available in these data.
    From the standpoint of the model, these changes are driven by three underlying forces,
reported in Figure 2 : a greater importance of intangibles in the production function; higher
rents; and a decline in user costs, more pronounced for physical than for intangible capital.
    The top left panel of Figure 2 shows that even using the relatively narrow definition of
intangibles in the NFCB data, the share of intangible capital in production,  , increased
substantially after 1985, from 0.17 to 0.29 in 2015.25 The behavior of the intangible share
approximately mimics the behavior of the measured ratio of intangible to physical capital at
replacement cost, which increases rapidly after 1985.

  23
     Using alternative window sizes from 3 to 9 years gives quantitatively similar results.
  24
     These numbers, and those that follow in this discussion, refer to the model with intermediate adjustment
costs, 1 = 3 and 2 = 12.
  25                                                                  1  
     This is derived assuming a Cobb-Douglas aggregator Kt = K1        ,t K2,t . The level of intangible share is
sensitive to the Cobb-Douglas assumption, but not the magnitude of the change after 1985.
                                                       18
    The eects of the intangible share on the overall investment gap are magnified by the rise
in rents after 1985. The top right panel of Figure 2 reports estimates of the rents implicit in
Equation (13). In order to facilitate comparison with existing estimates, we express them as
the flow value of rents relative to value added, which is related to the parameter controlling
rents in the model, µ, through s = (1 sL )(1 1/µ), where sL is the labor share of value
added.26 Rents, as a fraction of value added, increase from 1.5% in 1985, to 7.7% in 2015 --
a cumulative 6.2 percentage point (p.p.) change over three decades. Expressed as markups
over value added, this is an increase from 1.015 in 1985, to 1.083 in 2015.
    Finally, we note two other features of our time-series for the investment gap. First, the
gap is elevated during the 1960s; the decomposition attributes this to a combination of low
user costs (driven by the low interest rates of the period), and high rents.27 Second, the gap is
particularly small during the 1975-1985 period. The model primarily attributes this reversal
to the large increase in discount rate and the decrease in growth rates around the early 1980s,
which, by reducing the present value of future rents, pushes the average value of installed
capital closer to its marginal value.

Comparison to existing literature These findings are qualitatively consistent with the
recent literature arguing that pure profits as fraction of value added have been growing over the
last three decades (Guti´errez and Philippon, 2017; Barkai, 2020; Karabarbounis and Neiman,
2019). However, they dier quantitatively. For instance, Barkai (2020) finds that the pure
profit share rose from -5.6% in 1984 to 7.9% in 2014, an increase of 13.5 p.p. over the period.
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019), in their "case ," find that the pure profit share must
have risen by about 13 p.p. over the same period. We find an increase in rents of half that
magnitude.28
   User costs are at the heart of this dierence. Specifically, our approach leads to user costs
that are initially lower, but that decline more slowly. Figure 2 reports these implied user costs.
User costs for physical capital decline from 15.4% to 12.6% between 1985 and 2015, while user
costs for intangibles decline from 36.8% to 30.4%; their weighted average only declines from
  26
      We measure the labor share for the NFCB sector using NIPA data on labor payments for that sector, as
described in Appendix 3.1. As discussed in Appendix 4.2, given our estimate of µ, matching the labor share
in the data implies that the Cobb-Douglas elasticity of value added with respect to labor must vary over time.
Alternatively, we consider fixing the Cobb-Douglas elasticity of value added with respect to labor; the results
are almost identical.
   27
      On the latter point, we note that, related to the recent work of Guti´ errez and Philippon (2018b), the
legal literature on antitrust policy has highlighted the 1960s as a period of weak enforcement (Hovenkamp,
2018).
   28
      Related to this are the markup estimates of De Loecker et al. (2020) and Hall (2019). These markups,
when expressed in value added terms, are much higher than ours -- approximately 1.9 and 4 in 2015, respec-
tively --, and also far outside the range typically considered reasonable in the macroeconomics literature, as
discussed in detail by Basu (2019).
                                                      19
17.1% to 15.2%. (By contrast, Barkai (2020), for instance, finds a required rate of return on
capital that falls from approximately 20% in 1985 to approximately 14% in 2014.) The smaller
decline in user costs translates to higher payments to capital (particularly to intangibles), and
therefore a smaller increase in rents.
   The way we infer the discount factor perceived by firms from the data is key to this
result. As discussed before, we rely on valuations; by contrast, the papers mentioned above
generally combine risk-free rates with imputed estimates of risk premia to obtain discount
rates. Appendix Figure 2 reports the discount rate r implied by our approach. It declines
from 7.9% to 5.6% between 1985 and 2015. This is a smaller decline than the risk-free rate
over the same period of time, and is therefore consistent with a mild rise in risk premia
over this period of time, as argued by Caballero et al. (2017), Farhi and Gourio (2018), and
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019) in their case R. In Section 5.4, we discuss the results we
would obtain using a cost-of-capital approach instead of a Q approach.

User costs and rates of depreciation Our analysis implies that user costs for intangible
capital have fallen by less than those of physical capital. This change in relative user costs
explains why rents attributable to intangibles, which are the present value of net markups
over their user costs, as indicated by Equation (13), account for an increasing fraction of the
investment gap after 1985.
    Our approach infers this from the higher gross investment rates in intangibles, which,
through the relationship n = n g , n = 1, 2, also imply high rates of depreciation. Appendix
Figure 4 reports the model-implied depreciation rates, along with empirical counterparts,
obtained from the BEA's Fixed Assets tables.29 The model-implied and data series behave
similarly; both show a marked increase in depreciation rates for intangibles.30 The main
dierence is that our implied rate of depreciation for intangible is higher, on average, than
its empirical counterpart, owing to the higher net growth rate of the intangible capital stock
mentioned above.31
    We note that depreciation estimates indirectly enter our measurement, through their im-
pact on estimates of capital stocks.32 However, investment rates in BEA data are not primarily

  29
      Appendix 3.4 describes the computation of the empirical counterparts to the model depreciation rates.
  30
      Given that the BEA's estimates of depreciation rates are based on constant depreciation rates at the
asset level, the upward trend in depreciation rates reflect a shift in the composition of the capital stock toward
assets with shorter service lives.
   31
      As mentioned in footnote 22, these small dierences in growth rates across capital stocks do not materially
aect the quantitative results obtained in our decomposition.
   32
      In the BEA data, estimates of economic depreciation are the residuals that reconcile measured gross
investment, and estimates the net stocks of capital based on perpetual inventory methods. The net stock
estimates themselves rely on assuming constant rates of economic depreciation at the asset-level, the values
of which are based on microeconomic studies. Appendix 3.4 describes the methodology in detail.
                                                       20
driven by the value of economic depreciation rates assumed by the BEA. Appendix Figure 4
also reports gross investment rates and gross depreciation rates for both physical and intangi-
ble investment. While gross physical investment rates have trended downward, depreciation
rates of physical capital, for instance, have trended upward.


3.4     Counterfactuals
In order to further illustrate the respective roles played by intangibles and rents in our esti-
mation, Figure 3 reports results from two counterfactual exercises.
  The top panel constructs the change in the share of intangibles in production,  , that
would be necessary in order to fully account for the increase in the investment gap, assuming
that rents remain fixed at their 1985 level. This change is 34 p.p., compared to 12 p.p. in
our baseline results. This, in turn, implies that the ratio of intangible to total capital, at
replacement cost, would need to be 30 % in 2015, or approximately twice its observed value
of 14 % in the NFCB sector.33 In Section 4, we show that this magnitude is comparable to
the ratio of intangible to total capital including organization capital among publicly traded
firms.34
    The bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the increase in rents, as a fraction of value added,
which would be required in order to match the observed investment gap, assuming that both
the share of intangible capital, R2 , and the intangible investment rate 2 , had remained fixed
at their 1985 values. Instead of the 6.2 p.p. increase in rents as a fraction of value added
which we estimate as our baseline, rents would have needed to increase by 8.4 p.p., reaching
10.0% of value added by 2015. The total contribution of intangibles to the investment gap
would nevertheless remain elevated (approximately 31%, instead of 39% in our baseline), due
to the rising rents generated by the (more moderate) fixed stock of intangibles. This is really
an intermediate case, since it allows growth in intangibles, but not the acceleration seen in
the data.
    To show more extreme cases of these two counterfactuals, Appendix 4.3 reports results in

  33
      Simple algebra, using the results of Section 3.1, shows that the counterfactual ratio of intangible to
physical capital S ^ under fixed rents is the smallest positive root of Ax2 + Bx + C = 0, where A = 2 +
 2 g (2 + g + 2 g ), B = 1 + 2     ROA1 Q1 2 + 1 g (2 + g ) + 2 g (2 + g Q1 g ROA1 ) + 2 1 2 g 3 , C =
            (1985)
ROA1 Q1 /µ         + 1 ROA1 Q1 1 + 1 g (1 + g + 1 g 2 ROA1 Q1 g ), and µ(1985) is the estimated value
of the rents parameter µ in 1985 using our baseline approach. The ratio of intangible to total capital is then
          ^ (1 + S
given by S/        ^).
   34
      This magnitude is also comparable to Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019), "case K ". These authors
show that, if the profit share is assumed to be zero, then unmeasured capital would need to account for
approximately 40% of all business capital after 1970 in order to explain the measured capital share. Expressed
in terms of value added, our estimates imply that intangibles would need to be approximately 63% of value
added in the NFCB sector; this in line with similar estimates obtained by McGrattan and Prescott (2005)
under perfect competition.
                                                     21
versions of the model with either no intangibles (N = 1) or no rents (µ = 1). In the case
of no intangibles, the model requires a 12 p.p. increase rents (as a fraction of value added)
from 1980 to 2015, reaching 14% in 2015; this is almost double the magnitude obtained in
our baseline approach. In the case of no rents, the implied ratio S of intangible to physical
capital required to explain the level of Q1 in 2015 is approximately 1, compared to 0.3 in
the data. Additionally, the implied times series for S exhibits periods of substantial decline,
particularly in the late 1970s and in the wake of the dot-com bubble. This intangible capital
"destruction" is at odds with empirical measures of S , which grow consistently in the data,
as shown in Appendix Figure 1.35
    Aside from the additional results already mentioned, Section 5 provides further robustness
checks and extensions to our baseline results, including: results from an approach that infers
intangibles from Q1 , and from an approach that infers rents from Q1 (Section 5.4); a discussion
of the magnitude of pure rents under dierent assumptions about returns to scale (Section
5.5); a discussion of the implications of the model with heterogeneous rents parameters {µn }
(Section 5.6); and a discussion of how the financing frictions discussed in Section 2.5 may bias
our results (Section 5.7).

  Summarizing, we documented a large investment gap in the NFCB sector after 1985. This
gap reflects a combination of rising rents and a growing importance intangibles in production,
with the latter accounting for about one-third of the gap. Additionally, though our valuation-
based approach finds rising rents, the magnitude of the increase is approximately half that of
existing estimates.


4        The investment gap in firm-level data
In this section, we construct investment gaps at the sectoral level, and highlight how they
change when measures of intangibles are expanded beyond R&D capital. We find substantial
dierences across sectors in both the level of the gap and the relative contributions of rents
and intangibles. Expanding measures of intangibles beyond R&D reduces the quantitative
estimates of rents, and suggests that intangibles are the dominant force behind the growth in
the investment gap.




    35
     The no rents approach corresponds to the method used by Hall (2001) to estimate the stock of intangible
capital of non-financial businesses. He also finds a decline in the stock of intangibles in the late 1970s.
                                                    22
4.1     Data
We use the non-financial segment of Compustat, instead of data drawn from the National
Accounts. This restricts the scope of our analysis to publicly traded firms. We choose Com-
pustat both because, to our knowledge, there is no comprehensive sectoral data on operating
surplus t and enterprise value Vt spanning a su ciently long time period, and because it
allows for measures of intangible capital that can be expanded beyond R&D.

Sector definitions Compustat is a dataset of publicly traded US firms, so that the scope
of the analysis is similar to Section 3, but now excludes private corporations.36 We split the
sample into five broad sectors: the Consumer sector (primarily retail and wholesale trade);
the High-tech sector (primarily software and IT); the Healthcare sector (producers of medical
devices, drug companies, and health care service companies); the Manufacturing sector; and
the Service sector (professional and business services, entertainment, and hospitality services).
These groups are similar to the Fama-French 5 classification, with the main dierence being
that we exclude financial companies from our analysis.37

Data moments In order to construct the key moments needed for our analysis, we proceed
similarly to Section 3; Appendix 3.5 reports the details. The two main dierences are as
follows. First, we consider two types of intangibles: R&D, similar to the analysis of Section 3;
and organization capital, which we did not observe in the aggregate data in Section 3. R&D
investment is measured using reported R&D expenditures. For investment in organization
capital, we follow Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2014) and Peters and Taylor (2017) and impute
investment as 30% of SG&A expenditures net of R&D investment.38 Second, for operating
surplus, t , we use operating income before depreciation, but we adjust for expensing of
intangible investment in accounting data, consistent with our model.




  36
      Details on data construction are reported in Appendix 3.5. Appendix 3.7 contains a discussion of the
dierences between Compustat and the National Accounts data.
   37
      Appendix Tables 1 and 2 report the NAICS sectors that make up our classification. Using KLEMS
data from the BLS, described in Appendix 3.6, we estimate that the sectors we study accounted for 86.0%
of total value added by private, non-financial businesses in 2001. The remaining 14.0% are accounted for by
Transportation, Warehousing, and Construction, which we also exclude from our analysis because they are
not well represented in Compustat; there are fewer than 10 firm observations per year for a majority of their
constituent NAICS subsectors.
   38
      The primary source for the 30% imputation rate is the work of Hulten and Hao (2008). Appendix 3.5
discusses other existing estimates in the literature, which are generally close to this value.
                                                     23
4.2     The aggregate investment gap in Compustat
We start by applying our baseline analysis to pooled data from all Compustat sectors, as an
initial comparison to the aggregate results. The results are summarized in Table 1.39 Here,
we highlight the two main findings of this exercise.
   First, when using only R&D capital, the same trends highlighted in the introduction are
apparent in both the Compustat and the NFCB data: rising returns to physical capital, rising
Q1 , and declining physical investment rates. Compustat moments are very close to those of
the NFCB, consistent with the fact that the fixed asset tables primarily measure intangibles
as capitalized R&D. The exception are returns to physical capital, which are higher among
publicly traded firms. As a result, total rents as a fraction of value added are higher among
Compustat firms than in the NFCB sector as a whole. The rent share of value added is about
2 percentage points higher in the post-2001 period in the Compustat sample, as indicated in
Table 1. Other than this dierence, when using only R&D, the implications of our analysis
look similar for Compustat and the NFCB as a whole.
   Second, once organization capital is included, intangibles are the dominant force behind
the investment gap. With organization capital, the ratio of intangible to physical capital more
than doubles. Returns to physical capital also further increase, since operating surplus rises
after adjusting for the expensing of intangible investment in organization capital. However,
the eect of the higher stock of intangibles dominates. After 2001, for instance, the two
intangible-related terms account for 69% of the total investment gap, on average, as opposed
to 39% when only including R&D. The intangible share in production approximately doubles
compared to when only R&D capital is included, reaching  = 0.48 on average after 2001.
Additionally, the importance of rents overall declines. The share of rents in value added falls
to 4.9% of value added after 2001, compared to 8.7% when only R&D capital is included.
Thus, intangible capital of an empirically plausible magnitude can account for the majority
of the investment gap and reduce the role of rents substantially.
    Appendix Figure 6 also reports the time series for the components of the gap obtained
when explicitly separating R&D from SG&A. This decomposition is quantitatively similar
to the one obtained by taking the sum of the two measures of intangibles. As discussed in
Appendix 4.4, this alternative decomposition approach indicates that rents generated by R&D
capital are rising somewhat faster than those generated by SG&A capital.



  39
     Additionally, Appendix Figure 5 reports the raw time series for the moments used in our baseline analysis,
Appendix Figure 6 reports the time series for the investment gap and its decomposition, and Appendix Figure
7 reports the time series for the share of intangibles in production, the share of rents in value added, and the
user costs of the two types of capital, all based on the aggregated data from the Compustat sample.
                                                      24
4.3     The investment gap at the sectoral level
Trends across sectors Table 2 reports averages of the six data moments used in the con-
struction of the investment gap over two periods, 1985-2000 and 2001-2017.40 There are
notable dierences across sectors, even with this relatively coarse sectoral classification. High-
tech and Healthcare are characterized by a combination of high asset returns and high valu-
ations, declining physical investment, and a high (and rising) share of intangibles, consistent
with the aggregate data for the NFCB sector as a whole. The Consumer and Services sectors
also features high returns and low physical investment. In these sectors, when measured as
R&D, intangibles appear to be a negligible fraction of total capital. (As we discuss below, they
are between one quarter and one half of total capital when organization capital is included.)
Finally, Manufacturing is characterized by declining returns, declining valuations, declining
physical investment, and a declining intangible share, in contrast to the other sectors.

Results using only R&D capital Figure 4 reports investment gaps and their decomposi-
tion for the five sectors of our analysis, when intangibles are measured only with R&D capital.
The model used to construct this decomposition has positive adjustment costs of 1 = 3 and
 2 = 12, as in the previous section. This figure shows that the level and the composition of

the investment gap diers substantially across sectors.
    One extreme is the Manufacturing sector. In that sector, the investment gap is small.
Moreover, little of it is explained by intangibles. This is consistent with the fact that the stock
of R&D capital (relative to the stock of physical capital) has been declining in manufacturing
since the early 2000's. Accordingly, the bottom panel of Table 2 indicates that intangibles'
share in the production function has decreased. Though rents have been rising in that sector --
they increased by 3.8 percentage points of value added from before to after 2000, as indicated
by Table 2 --, they remain small.
    The other extreme is the Consumer and the Services sectors. There, the investment gap
is large, in particular after 1990. However, it is almost entirely explained by rents to physical
capital when using R&D capital alone -- our measure of intangibles for this exercise -- since
measured R&D is very small.41 The combination of high returns, high valuations, and low
intangibles lead to a high (and rising) share of rents in value added, reaching 12.4% in the
Consumer sector and 13.0% in the Services sector after 2000, as reported in Table 2.
    The Healthcare and High-tech sectors are intermediate cases. Both experienced a large
increase in the physical investment gap starting in the mid-1980's. In both cases, rents at-

  40
    Appendix Figures 25 to 29 report the full time series for these moments for each sector.
  41
    In the Consumer sector, intangibles rise slightly after the mid-2000's, driven primarily by Amazon's
reported R&D expenditures, but remains too low to account for the physical investment gap.
                                                  25
tributable to physical capital have also increased. However, they only account for about
one-half -- in the High-tech sector -- and one-third -- in the Healthcare sector -- of the
investment gap overall. In both sectors, the key change in the composition of the investment
gap after 2000 is a substantial increase in the level and rents to intangible capital. For the
Healthcare sector, for instance, they account, alone, for 41% half of the total investment gap.
Table 2 indicates that this is the eect of two changes: a rising intangible share; and a rise in
overall rents. Rents as a fraction of value added rise by 6.6 percentage points in the High-tech
sector, and 4.3 percentage points in the Healthcare sector, between the pre- and post-2000
periods. The intangible share in production also increased, particularly in the Healthcare
sector, where it roughly doubles.

Results including organization capital The previous sectoral results were constructed
using only R&D as a measure of the intangible capital stock. Expanding the definition of
intangibles to include organization capital has two main eects, both of which are most clearly
apparent in the Consumer sector. (Summary results are in Appendix Table 3.)
   First, unsurprisingly, the implied share of intangibles in the production function increases
substantially. The increase is particularly striking in the Consumer sector, where the stock
of organization capital becomes comparable in magnitude to the stock of physical capital.
(The increase in intangible intensity  is smaller, though still visible, in the Services sector.)
Second, the level of implied rents declines substantially. In the Consumer sector, rents fall
from 12.4% to 2.7% of value added after 2001. (In the Services sector, they fall from 13.0%
to 8.2% of value added.) The combined eect of these two changes is to magnify the direct
contribution of intangibles to the investment gap. The Consumer and Healthcare sectors are
both particularly impacted; in both, intangibles measured in this way account for more than
half of the investment gap.
    It is worth noting, though, that while including organization capital leads to a substantial
decrease in the level of rents, it has a more moderate impact on their trend. Figure 5 reports
the cumulative change in the estimated share of rents in total value added from 1985 onward
for each of the four sectors, measuring intangibles using either R&D (blue circled line) or the
sum of R&D and organization capital (green crossed line). The Consumer sector is where
including organization capital makes the sharpest dierence: the cumulative change in rents
falls by approximately one-third.42 In the Services sector, including organization capital also
reduces the trend increase in rents, by about a fifth. In other sectors, there is little trend

  42
      Prior work (Foster et al., 2006; Crouzet and Eberly, 2018) has indeed argued that the Consumer sector
relies extensively on intangible capital, particularly brand capital and, in more recent years, innovations to
supply chain and logistics. Investment in these intangibles are not recorded as R&D expenditures, but instead
expensed as SG&A, and so they are picked up by our measure of organization capital.
                                                     26
increase in organization capital relative to R&D capital after 1985, and so cumulative changes
in rents are similar under the two measures.

Counterfactuals Figure 5 also reports a counterfactual that highlights the dierential ef-
fects of the rise in intangibles across sectors. Similarly to Section 3, we compute the cumulative
change in the share of rents that would have had to occur in order to explain the investment
gap, had the ratio of intangible to physical capital stayed constant over the sample. In the
Manufacturing sector, where intangible intensity is declining, the cumulative increase in rents
would have been smaller. A similar finding holds for the Services sector, where intangible
intensity is also slightly declining when using R&D capital only, as reported in Table 2. In the
other sectors, it would have been larger, and in some substantially so. The Healthcare sector
is the most striking example; there, the increase in rents needed to account for the investment
gap without a rise in intangibles would have been about 50% (or 5 p.p.) larger. In the Con-
sumer sector, the dierence is approximately 30%, relative to the case where intangibles are
measured including organization capital. Thus, in both of these sectors, a substantial part of
the investment gap is due not purely to rising rents, but to the interaction of rising rents with
high and growing intangibles.


4.4    The relationship between rents and intangibles
The previous analysis shows that sectors that experienced the sharpest increase in rents over
the last three decades (Healthcare, High-Tech) were also those where intangible capital grew
most rapidly. In this section, we ask whether the relationship between trends in rents and in
intangible intensity is systematic, by exploring these trends at a more disaggregated level.

Results using only R&D capital Figure 6 summarizes the contrasting evolution of the
five broad sectors of our analysis more succinctly. The top left panels of the figure reports
the distribution of the rents parameter µ and the Cobb-Douglas share  of intangibles in
production as of 1980, with µ on the vertical axis and  on the horizontal axis. The top right
panel of the figure reports this distribution as of 2015.
    As of 1985, rents and intangible intensity were low in all five sectors, and there was little
heterogeneity across sectors -- the five sectors cluster in the southwest portion of the graph.
Thereafter, the five sectors diverge. In the Consumer and Services sectors, rents increased,
but intangible intensity remained roughly the same -- the sectors move vertically toward the
northwest part of the graph. Rents and intangible intensity did not change substantially in
the Manufacturing sector, which remains in the southwest corner of the graph. Finally, rents


                                               27
and intangible intensity increased simultaneously in the Healthcare and High-tech sectors,
which move out from the origin toward the northeast part of the graph.
   Figure 6 also reports the distribution of rents µ and intangible intensity  for the subsectors
that make up each of the five sectors in our analysis. The subsectors correspond to the NAICS
2D/3D level and are those described in Appendix Tables 1 and 2. Each subsector is represented
by a transparent dot (the shape of the dots match those of their parent sector).43 Additionally,
in order to keep the graph area compact, we have not plotted six subsectors where µ exceeds
2 in 2015.44
    Figure 6 suggests that the evolution of the five broad sectors generally captures the more
granular evolution of their subsectors. With few exceptions, subsectors are initially clustered
around the southwest part of the graph, indicating limited rents and intangibles in 1985. The
Consumer and Services subsectors then experienced no increase in intangible intensity but
a sharp increase in rents, moving up toward the northwest. The Healthcare and High-tech
subsectors also generally experienced a simultaneous increase in both rents and intangibles,
moving out northeastward between the 1985 and 2015 plot.
    However, the evolution of subsectors within Manufacturing seems to have been substan-
tially more heterogeneous than the aggregate sector's evolution would suggest. Certain subsec-
tors experienced a large increase in both intangibles and rents, while other remained physical-
capital intensive and rent-free. For instance, subsector 333 (Machinery, in which the two
largest companies by book assets in 2015 were John Deere and Caterpillar) experienced both
a large increase in intangibles, and a large increase in rents. On the other hand, subsector
212 (Mining excluding Oil and Gas, in which the two largest companies by book assets in
2015 were Newmont Mining and Freepont McMoRan) had stable intangible intensity and no
notable increase in rents over the period. The same pattern holds in the Oil and Gas subsector
(324), which also had stable intangible intensity and stable rents over the period.
   As a result, within Manufacturing (as also within Healthcare and High-tech), sectors which
experienced a large increase in intangible intensity also experienced a high increase in rents
-- as in the broad Healthcare and High-tech sectors. Aggregation however obscures this
coherence between the three sectors, as Manufacturing is dominated by subsectors where

  43
      In this analysis, we have dropped all the subsectors that did not have at least ten firms in each year from
1985 to 2015 in Compustat; the list of the subsectors dropped for this reason is reported in Appendix Tables
1 and 2.
   44
      These sectors are the following (with their NAICS code, the share of operating profits in their sector,
and the implied value for µ in 2015): in High-tech, Computer Systems Designs and Related Services (5415;
2.4%; µ = 2.04) in Manufacturing, Food and Beverage and Tobacco Products (311; 20%; µ = 2.71), Apparel
and Leather Product (315; 3.3%; µ = 2.95), and Oil and Gas extraction (211; -20.2%; µ = 2.30); in Services,
Administrative and Support Services (561; 18.3%; µ = 3.25), and Miscellaneous Professional, Scientific and
Technical Services (5412; 16.0%; µ = 3.08).
                                                       28
rents and intensity did not substantially change since 1980, while in Healthcare and High-
tech, most subsectors experienced an increase in intangible intensity and rents. This pattern
stands in contrast with the Consumer and Services subsectors, where rents rose in spite of
little or no change in intangible intensity, at least as measured by R&D, which we generalize
below.
   Figure 7 expands on the dierences between the Manufacturing, Healthcare, and High-tech
sectors, on the one hand, and the Consumer and Services sectors, on the other. The top two
panels of the figure report a scatterplot of time trends of the rents parameters µs,t and the
Cobb-Douglas intangible share s,t , estimated within each of the 55 subsectors separately.45
These scatterplots help evaluate whether subsectors where the trend increase in intangibles
was high, also experienced a high trend increase in rents, and vice-versa.
   Consistent with the previous results, the scatterplots indicate that this is the case for the
Manufacturing, Healthcare, and High-tech subsectors -- where the correlation between the
time trends in rents and intangibles is positive --, but not for the Consumer and Services sub-
sectors -- where the correlation is negative.46 Table 3 provides additional evidence consistent
with this interpretation of Figure 7, using the simple regression framework:

                                           µs,t = s + s,t + s,t .                                           (17)

The point estimates of -- which capture the within-subsector covariance between rents and
intangibles -- is positive in the sample of Manufacturing, Health and High-tech subsectors,
but negative in the sample of Consumer and Services subsectors.
   This supports the notion that in the Manufacturing, Health and High-tech subsectors,
when rents rose, they rose in tandem with intangible (R&D) capital. By contrast, the two
trends were not coincident in the Consumer and Services subsectors.

Results including organization capital Figures 6 and 7, and Table 3, also report results
for the case where organization capital is also used in addition to R&D capital to measure
intangible intensity. The results are qualitatively similar, and quantitatively stronger, in the
sample of Manufacturing, Healthcare, and High-Tech subsectors.
    For Consumer and Services, the results generally still support the view that the rise in rents
  45
       More precisely, Figure 7 reports the coe cients {   µ,  }      in:

                                         µs,t   =   µ,s   +   µ,s t   + µ,s,t ,

                                          s,t   =    ,s   +    ,s t   + ,s,t .

  46
     The slope of the simple OLS line in the top left panel of Figure 7 is 0.51, with a heteroskedasticity-robust
t-statistic of 1.34; on the top right panel, the slope is 5.70, with a robust t-statistic of 2.84.
                                                       29
was not accompanied by a rise in intangible intensity in those sectors. The time trends in the
Cobb-Douglas share s,t and the rents parameters µs,t appear to be weakly negatively related.
The point estimate of the coe cient in Equation 17 is positive, though it is smaller than
for the Manufacturing, Healthcare and High-tech subsectors, and only marginally statistically
significant. It should be noted that there are relatively few subsectors belonging to the Services
and Consumer sectors in the Compustat Non-Financial sample (only seven in total), making
it more di cult to ascertain whether rents and intangibles rose in tandem in those subsectors.
Nevertheless, even including organization capital as a measure of intangibles, the evidence of
positive correlation between rising rents and rising intangibles appears to be substantially less
clear-cut in the Consumer and Services subsectors than in the Manufacturing, Healthcare and
High-tech subsectors.

Relation to prior work and interpretation In prior work (Crouzet and Eberly, 2019), we
highlighted the fact that measures of intangible intensity and measures of markups appeared
to be correlated, both in aggregate or sectoral time series, and within sector. The current
analysis diers in two main ways. First, the methodology we use is dierent: our prior
work used reduced-form proxies for intangibles and market power, while this analysis uses
estimates of the rents parameter  and the intangible intensity µ derived from our structural
model. Second, the results we arrive dier in some important ways from our prior analysis. In
particular, the joint increase in intangible intensity and in rents only appears to be significant
in the High-Tech, Healthcare, and Manufacturing sample. By contrast, in the Consumer and
Services sectors, the relationship is either significant and negative (with R&D only), or has
weak statistical significance (with R&D and organization capital).
    One potential interpretation of the contrasting results between High-tech, Healthcare, and
Manufacturing, on the one hand, and Consumer and services, on the other, is that intangible
investment has a dierent economic function in each of these groups of sectors. In the first
group (which contains subsectors such as machinery or medical devices), intangible investment
may be associated with product dierentiation, which in turn might allow firms to charge
higher prices and earn higher rents. On the other hand, in Consumer and Services (which
contains subsectors such as retail chains), product dierentiation may be weaker. There,
intangible investment might instead be associated with e ciency gains and reductions in
costs (for instance, through process innovation), which could in turn lead to price competition
and lower rents.

  Summarizing, the three main findings of this section are the following. First, a broader
empirical definition of intangibles -- one that includes organization capital -- reduces the

                                               30
contribution of rents to the investment gap, and substantially so after 2000. Second, even
across broadly defined sectors, there are large dierences in the composition of the investment
gap. As a whole, the Manufacturing sector has a small investment gap, declining intangibles,
and moderate rents, at odds with aggregate trends. By contrast, the Healthcare and High-
tech sector are characterized by a larger investment gap than in aggregate, and one where
intangibles play a bigger role, particularly in the Healthcare sector. Third, the rise in rents
and the rise in intangibles are systematically correlated within the subsectors of Healthcare,
High-Tech, and Manufacturing, but not within Consumer and Services subsectors. The latter
two findings are particularly interesting: they suggest that any aggregate statement about the
investment gap may be misguided, as there is substantial heterogeneity in both the aggregate
investment gap itself and the underlying forces that explain it.


5         Robustness and additional results
In this section, we discuss robustness checks on our baseline results, as well as results related
to the extensions to our main model that were discussed in Section 2.5.


5.1         Enterprise value
We consider an alternative measure of the enterprise value of the NFCB sector, that of Hall
(2001). As mentioned above, this measure subtracts all financial assets of the NFCB sector
from gross claims, instead of subtracting only liquid financial assets, as we do in our baseline.
The top panel of Appendix Figure 8 reports the time series for Q1 obtained this way (details
on data construction are reported in Appendix 3.2). It is lower than in our baseline, though it
displays approximately the same medium and long-run trends. The bottom panel of Appendix
Figure 8 then reports the investment gap obtained using this measure of Q1 .
    The main dierence with our baseline is in the overall level of the gap; it is about half
as large. As a result, implied rents are lower than in our baseline. For instance, without
adjustment costs, rents are 4.2% of value added when using this measure of Q1 , as opposed
to 7.7% in our baseline measurement exercise, and their cumulative increase from 1985 to
2015 is 5 p.p., as opposed to 6.2 p.p. in our baseline measurement exercise.47 Moreover, the
direct eect of intangibles becomes larger; and overall, intangibles account for more of the gap
with this measure of Q1 than in our baseline. Overall, results using this alternative measure
of the enterprise value of the NFCB sector suggest that intangibles play a larger role in the
investment gap.

    47
         With adjustment costs, the share of rents is 3.4% in 2015, and the 1985-2015 increase is 5.1 p.p.
                                                         31
5.2     Adjustment costs
The value of    1   = 3, which we draw from Belo et al. (2019), is in the range of typical estimates
of values of the convexity parameter in quadratic adjustment investment cost functions. Given
the annual calibration, the value 1 = 3 corresponds to a doubling time of three years, between
the cases of fast adjustment (2 years) and slow adjustment (8 years) considered in Hall (2001).
The value 2 = 12 is close to the baseline estimate for knowledge capital adjustment costs in
Belo et al. (2019).
    Appendix Figure 9 reports four implied moments under alternative combinations of ad-
justment costs for physical and intangible assets. The values considered are 2 2 [0, 20] and
 1 2 [0, 10]. The four moments are the change in the overall investment gap, Q1       q1 ; the
contribution of intangibles to the investment gap in 2015; the implied intangible share in
2015; and the implied share of rents in total value added in 2015. Of these moments, none
display significant sensitivity to changes in user costs except the share of rents in value added.
That share is highest when adjustment costs are lowest. This is because taking into account
adjustment costs tends to raise user costs of capital and lower implied rents.


5.3     GMM estimation on split samples
In our baseline approach, we apply moments conditions implied by the model to seven-year
averages of the underlying data in order to construct our decomposition of the investment
gap. Appendix 4.5 reports results from a dierent methodology, which consists of estimating
a version of the model with i.i.d. shocks to fundamentals and no adjustment costs using GMM
on split samples (the 1985-2000 and 2001-2017 samples, respectively).48
    The moment conditions used in this estimation are similar to those described in Section
3.1, so the results of the estimation, which are reported in Appendix Table 4 are qualitatively
in line with our baseline analysis, confirming that, in the NFCB sector, both rents and the
Cobb-Douglas intangible share increased.49
    The value added by this estimation approach over our baseline approach is that it allows
to test formally whether point estimates of the structural parameters of interest (intangible
intensity, the size of rents relative to value added, and user costs) changed significantly across
subsamples. Appendix Table 4 shows that for the NFCB data, across the two subsamples, the
increase in rents and in intangible intensity, and the decline in user cots, are all statistically
significant. However, this is not the case in the Compustat sample, where changes in rents,
  48
     We focus on the post-1985 period because over this period, results from aggregate data and results from
the Compustat sample can be compared.
  49
     Quantitatively, the results are somewhat dierent because the underlying data used to estimate the
moments conditions is not averaged over seven-year windows.
                                                    32
in particular, are not significant in the specifications where intangibles are measured using
organization capital in addition to R&D capital. These results thus further support the
notion that including organization capital in our analysis substantially reduces the estimated
increase in rents.


5.4    Alternative identification strategies
We next discuss alternative identification strategies for constructing the various elements of
the investment gap decomposition (13). These alternative approaches are described in greater
detail in Appendix 4.6. They use measures of the average cost of capital in order to construct
r and the Gordon growth term r g , and but do not necessarily match observed values of Q1 .
By contrast, our approach measures infer the Gordon Growth term r g from Q1 , so that it
matches Q1 by construction.

Average cost of capital approach Appendix 4.6.1 reports the investment gap decompo-
sition obtained using a first alternative identification strategy, which we call the "average cost
of capital approach". This approach is closer to that of Barkai (2020) and Karabarbounis
and Neiman (2019) (case ). We measure the average cost of capital as the leverage-weighted
average of the cost of debt (obtained from average interest rates on the market value of debt
of the NFCB sector), and the cost of equity (obtained from the PD ratio of public firms).
We then construct the dierent terms on the right-hand side of Equation (13) using the same
moments as in our baseline, except that we do not match the observed value of Q1 .
    In this approach, the (implied) value of the investment gap (that is, the left-hand side of
Equation 13) is growing faster after 1985 than the investment gap we measured in our baseline
approach (that is, the left-hand side of Equation 13). By 2015, the implied investment gap
is about twice as large as the measured one. This is because the discount rate r obtained
using an average cost of capital approach is lower, and declining faster, than the discount rate
implicit in our baseline decomposition. Consistent with Barkai (2020) and Karabarbounis
and Neiman (2019) (case ), lower discount rates also lead to a higher, and more rapidly
increasing profit share (approximately 9.0 p.p. over the 1985-2015 period, instead of 6.2 p.p.
in our baseline approach).
    However, the composition of the implied investment gap remains similar to our baseline
findings. Appendix 4.6.1 reports more detailed results, compares the discount rates implied by
both approaches, and expands on the interpretation of the results in terms of implicit equity
risk premia, following the discussion of Section 3.3.



                                               33
Inferring intangibles from the investment gap Appendix 4.6.2 describes a second al-
ternative approach, which builds on the average cost of capital approach. In this approach,
we use the values of Q1 in order to infer the size of the intangible capital stock, instead of
matching the times series for S from the BEA data. This approach is similar to the "no
rents" case discussed above in that movements in the implied intangible capital stock mirror
movements in Q1 . It can be thought of as an extension of the analysis of Hall (2001) that
allows for rents.
    This approach suggests that about two-thirds of the investment gap is due to intangibles,
as opposed to one-third in our baseline analysis. However, similar to the "no rents" case, this
approach leads to inferring an intangible capital stock that is sharply declining in the late
1970s and early 1980s, by contrast with most empirical measures of intangibles, including the
one which our baseline approach uses.

Inferring rents from the investment gap Finally, Appendix 4.6.2 describes a third
alternative approach, which consists of inferring the rents parameter µ from the value of Q1 ,
while again using the average cost of capital approach to measure r g . This approach
matches all the same moments as our baseline analysis, except average returns to capital
ROA1 . Overall, this approach leads to an investment gap decomposition that is quantitatively
and qualitatively similar to our baseline analysis. The main dierence is that the increase in
rents is somewhat smaller than in our baseline approach. Relatedly, the implied returns to
capital in this approach, are on average approximately 4 p.p. lower than in the data, and
increases somewhat less after 1980.

Summary While these alternative approaches lead to somewhat dierent values of rents and
of the investment gap than in our baseline analysis, the relative contribution of intangibles
to the investment gap is similar (or larger) in these alternative approaches compared to our
baseline approach.
    We view our Q approach as having two main advantages over these alternatives. First, it
allows us to match simultaneously the two most natural metrics of the returns to investment,
the average return to capital, ROA1 , and Tobin's Q, Q1 , whereas the alternative approaches
generally do not match these moments or, when they do, require large and sometimes negative
changes in intangibles. Second, our baseline approach does not require information on the
capital structure of the firm, other than that contained in the measurement of enterprise value.
This allows us to sidestep issues related to direct measurement of the cost of equity and debt
capital.


                                              34
5.5     Markups and returns to scale
Appendix 4.7 discusses what our estimates of total rents imply for "pure rents" (rents at-
tributable to pricing power or markups) and for "quasi-rents" (rents attributable to decreasing
returns). Specifically, we estimate the markup µS over the marginal cost of sales implied by
dierent degrees of returns to scale  .50
    The broad conclusion from the empirical analysis is that, at the aggregate level, a relatively
modest degree of decreasing returns to scale ( = 0.95) is su cient to account for most
of revenue in excess of capital costs and variable input costs without having to resort to
markups.51 Additionally, even under increasing returns to scale ( = 1.05), the implied
sales markup remains substantially below existing estimates. In particular, in our baseline
specification, the markup over sales is 1.099 on average after 2000, increasing from 1.072 on
average in the pre-2000 period. By comparison, De Loecker et al. (2020) report a revenue-
weighted average markup of price over the cost of sales of approximately 1.5 after 2010.52
   Related work has taken dierent approaches to estimating returns to scale, depending on
data availability. Where detailed cost data are available, for example from the Census of Man-
ufacturing, returns to scale can be estimated using data on cost shares and output. Syverson
(2004) develops this methodology and estimates that a benchmark of constant returns to scale
is justified in his detailed industry analysis. More recently De Loecker et al. (2020) use two
approaches. First, using Compustat and hence lacking detailed cost shares, they use a de-
mand approach and estimate slightly increasing returns to scale in their specifications. In a
standard specification, similar to ours, they estimate nearly constant returns of 1.02 in 1980,
rising to 1.08 by 2016. When they specify overhead in the production function, which in
Compustat includes some intangibles, they have higher returns to scale of 1.07 initially rising
to 1.13 at the end of the sample. When instead they approximate the Syverson (2004) cost
share methodology, they obtain lower estimates of nearly constant returns, of 0.98 pre-1980
and 1.03 by 2010, using industry averages. In firm-level data, which have more heterogeneity,
they find initially slightly more decreasing returns and a larger increase.




  50
      In order to estimate µS , we additionally require data on total revenue, as opposed to operating surplus.
As discussed in Appendix 4.7, this data does not appear to be available for the NFCB sector in either NIPA
tables or in Flow of Funds data, so we use the Compustat sample of Section 4 instead.
   51
      Recent research has argued that returns to R&D investment may have declined in recent years (Bloom
et al., 2020), which would strengthen the idea that "quasi"-rents, not pure rents, may explain the growth in
total rents in our estimates, particularly in R&D-intensive sectors.
   52
      See their Figure III.
                                                      35
5.6    Heterogeneous rents parameters
In our baseline approach, the operating profit function is homogeneous of degree µ with respect
to all capital types. As discussed in Section 2, it is straightforward to relax this assumption and
instead construct the investment gap with heterogeneous rents parameters {µn }N        n=1 . However,
estimating these rents parameters in the data is more challenging; separate identification of
each rents parameter µn would essentially require measuring separately revenue generated
from each type of capital, which we do not observe in the data.
   In Appendix 4.8, we nevertheless make two empirical points about the model with het-
erogeneous rents parameters {µn }Nn=1 . First, it can be shown that if the true model featured
heterogeneous rents, then the µ measured in our baseline methodology would be the user-
cost weighted average rents parameter across capital types. Second, two limit cases (all rents
generated by intangibles, µ1 = 1; and all rents generated by physical capital µ2 = 1) can be
identified in the data using the same moments as our baseline approach. The former case
requires an intangible intensity  in the order of  = 0.5, and a rent parameters in the order of
µ2 = 2, to rationalize the data, both of which are substantially above our baseline estimates.
The case µ2 = 1, by contrast, delivers predictions that are closer to our baseline, primarily
because of the relative size of physical capital, the average rents parameter µ is close to the
rents parameter for physical capital, µ1 .


5.7    Financing frictions
As mentioned in the extensions to the model described in Section 2.5, while introducing
simple financing frictions does not change the insight of Result 1, frictions can aect the
overall magnitude of the gap, or its composition.
    In Appendix 4.9.1, we discuss the quantitative impact of equity financing frictions on the
size of the investment gap. On the balanced growth path, these frictions generally imply that
the investment gap is larger than in our baseline model. With equity financing frictions, the
first-order condition for firm investment is qn,t = 0n,t f 0 (dt ), where f 0 (dt ) captures the wedge
between the marginal value of internally generated cash and external distributions to and from
shareholders. Along the balanced growth path, it must be that dt < 0, so f 0 (dt ) < 1, and so
qn,t is lower than when there are no equity financing frictions f 0 (dt ). Intuitively, the marginal
returns to increasing capital are lower because of the wedge created the friction, f 0 (dt ) < 1.
    Appendix Figure 10 reports the implied size of the investment gap, for dierent values
of f 0 (dt ), along the balanced growth path, along with the composition of the investment
gap between total rents (attributable to intangibles and physical capital) and the omitted


                                                 36
intangibles eect.53 The main message of these figures is that introducing equity financing
frictions will in general magnify the total contribution of rents to the gap. The intuition is that
total rents (those due to either physical capital or intangibles) are the residual after taking
into account the value of the intangible capital stock. This latter value is adjusted downward
with equity financing frictions, because of the wedge f 0 (dt ) between inside and outside finance.
Thus for a given (empirical) value of Q1 , rents are magnified. Appendix Figure 11 repeats
this exercise across the five sectors of the analysis of Section 4; the eects of introducing
equity financing frictions are most visible for the most intangible-intensive sectors, where the
omitted capital eect is initially largest.54 However, in general, even introducing relatively
large frictions (f 0 (d) = 0.80, implying that one dollar of free cash flow after investment only
raises flow payos to shareholders by 80 cents) does not alter our qualitative conclusions, and
quantitatively, only has modest eects on the overall direct contribution of intangibles to the
gap.
   Finally, Appendix 4.9.2 studies how frictions to debt issuance aect our estimates. The
main result is that, when the collateral constraint applies to the stock of physical capital (only),
total rents remain correctly estimated in our approach, but the contribution of physical rents is
underestimated, while the contribution of intangibles is overestimated. The intuition for this
result is that the collateral constraint reduces the "internal" user cost of capital, because part
of the return to holding physical capital is that it relaxes the borrowing constraint, and helps
shareholders lever up and take advantage of the wedge between their discount factor and that
of debtholders. Additionally, we show that with a collateral constraint, our approach leads to
total user costs that are always larger than their true value (driven by the overestimate of the
user cost of physical assets). In turn this implies that our baseline approach underestimates
the rents parameter µ, relative to its true value. Thus, when borrowing creates excess returns
to shareholder, but is subject to a collateral constraint that applies to physical capital only,
our baseline results will generally overstate the role of rents to physical capital, and understate
the value of µ.
    However, Appendix 4.9.2 also shows that these eects are likely to be quantitatively small.
For instance, even for a wedge between shareholders' discount rate, and debtholders' discount
rate, of 5%, our estimate of total rents as a share of value added is only 2 p.p. higher than its


  53
      In Appendix 4.9.1, we show that the complete decomposition cannot be obtained in the model with equity
issuance frictions without additional parametric assumptions about f (.). However, we provide conditions on
the Cobb-Douglas share of intangibles in production such that our baseline estimate of the relative contribution
of intangibles to total rents (which assumes no equity issuance frictions) is an under estimate of their true
contribution, in the presence of equity issuance frictions.
   54
      This result is reminiscent of Bianchi et al. (2019), who find, using a structural approach, that equity
financing shocks (as opposed to debt financing shocks) are more likely to aect R&D investment.
                                                      37
true value.55 Thus, overall, the omission of this form of financing friction from our baseline
model is unlikely to substantially alter our quantitative results.


5.8      Rents and productivity
Finally, we briefly discuss the relationship between our measure of rents, and measures of total
factor productivity. Our baseline analysis estimates the rents parameter µ using the ratio of
aggregate or sectoral returns to physical capital, to estimated user costs. One concern is that,
if firms have heterogeneous marginal returns to capital, highly productive firms will produce
more, have higher revenue, and push up average returns to physical capital. This could occur
even if rents are relatively small.56 To alleviate this concern, in Appendix 4.10, we use the
disaggregated data from Section 4, along with estimates of total factor productivity at the
subsector level obtained from the BLS KLEMS tables, to study the correlation between our
estimates of rents, and measures of total factor productivity. We show that growth in the two
measures are uncorrelated, both within the Healthcare/High-Tech/Manufacturing sectors and
within the Consumer/Services sectors. This suggests that our rents measure is not primarily
driven by heterogeneity in marginal returns to capital across firms.


6        Conclusion
This research provides a general decomposition of the gap between average Q -- which is
observable -- and marginal q -- the shadow value that drives investment. This decomposition
captures the eects of unmeasured capital, such as intangibles, and also the eect of rents.
    We use measurement of the gap to shed light on the growing divergence between physical
investment and valuations, which our approach interprets as being driven by the combined
eects of growing rents and growing intangible capital. With a relatively narrow measure of
intangibles (R&D capital), one-third of the investment gap reflects a combination of growth in
the intangible capital stock and rents generated by intangible capital. Expanding the definition
of intangibles beyond R&D increases this contribution to about two thirds. In addition to
these aggregate eects, sectoral results show that rents on intangibles are largest in some of
the fastest growing sectors in the economy, such as Tech and Health, and that within these
sectors, rents are highest in subsectors with rapid growth in intangibles, as well.

    55
     We estimate the investment gap and its elements by matching  to observed values of the ratio of book
debt to the replacement cost of physical assets, and by calibrating the wedge in discount rates r rb .
  56
     In the limit where rents are zero, for instance because products within an industry are perfect substitutes,
the most productive firms would be the only ones to produce; this is highlighted, for instance, in Autor et al.
(2020).
                                                       38
   Our analysis opens several questions for future research.
   First, though our general decomposition allows for risk premia, we remained deliberately
agnostic about their source in our empirical applications. A more thorough treatment of their
interaction with the investment gap would be a useful next step. A particularly interesting
direction to explore are priced capital quality shocks specific to intangible capital, as the rise
in intangibles might then contribute to the growing wedge between the risk-free rate and the
implicit firm discount rates discussed in Section 3.
   Second, our decomposition holds at the firm level. Exploring the distribution of the in-
vestment gap across firms of particular sectors would both help validate our findings on the
sources of the investment gap, and shed further light on the reasons for its growth over the
last two decades.
    Third, our decomposition suggests ways in which standard investment-Q regressions might
need to be adjusted in order to take into account the possibility that firms have intangible
capital and earn rents. Specifically, building on Peters and Taylor (2017), the decomposition
suggests that controlling for intangible intensity may not be su cient; an additional interaction
term with empirical proxies for rents may further help improve the empirical performance of
the regressions, particularly in the cross-section, a dimension we have not explored in this
paper.57
    Fourth, we noted in Section 2.5 that there is a close link between the investment gap and
the gap between stock returns and returns to investment. The returns gap, in our model, is
driven by the same three fundamental forces that explain the investment gap. As we argued,
because it captures changes in firm value, the returns gap approach is better suited to studying
short-run variation in rents and omitted factors such as intangibles. Using our framework to
decompose higher-frequency data on the returns gap would help connect our Q approach to
the production-based asset pricing literature, and also hopefully shed light on the importance
of rents and omitted factors for that literature.
    Finally, and in a dierent vein, we have maintained a neoclassical approach to the interac-
tion between intangibles and rents. A broader approach, however, could allow for an economic
interaction; for example, investment in intangibles such as product innovation or a software
platform may generate rents to the firm. These interactions would augment the neoclassical
approach we take here, and could generate additional links between intangible capital and the
decisions and valuation of the firm. We pursue this in future work.



  57
     Relatedly, in previous work (Crouzet and Eberly, 2019), we showed that estimated time eects in a
standard investment-Q panel regressions display a smaller downward trend when controlling for intangibles;
the current analysis suggests expanding this with an interaction term capturing rents.
                                                   39
References
Abel, A. B. (1983). Optimal investment under uncertainty. The American Economic Re-
  view 73 (1), 228­233.

Abel, A. B. and O. J. Blanchard (1986). The present value of profits and cyclical movements
  in investment. Econometrica 54 (2), 249.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1994). A unified model of investment under uncertainty.
  American Economic Review 84 (5), 1369.

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (2011). How Q and cash flow aect investment without frictions:
  An analytic explanation. The Review of Economic Studies 78 (4), 1179­1200.

Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Gri th, and P. Howitt (2005). Competition and
  innovation: An inverted-u relationship. The quarterly journal of economics 120 (2), 701­
  728.

Ai, H., M. M. Croce, and K. Li (2013). Toward a quantitative general equilibrium asset pricing
  model with intangible capital. The Review of Financial Studies 26 (2), 491­530.

Alexander, L. and J. Eberly (2018). Investment hollowing out. IMF Economic Review 66 (1),
  5­30.

Altinkili¸
         c, O. and R. S. Hansen (2000). Are there economies of scale in underwriting fees?
  Evidence of rising external financing costs. The Review of Financial Studies 13 (1), 191­218.

Andrei, D., W. Mann, and N. Moyen (2019). Why did the Q theory of investment start
 working? Journal of Financial Economics 133 (2), 251­272.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2020). The fall of the
 labor share and the rise of superstar firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2),
 645­709.

Baqaee, D. and E. Farhi (2020). Entry vs. rents. NBER working paper .

Barkai, S. (2020). Declining labor and capital shares. The Journal of Finance 75 (5), 2421­
  2463.

Basu, S. (2019). Are price-cost markups rising in the United States? A discussion of the
  evidence. Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (3), 3­22.


                                              40
Belo, F., V. Gala, J. Salomao, and M. A. Vitorino (2019). Decomposing firm value. Working
  paper .

Belo, F., X. Lin, and M. A. Vitorino (2014). Brand capital and firm value. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 17 (1), 150­169.

Benmelech, E., N. Bergman, and H. Kim (2018). Strong employers and weak employees: How
  does employer concentration aect wages? NBER working paper .

Bianchi, F., H. Kung, and G. Morales (2019). Growth, slowdowns, and recoveries. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 101, 47­63.

Bloom, N., C. I. Jones, J. Van Reenen, and M. Webb (2020). Are ideas getting harder to
  find? American Economic Review 110 (4), 1104­44.

Bolton, P., H. Chen, and N. Wang (2011). A unified theory of Tobin's Q, corporate investment,
  financing, and risk management. The journal of Finance 66 (5), 1545­1578.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2017). Rents, technical change, and risk
  premia. American Economic Review 107 (5), 614­20.

Campbell, J. Y. and S. B. Thompson (2008). Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
  Can anything beat the historical average? The Review of Financial Studies 21 (4), 1509­
  1531.

Chen, H. J. and S. J. Chen (2012). Investment-cash flow sensitivity cannot be a good mea-
  sure of financial constraints: Evidence from the time series. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 103 (2), 393­410.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991). Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns
  and economic fluctuations. The Journal of Finance 46 (1), 209­237.

Cochrane, J. H. (1996). A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model.
  Journal of Political Economy 104 (3), 572­621.

Cooper, R. and J. Ejarque (2003). Financial frictions and investment: requiem in Q. Review
  of Economic Dynamics 6 (4), 710­728.

Corhay, A., H. Kung, and L. Schmid (2020). Q: Risk, rents, or growth? Working paper .

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2005). Measuring capital and technology: an expanded
  framework. In Measuring capital in the new economy, pp. 11­46. University of Chicago
  Press.
                                             41
Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009). Intangible capital and US economic growth.
  Review of income and wealth 55 (3), 661­685.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2018). Intangibles, investment, and e ciency. American Economic
  Review, Papers and Proceedings 108, 426­31.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2020). Intangibles, markups, and the measurement of productivity
  growth. Working paper .

Crouzet, N. and J. C. Eberly (2019). Understanding weak capital investment: the role of
  market power and intangibles. Proceedings of the 2018 Jackson Hole Symposium , 87­148.

De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020). The rise of market power and the macroe-
  conomic implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2), 561­644.

DeMarzo, P. M., M. J. Fishman, Z. He, and N. Wang (2012). Dynamic agency and the Q
  theory of investment. The Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2295­2340.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and D. Papanikolaou (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of
  expected returns. The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1365­1406.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and D. Papanikolaou (2014). The value and ownership of intangible capital.
  American Economic Review 104 (5), 189­94.

Evans, D. L. (2003). Fixed assets and consumer durable goods in the united states, 1925-97.
  Technical Report, Bureau of Economic Analysis .

Ewens, M., R. H. Peters, and S. Wang (2020). Measuring intangible capital with market
 prices. NBER working paper .

Falato, A., D. Kadyrzhanova, J. Sim, and R. Steri (2020). Rising intangible capital, shrinking
  debt capacity, and the US corporate savings glut. Working paper .

Farhi, E. and F. Gourio (2018). Accounting for macro-finance trends: Market power, intangi-
  bles, and risk premia. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2), 147­250.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2006). Market selection, reallocation, and
  restructuring in the US retail trade sector in the 1990s. The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 88 (4), 748­758.

Gomes, J. F. (2001). Financing investment. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1263­1285.


                                             42
Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011). The return to capital and the business
  cycle. Review of Economic Dynamics 14 (2), 262­278.

Gourio, F. and L. Rudanko (2014). Customer capital. Review of Economic Studies 81 (3),
  1102­1136.

Guti´
    errez, G. and T. Philippon (2017). Investmentless Growth: An Empirical Investigation.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2), 89­190.

Guti´
    errez, G. and T. Philippon (2018a). Declining Competition and Investment in the US.
  NBER working paper .

Guti´
    errez, G. and T. Philippon (2018b). How EU markets became more competitive than US
  markets: A study of institutional drift. NBER working paper .

Hall, R. E. (2001). The stock market and capital accumulation. American Economic Re-
  view 91 (5), 1185­1202.

Hall, R. E. (2019). New evidence on the markup of prices over marginal costs and the role of
  mega-firms in the US Economy. NBER working paper .

Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 1029­1054.

Hansen, L. P., J. C. Heaton, and N. Li (2005). Intangible risk. In Measuring Capital in the
  New Economy, pp. 111­152. University of Chicago Press.

Haskel, J. and S. Westlake (2018). Capitalism without capital: The rise of the intangible
  economy. Princeton University Press.

Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin's marginal q and average Q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econo-
  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 213­224.

Hayashi, F. and T. Inoue (1991). The Relation between Firm Growth and Q with Multiple
  Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese Firms. Economet-
  rica 59 (3), 731­53.

Hennessy, C. A., A. Levy, and T. M. Whited (2007). Testing Q theory with financing frictions.
  Journal of financial economics 83 (3), 691­717.

Hovenkamp, H. (2018). Whatever Did Happen to the Antitrust Movement? Notre Dame L.
  Rev. 94, 583.
                                             43
Hulten, C. R. and X. Hao (2008). What is a Company Really Worth? Intangible Capital and
  the "Market to Book Value" Puzzle. NBER working paper .

Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
  costs and ownership structure. Journal of financial economics 3 (4), 305­360.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2019). Accounting for factorless income. NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual 33 (1), 167­228.

Lev, B. and S. Radhakrishnan (2005). The valuation of organization capital. In Measuring
  capital in the new economy, pp. 73­110. University of Chicago Press.

Li, W. C. and B. H. Hall (2020). Depreciation of business R&D capital. Review of Income
  and Wealth 66 (1), 161­180.

Lindenberg, E. B. and S. A. Ross (1981). Tobin's Q ratio and industrial organization. Journal
  of business , 1­32.

Martin, I. (2017). What is the expected return on the market? The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132 (1), 367­433.

McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2005). Taxes, regulations, and the value of US and UK
 corporations. The Review of Economic Studies 72 (3), 767­796.

McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2010). Unmeasured investment and the puzzling US
 boom in the 1990s. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4), 88­123.

Peters, R. H. and L. A. Taylor (2017). Intangible capital and the investment-Q relation.
  Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 251­272.

Syverson, C. (2004). Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of
  Political Economy 112 (6), 1181­1222.

Whited, T. M. (1992). Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate investment: Evidence from
 panel data. The Journal of Finance 47 (4), 1425­1460.




                                             44
                                                                                                Compustat             Compustat
                                                         Non-Financial Corporate Businesses    non-financials        non-financials
                                                                                                  (R&D)             (R&D+ org. cap.)

                 Targeted moments                        1947      1966     1985      2001    1985       2001       1985       2001
                                                           -         -        -         -       -          -          -          -
                                                         1965      1984     2000      2017    2000       2017       2000       2017
      i1        Physical investment rate                 0.089     0.108    0.099     0.087   0.097      0.090      0.097      0.090

      i2        Intangible investment rate               0.252     0.276    0.281     0.261   0.260      0.248      0.251      0.245

      S         Intangible/physical capital              0.053     0.078    0.124     0.164   0.102      0.136      0.308      0.377

      ROA1      Return on physical capital               0.208     0.211    0.211     0.221   0.225      0.256      0.276      0.314

      Q1        Av. Q for physical capital               1.184     1.413    2.032     2.479   1.764      2.177      1.764      2.177

      g         Growth rate of total capital stock       0.034     0.038    0.029     0.019   0.026      0.024      0.026      0.024

                                                         1947      1966     1985      2001    1985       2001       1985       2001
                  Implied moments                          -         -        -         -       -          -          -          -
                                                         1965      1984     2000      2017    2000       2017       2000       2017
      Q1   q1   Investment gap                           0.072     0.308    0.908     1.439   0.620      1.173      0.859      1.446
                 % rents from physical capital             69       41        61        71      71         66         36         33
45




                 % intangibles                             25       52        21        14      15         15         43         41
                 % rents from intangibles                   7        7        18        24      15         19         21         26

                Intangible share in production           0.099     0.145    0.227     0.286   0.179      0.222      0.392      0.440

      s         Rents as a fraction of value added       -0.008    0.014    0.035     0.067   0.029      0.076      0.005      0.043

      R1        User cost of physical capital            0.193     0.171    0.143     0.128   0.164      0.155      0.163      0.155

      R2        User cost of intangible capital          0.392     0.369    0.341     0.312   0.350      0.326      0.339      0.322

      µ         Curvature of operating profit function   0.984     1.051    1.136     1.244   1.117      1.290      1.023      1.145

      µ
      ~         Markup over value added                  0.993     1.014    1.037     1.072   1.030      1.083      1.005      1.045

     Table 1: Summary of targeted and implied moments, for the non-financial corporate business sector (columns 3 to 5) and for the
     Compustat Non-Financial sample. For Compustat non-financials, columns 6 and 7 use R&D as the measure of intangibles, and columns
     8 and 9 use the sum of R&D and SG&A as the measure of intangibles. The moments are averages over the sub-period indicated in each
     column. The intangible share in production is estimated under the assumption that physical and intangible capital are Cobb-Douglas
                          1  
     substitutes: Kt = K1  ,t K2,t . Rents as a fraction of value added are computed as s = (1  sL )(1 1/µ), where sL is the labor share
     of value added for the NFCB sector. Markups over value added are computed as µ     ~ = 1/(1 s). The implied moments reported are
     for the model with adjustment costs; the adjustment cost values are 1 = 3 and 2 = 12. In the decomposition of the investment gap,
     percentages may not add up due to rounding. Data sources are described in Sections 3 and 4.
                                                                                      Compustat non-financials (Intangibles = R&D)
                                                            Consumer               Services            High-tech            Healthcare         Manufacturing

                                                         1985     2001      1985          2001      1985       2001      1985        2001     1985      2001
                 Targeted moments                          -        -         -             -         -          -         -           -        -         -
                                                         2000     2017      2000          2017      2000       2017      2000        2017     2000      2017
      i1        Physical investment rate                 0.128    0.098     0.142         0.084     0.139      0.101     0.105       0.082    0.094     0.093

      i2        Intangible investment rate               0.245    0.317     0.241         0.224     0.346      0.331     0.225       0.190    0.226     0.226

      S         Intangible/physical capital              0.008    0.023     0.028         0.010     0.227      0.238     0.346       0.722    0.113     0.087

      ROA1      Return on physical capital               0.269    0.281     0.261         0.245     0.359      0.397     0.355       0.495    0.226     0.222

      Q1        Av. Q for physical capital               2.672    2.651     2.517         2.587     2.937      3.261     3.064       4.306    1.467     1.743

      g         Growth rate of total capital stock       0.054    0.037     0.082         0.016     0.065      0.014     0.046       0.028    0.016     0.028

                                                         1985     2001      1985          2001      1985       2001      1985        2001     1985      2001
                  Implied moments                          -        -         -             -         -          -         -           -        -         -
                                                         2000     2017      2000          2017      2000       2017      2000        2017     2000      2017
      Q1   q1   Investment gap                           1.523    1.645     1.380         1.574     1.634      2.424     1.908       3.329    0.367     0.687
                 % rents from physical capital             98          93     93              97      46           55      42            32     43        72
                 % intangibles                             1           2      3               1       31           13      30            27     47        16
46




                 % rents from intangibles                  1           6      4               2       23           32      28            41     9         12

                Intangible share in production           0.013    0.058     0.038         0.020     0.324      0.367     0.387       0.562    0.176     0.143

      s         Rents as a fraction of value added       0.087    0.124     0.070         0.130     0.044      0.110     0.060       0.103    0.016     0.052

      R1        User cost of physical capital            0.188    0.169     0.191         0.150     0.198      0.174     0.173       0.151    0.175     0.159

      R2        User cost of intangible capital          0.319    0.418     0.310         0.306     0.429      0.420     0.316       0.271    0.332     0.305

      µ         Curvature of operating profit function   1.412    1.575     1.308         1.621     1.184      1.474     1.260       1.433    1.064     1.186

      µ
      ~         Markup over value added                  1.095    1.142     1.075         1.150     1.047      1.124     1.064       1.115    1.017     1.055


     Table 2: Summary of targeted and implied moments for the dierent sectors of the Compustat non-financial sample. All columns
     measure intangibles as the R&D capital stock. The moments are averages over the sub-period indicated in each column. The intangible
                                                                                                                                    1  
     share in production is estimated under the assumption that physical and intangible capital are Cobb-Douglas substitutes: Kt = K1 ,t K2,t .
     Rents as a fraction of value added are computed as s = (1 sL )(1 1/µ), where sL is the labor share of value added for the NFCB
     sector. Markups over value added are computed as µ   ~ = 1/(1 s). The implied moments reported are for the model with adjustment
     costs; the adjustment cost values are 1 = 3 and 2 = 12. In the decomposition of the investment gap, percentages may not add up due
     to rounding. Data sources are described in Section 4.
                      (a)   Manufacturing, High-tech, and Healthcare sectors
                                                                   Rents (µs,t )
                                                Intangibles=R&D           Intangibles=R&D + org. cap.
                                                (1)          (2)               (1)          (2)
 Cobb-Douglas intangible share (s,t )         1.39         1.39              1.13         1.13
                                               (0.10)       (0.44)           (0.09)        (0.39)
 Number of observations                        1040         1040              1040         1040
 Adjusted R-sq.                                 0.71        0.71              0.53         0.53
 Clustering of s.e.                            none       subsector           none       subsector


                                 (b)   Consumer and services sectors
                                                                   Rents (µs,t )
                                                Intangibles=R&D           Intangibles=R&D + org. cap.
                                                (1)          (2)               (1)          (2)
 Cobb-Douglas intangible share (s,t )          6.04         6.04             0.74          0.74
                                               (0.48)       (1.37)           (0.11)        (0.32)
 Number of observations                         294          294               294          294
 Adjusted R-sq.                                 0.69        0.69              0.42         0.42
 Clustering of s.e.                            none       subsector           none       subsector


Table 3: The relationship between intangibles and rents at the sub-sector level. In both panels,
the model estimated is µs,t = s + s,t + s,t , where s is a sector and t is a year. Specifications
marked (1) report heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, while the specifications marked (2)
report standard errors clustered at the sub sector level. The data is the Compustat non-financial
sample, aggregated to the level of the subsectors described in Tables 1 and 2. Both µs,t and s,t are
winsorized at the bottom and top 1%. The top panel reports results for the subsectors belonging
to the Manufacturing, High-tech and Healthcare sectors (pooled together), while the bottom panel
reports the results for the subsectors belonging to the Consumer and Services subsectors.




                                                   47
                                                       (a) Zero adjustment costs

 2

1.5

 1

 .5

 0
        50


               55


                         60


                                    65


                                               70


                                                         75


                                                                80


                                                                            85


                                                                                     90


                                                                                               95


                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                       05


                                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                                       15
      19


             19


                       19


                                  19


                                             19


                                                       19


                                                              19


                                                                          19


                                                                                   19


                                                                                             19


                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                     20
                    Rents attributable to physical capital    Intangibles        Rents attributable to intangibles          Total



                                                     (b) Positive adjustment costs

 2

1.5

 1

 .5

 0
        50


               55


                         60


                                    65


                                               70


                                                         75


                                                                80


                                                                            85


                                                                                     90


                                                                                               95


                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                       05


                                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                                       15
      19


             19


                       19


                                  19


                                             19


                                                       19


                                                              19


                                                                          19


                                                                                   19


                                                                                             19


                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                     20
                    Rents attributable to physical capital    Intangibles        Rents attributable to intangibles          Total



                                                       (c) High adjustment costs

 2

1.5

 1

 .5

 0
        50


               55


                         60


                                    65


                                               70


                                                         75


                                                                80


                                                                            85


                                                                                     90


                                                                                               95


                                                                                                          00


                                                                                                                       05


                                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                                       15
      19


             19


                       19


                                  19


                                             19


                                                       19


                                                              19


                                                                          19


                                                                                   19


                                                                                             19


                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                     20




                    Rents attributable to physical capital    Intangibles        Rents attributable to intangibles          Total


Figure 1: The investment gap Q1 q1 for physical capital in the non-financial corporate (NFCB)
sector for dierent values of adjustment costs. In each panel, the crossed blue line is an estimate
of Q1 q1 constructed using data from the Flow of Funds and from the BEA fixed asset tables.
The shaded areas present the decomposition of the physical investment gap into three terms, cor-
responding to the eects of rents generated by physical capital, the omitted capital eect due to
intangibles, and rents generated by intangibles. The decomposition is described in Equation (13).
The top panel reports results with zero adjustment costs ( 1 = 2 = 0); the middle panel reports
results with positive adjustment costs ( 1 = 3, 2 = 12); and the bottom panel reports results with
high adjustment costs ( 1 = 8, 2 = 18). Methodology and data sources are described in Section 3.
                                                                     48
                                 (a) Intangible share                                     (b) Rents as a fraction of value added
         .3                                                                    .1
                                                                             .08
        .25                                                                  .06
                                                                             .04
         .2
                                                                             .02
        .15                                                                     0
                                                                            -.02
         .1                                                                 -.04

        .05
                50
                55
                60
                65
                70
                75
                80
                85
                90
                95
                00
                05
                10
                15




                                                                                      50
                                                                                      55
                                                                                      60
                                                                                      65
                                                                                      70
                                                                                      75
                                                                                      80
                                                                                      85
                                                                                      90
                                                                                      95
                                                                                      00
                                                                                      05
                                                                                      10
                                                                                      15
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              20
              20
              20
              20




                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                    20
                                                                                    20
                                                                                    20
                                                                                    20
                     zero adjustment costs        high adjustment costs                  zero adjustment costs        high adjustment costs
                     positive adjustment costs                                           positive adjustment costs


                          (c) User cost of physical capital                                  (d) User cost of intangible capital
         .4
                                                                             .4
        .35
49




                                                                            .35
         .3
                                                                             .3
        .25
                                                                            .25
         .2                                                                  .2
        .15                                                                 .15
         .1                                                                  .1
                50
                55
                60
                65
                70
                75
                80
                85
                90
                95
                00
                05
                10
                15




                                                                                    50
                                                                                    55
                                                                                    60
                                                                                    65
                                                                                    70
                                                                                    75
                                                                                    80
                                                                                    85
                                                                                    90
                                                                                    95
                                                                                    00
                                                                                    05
                                                                                    10
                                                                                    15
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              19
              20
              20
              20
              20




                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  19
                                                                                  20
                                                                                  20
                                                                                  20
                                                                                  20
                     zero adjustment costs        high adjustment costs                 zero adjustment costs         high adjustment costs
                     positive adjustment costs                                          positive adjustment costs



     Figure 2: Other model moments for the NFCB sector. Panel (a) reports the share of intangibles in production,  , when the capital
                                                          1  
     aggregator is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas: Kt = K1      ,t K2,t . Panel (b) reports rents as a fraction of value added, sV A , which is given
     by sV A = (1 sL )(1 1/µ), where µ is the model parameter governing the size of rents, and sL is labor's share of value added. Panels
     (c) and (d) report user costs for each type of capital, R1 and R2 . The "zero adjustment costs" case corresponds to 1 = 2 = 0; the
     "positive adjustment costs case" corresponds to 1 = 3 and 2 = 12; the "high adjustment costs" case corresponds to 1 = 8 and 2 = 18.
     Methodology and data sources are described in Section 3.
                                     (a) Change in intangible share


.4


.3


.2


.1


 0
  85




                90




                               95




                                                     00




                                                                      05




                                                                                         10




                                                                                                      15
19




              19




                             19




                                                   20




                                                                    20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                    20
                      zero adj. costs (baseline)           zero adj. costs (no increase in rents)
                      pos. adj. costs (baseline)           pos. adj. costs (no increase in rents)
                      high adj. costs (baseline)           high adj. costs (no increase in rents)




                          (b) Change in rents as a fraction of value added

 .1

.08

.06

.04

.02

     0
   85




                 90




                                95




                                                      00




                                                                       05




                                                                                         10




                                                                                                      15
 19




               19




                              19




                                                    20




                                                                     20




                                                                                       20




                                                                                                    20



                       zero adj. costs (baseline)          zero adj. costs (no increase in rents)
                       pos. adj. costs (baseline)          pos. adj. costs (no increase in rents)
                       high adj. costs (baseline)          high adj. costs (no increase in rents)




Figure 3: Counterfactual exercises for the NFCB sector. The top panel reports the change in the
change in the intangible share in production,  , from 1985 to 2017, when the capital aggregator is
                                           1  
assumed to be Cobb-Douglas: Kt = K1         ,t K2,t . The blue lines report the change in the baseline
decomposition; see panel (a) of Figure 2. The orange lines report the change when the parameter
controlling rents, µ, is set to its estimated value in 1985. The bottom panel reports the change in
rents as a fraction of value added from 1985 to 2017; rents as a fraction of value added are given by
s = (1 sL )(1 1/µ), where µ is the model parameter governing the size of rents, and sL is labor's
share of value added. The blue lines report the change in the baseline decomposition; see panel (b)
of Figure 2. The orange lines report the change when the ratio of intangible to physical capital, S ,
and the intangible investment rate, 2 , are fixed to their 1985 values. Methodology and data sources
are described in Section 3.
                                                           50
                      (a) Consumer sector                                (b) Services sector                           (c) Manufacturing sector

           5                                                  5                                              5

           4                                                  4                                              4

           3                                                  3                                              3

           2                                                  2                                              2

           1                                                  1                                              1

           0                                                  0                                              0

                             5
             75

             80

             85

             90

             95

             00

             05

             10

             15



                                                                75

                                                                80

                                                                85

                                                                90

                                                                95

                                                                00

                                                                05

                                                                10

                                                                15



                                                                                                               75

                                                                                                               80

                                                                                                               85

                                                                                                               90

                                                                                                               95

                                                                                                               00

                                                                                                               05

                                                                                                               10

                                                                                                               15
           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           20

           20

           20

           20



                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              19

                                                              20

                                                              20

                                                              20

                                                              20



                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                             20
                             4
                                 (d) High-tech sector                                                            (e) Healthcare sector

       5                     3                                                         5

       4                                                                               4
51




                             2
       3                                                                               3

       2                     1                                                         2

       1                                                                               1
                             0
       0                                                                               0
         75


                 80


                        85


                                 0


                                      19 1995

                                               00


                                                      80505

                                                                10


                                                                       5




                                                                                      20 1975

                                                                                                  80


                                                                                                       585

                                                                                                              20 990

                                                                                                                         95


                                                                                                                                10500

                                                                                                                                          05


                                                                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                                                                        15
                             59




                                                                     01
                                        80




                                                                    90


                                                                             95


                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                  10
       19


               19


                      19


                            19




                                             20




                                                              20




                                                                                                19


                                                                                                      19




                                                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                      20
                           7




                                                                                                     0
                                                    19 2



                                                                     2




                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                              20 2
                         19




                                                                  19


                                                                           19




                                           Rents attributable to physical capital                  20
                                                                                               Rents attributable to intangibles
                                           Intangibles                                         Total

     Figure 4: The investment gap Q1 - q1 for physical capital across sectors, using R&D as a measure of intangibles. Data is from the
     Compustat Non-Financial (NF) sample. We use the version of model with adjustment costs 1 = 3 and 2 = 12, in order to construct
     the components of the investment gap. Methodology and data sources are described in Section 4.
                           (a) Consumer sector                                   (b) Services sector                                (c) Manufacturing sector

             .1                                                                                                           .1
                                                                    .1
          .08                                                                                                            .08

          .06                                                                                                            .06
                                                                  .05
          .04                                                                                                            .04

          .02                                                                                                            .02

             0                                                      0                                                      0
               85

                      90

                              95

                                      00

                                             05

                                                    10

                                                           15




                                                                     85

                                                                            90

                                                                                   95

                                                                                          00

                                                                                                 05

                                                                                                         10

                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                            85

                                                                                                                                   90

                                                                                                                                           95

                                                                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                                                                         05

                                                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                                                        15
             19

                    19

                            19

                                    20

                                           20

                                                  20

                                                         20




                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                        20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                      20
                               .1
                                     (d) High-tech sector                                                                   (e) Healthcare sector

        .2
                                                                                                 .15
52




       .15                    .05
                                                                                                  .1
        .1

                                                                                                 .05
       .05
                                0
                                      5




                                                     90




                                                                    95




                                                                                     00




                                                                                                        05




                                                                                                                         95 10




                                                                                                                                             15
         0                                                                                         0
                               19 98




                                                   19




                                                                      9




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                       19 20




                                                                                                                                           20
                                    1




                                                                  10 1
          85



                       90



                                 95



                                              00



                                                           05




                                                                            15




                                                                                                    85



                                                                                                                90




                                                                                                                                      00



                                                                                                                                                  05



                                                                                                                                                               10



                                                                                                                                                                        15
        19



                     19




                                            20



                                                         20



                                                                20



                                                                          20




                                                                                                  19



                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                                                20



                                                                                                                                                             20



                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                           Intangibles = R&D      Intangibles = R&D + organization capital      Counterfactual: no increase in intangibles


     Figure 5: Rents as a fraction value added in the Compustat non-financial sample. Each panel reports the change in the change in
                                                                                                                    1- 
     the intangible share in production,  , from 1985 to 2017, if the capital aggregator is Cobb-Douglas: Kt = K1    ,t K2,t . The blue circled
     lines report the change obtained in the baseline exercise, using R&D as the measure of intangible capital. The green crossed line reports
     the change obtained when also including organization capital. Finally, the orange line with triangles reports the counterfactual change
     necessary to match the investment gap when the parameter controlling rents, µ, is kept equal to its estimated value in 1985, in the case
     where R&D only is used to measure intangible capital. Methodology and data sources are described in Section 4.
                        (a) Rents and intangible intensity in 1980                                             (b) Rents and intangible intensity in 2015
                                          R&D                                                                                    R&D

          Rents   1.9                                                                            Rents   1.9
                                                                                                                    Services
            µ     1.8                                                                              µ     1.8
                  1.7                                                                                    1.7                Consumer                         High-tech
                  1.6                                                                                    1.6
                  1.5                                                                                    1.5                                                                Healthcare
                  1.4                                                                                    1.4
                  1.3                                                                                    1.3
                  1.2                                                                                    1.2
                             Consumer                                                                                       Manufacturing
                  1.1          Services                                                                  1.1
                                                   Healthcare
                    1                                                                                      1
                        High-tech
                   .9            Manufacturing                                                            .9
                   .8                                                                                     .8
                         0     .1        .2        .3        .4        .5        .6    .7   .8                  0      .1          .2         .3        .4        .5        .6    .7     .8
                                    Cobb-Douglas intangible share                                                             Cobb-Douglas intangible share 



                        (c) Rents and intangible intensity in 1980                                             (d) Rents and intangible intensity in 2015
                                    R&D + org. cap.                                                                       R&D + org. cap.
53




         Rents    1.9                                                                            Rents   1.9
           µ      1.8                                                                              µ     1.8
                  1.7                                                                                    1.7
                  1.6                                                                                    1.6
                  1.5                                                                                    1.5                                        Services
                  1.4                                                                                    1.4                                                           High-tech
                  1.3                                                                                    1.3                                                                 Healthcare
                  1.2                                                                                    1.2                                                                Consumer
                  1.1                                                                                    1.1                            Manufacturing
                   1                                Services                                               1
                             High-tech                                 Healthcare
                                                                         Consumer
                   .9                                                                                     .9
                        Manufacturing
                   .8                                                                                     .8
                         0    .1    .2        .3        .4        .5        .6    .7   .8   .9                 0      .1      .2         .3        .4        .5        .6    .7   .8     .9
                                    Cobb-Douglas intangible share                                                            Cobb-Douglas intangible share 


     Figure 6: The evolution of rents and intangibles across sectors and underlying subsectors. The top panel reports the values of the
     rents parameter µ and the Cobb-Douglas intangible share  across the main sectors in our analysis in the year 1980. The bottom panel
     reports the same structural parameters in the year 2015. Data are from the Compustat Non-Financial (NF) sample, aggregated up to
     the BEA sectors (circles with size proportional to operating revenue). The graph also reports the value of rents and intangibles for the
     five broad sectors as in Figure 4. Appendix Tables 1 and 2 report the sectoral classification used to construct the figures. Data sources
     are described in Section 4.
                                               (a) Manufacturing, High-tech, and Healthcare                                                                                                         (b) Consumer and services
                                                                  R&D                                                                                                                                        R&D

                                            .04                    311                                                                                                           .06
                                                           315                                                                                                                         5412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     561




                 Time trend in rents µs,t




                                                                                                                                                      Time trend in rents µs,t
                                            .03
                                                                                             518
                                                                                            5415                                                                                 .04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
                                            .02                   332                          339
                                                                               333
                                                          211
                                                                       334                                                                   511                                 .02                                                       722
                                                                     337                                   325
                                                                336335
                                            .01         515 327
                                                      331 324
                                                         326      322
                                                         212321                                                                                                                                                                           721         44
                                                     213 622
                                                            22                                                                                                                                                                      713
                                              0                                                                                                                                    0
                                                          0                    .005                 .01                  .015           .02                                                 -.006            -.004          -.002     0               .002
                                                          Time trend in Cobb-Douglas intangible share s,t                                                                                     Time trend in Cobb-Douglas intangible share s,t




              (c) Manufacturing, High-tech, and Healthcare                                                                                                                                          (d) Consumer and services
              R&D + org. cap.                                                                                                                                                                           R&D + org. cap.

                                             .02                                                                                                                                 .03
54




                                                                                                                                518                                                         5412
                                                                                                          311
              Time trend in rents µs,t




                                                                                                                                                   Time trend in rents µs,t
                                            .015
                                                                                                                            5415
                                                                                                          332      315                511                                        .02
                                                                                                                     333 339
                                                                                                                 334
                                             .01                                               211                          325
                                                                                                                336                                                                                    722
                                                                                       324         327          335
                                                                                                                  337                                                                                                                             42
                                                                                                                        515                                                      .01                                                561
                                            .005                 213                          331326             322
                                                                                      212
                                                                                                                                                                                       44                                  721
                                                                                                          622
                                                                                                   22             321
                                                                                                                                                                                              713
                                              0                                                                                                                                   0
                                                   -.01                -.005                   0                       .005            .01                                                     0                            .005                      .01
                                                          Time trend in Cobb-Douglas intangible share s,t                                                                                    Time trend in Cobb-Douglas intangible share s,t


     Figure 7: The relationship between rising rents and rising intangible intensity across subsectors. Each panel reports a scatter plot of
     the coe cients ( µ,s , ,s ), where s is a sector, and the coe cients are the estimated time trends of the rents parameters µs,t and the
     Cobb-Douglas intangible intensity s,t , i.e. µs,t = µ,s + µ,s t + µ,s,t and s,t = ,s + ,s t + ,s,t . The top left panel reports these
     coe cients for the Manufacturing, Healthcare, and High-tech sectors when intangibles are measured using R&D capital (the slope of the
     simple OLS line is 0.51, with a robust t-statistic of 1.34); the bottom left panel reports these when intangibles are measured using R&D
     capital plus organization capital (the slope of the simple OLS line is 0.68, with a robust t-statistic of 4.11). The top and bottom right
     panels are similarly constructed, but subsectors belonging to the Consumer and Services subsectors; in the top panel, the slope of the
     OLS line is 5.70, with a robust t-statistic of 2.84; in the bottom panel, the slope is 0.22, with a robust t-statistic of 0.28.
