                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE DIFFUSION OF DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGIES

                                         Nicholas Bloom
                                     Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                         Aakash Kalyani
                                           Josh Lerner
                                         Ahmed Tahoun

                                       Working Paper 28999
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28999


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank audiences at the Applied Machine Learning, Economics, and Data Science webinar,
Bocconi University, Columbia University, Dartmouth University, the London School of
Economics, Nova Business School, the Toulouse Network on Information Technology, the
University of Maryland, and Yeshiva University for helpful comments, Lisa Kahn for data
sharing, and William Hartog and Jared Simpson for excellent research assistance. We thank
Scarlett Chen, Nick Short, Corinne Stephenson, and Michael Webb for assistance in
conceptualizing and researching early versions of this project. Funding for this research was
provided by the Institute for New Economic Thinking, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation,
Harvard Business School's Division of Research and Doctoral Programs, the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, and the Toulouse Network on Information Technology. Lerner has received
compensation from advising institutional investors in venture capital funds, venture capital
groups, and governments designing policies relevant to venture capital. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicholas Bloom, Tarek Alexander Hassan, Aakash Kalyani, Josh Lerner, and Ahmed
Tahoun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Diffusion of Disruptive Technologies
Nicholas Bloom, Tarek Alexander Hassan, Aakash Kalyani, Josh Lerner, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 28999
July 2021
JEL No. O31,O32

                                           ABSTRACT

We identify novel technologies using textual analysis of patents, job postings, and earnings calls.
Our approach enables us to identify and document the diffusion of 29 disruptive technologies
across firms and labor markets in the U.S. Five stylized facts emerge from our data. First, the
locations where technologies are developed that later disrupt businesses are geographically highly
concentrated, even more so than overall patenting. Second, as the technologies mature and the
number of new jobs related to them grows, they gradually spread across space. While initial
hiring is concentrated in high-skilled jobs, over time the mean skill level in new positions
associated with the technologies declines, broadening the types of jobs that adopt a given
technology. At the same time, the geographic diffusion of low-skilled positions is significantly
faster than higher-skilled ones, so that the locations where initial discoveries were made retain
their leading positions among high-paying positions for decades. Finally, these technology hubs
are more likely to arise in areas with universities and high skilled labor pools.

Nicholas Bloom                                    Josh Lerner
Stanford University                               Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                           Rock Center 214
579 Serra Mall                                    Soldiers Field
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                           Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                          and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu                               jlerner@hbs.edu

Tarek Alexander Hassan                            Ahmed Tahoun
Department of Economics                           London Business School
Boston University                                 26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
270 Bay State Road                                London NW1 4SA
Boston, MA 02215                                  United Kingdom
and NBER                                          atahoun@london.edu
thassan@bu.edu

Aakash Kalyani
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
aakashk@bu.edu

The dataset constructed as part of this paper, as well as relevant code is available at
www.techdiffusion.net
1. Introduction


The development of novel technologies, the degree to which they affect jobs, and the speed with
which they spread across regions, firms, and industries are key elements in the study of economic
growth, economic inequality, entrepreneurship, and firm dynamics. Many authors have sought to
understand whether the benefits from the adoption of new technologies accrue primarily to
inventors, early investors, highly skilled users, or to society more widely through, for instance,
employment growth.2 Other studies, as discussed below, have explored the geography of the
development and diffusion of new technologies.


One key obstacle to resolving these questions is that it has proven difficult to measure the
development and spread of multiple technological advances in a single framework, and to separate
those innovations that affect jobs and businesses from those that do not.


In this paper, we make use of the full text of millions of patents and job postings and hundreds of
thousands of earnings conference calls over the past two decades to make progress on this
challenge. In particular, we develop a flexible methodology that allows us to determine which
innovations or sets of innovations ("technologies") affect businesses, trace these back to the
locations and firms where they emerged, and track their diffusion through regions, occupations,
and industries over time. We then use our newly created data to establish five novel stylized facts
about the development and diffusion of disruptive technologies across space, skill levels, and other
dimensions.


The first step of our analysis is to develop a methodology for systematically identifying two-word
phrases ("technical bigrams") associated with rapidly diffusing, or disruptive, technologies
through a series of systematic rules, whose robustness we verify through various diagnostic tests.
To this end, we intersect information from two large corpora of text. First, we use the full text of
U.S. patents awarded between 1976 and 2016 to isolate two-word combinations that appear in
influential patents but were not commonly used elsewhere. That is, we isolate language specific to


2
 See, for example, Katz and Murphy (1992), Goldin and Katz (2008), Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Piketty and
Saez (2013), and Song et al. (2019).

                                                      2
recent influential innovations. Second, we search for these bigrams in the full text of earnings
conference calls held by more than 8,000 listed firms between 2002 and 2020, to identify those
technical bigrams that feature prominently in discussions between firm executives and investors
during our sample period. This procedure highlights a small set of 305 technical bigrams that
describe recent technological advances that have disrupted a large number of businesses in the last
two decades. The top three of these are "mobile devices," "machine learning," and "cloud
computing."


To aid interpretation, we then group our technical bigrams into sets of technologies, recognizing
the fact that, for example, "cloud computing" and "cloud services" refer to closely-related
innovations. This approach partly relies on human judgment, aided by machine learning
methodologies. Using this "supervised" process, we identify 29 disruptive technologies, which we
use for the main analyses in the paper.3 Taken together, 22% of all patents granted by the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) between 1992 and 2016 are involved with the development
of at least one of our 29 technologies. In this sense, our disruptive technologies cover a significant
part of recent innovative activity. While we make no claim of completeness, we argue that each of
these 29 advances had significant implications for businesses and jobs in the United States in the
past two decades.


After establishing our list of new technologies, we then identify patents, earnings calls, and job
postings that mention these new technologies. We use patents to identify the locations where each
of the technologies were developed and earnings calls to identify exposed firms and the year in
which the technology started to feature prominently in the conversations between executives and
investors (its commercial breakthrough). We then cross-reference our list of technical bigrams
with the full text of online job postings to identify 13 million jobs advertised between 2007 and
2020 that use, produce, or develop our disruptive technologies. These granular data uniquely allow
us to track the spread of disruptive technologies along a dimension of crucial importance to
policymakers: employment. In particular, we examine the evolution of the number, location, and
quality of job postings associated with these new technologies.


3
  In a second, "unsupervised" approach we use all technical bigrams "as is"--i.e., with no human processing. This
alternative approach yields qualitatively identical results.

                                                       3
The key results of this analysis are as follows.


First, the locations where disruptive technologies are developed are geographically highly
concentrated, both within and across technologies. Based on patenting activity ten years prior to
each technology's commercial breakthrough, we show that the typical disruptive technology in
our data emerged from only a handful of urban areas, which housed the majority of early patenting
in the technology and the vast majority of its early employment up to the year in which it has its
commercial breakthrough. We term these specific urban areas the technology's "pioneer
locations."


Although 23 of the 50 U.S. states host at least one pioneer location according to this definition,
their distribution across technologies is also remarkably skewed: a few super-clusters are the
birthplace of a surprising number of disruptive technologies in our data. Collectively, locations in
California alone host a remarkable 40.2% of our technology-pioneer location pairs. Another super-
cluster along the Northeast Corridor from Washington to Boston accounts for additional 21.2%.
More broadly, we find that the geographic distribution of patenting related to our 29 disruptive
technologies is even more skewed than that of patenting in general.


Second, despite this highly skewed initial distribution, as technologies mature and the number of
new jobs related to them grows, they gradually spread geographically. For example, the coefficient
of variation across the 917 core-based statistical areas (CBSAs) in the United States drops by 24%
in the first decade after a technology emerges. We see this pattern of "region broadening" in
virtually every technology that we examine.


Third, while initial hiring is concentrated on high-skilled jobs, over time, the mean required skill
levels of the jobs associated with the technologies declines, broadening the types of jobs that adopt
a given technology. For example, the average earnings associated with job postings in a given new
technology drop by about 15% within the first decade, falling from $70,468 per year to $60,608
per year on average, a drop of about one thousand dollars per year (all figures in 2015 dollars).



                                                   4
This pattern of an increasing share of low-skilled jobs that begin to use and adopt a given
technology holds within most (though not all) of our disruptive technologies. 4


Fourth, region and skill broadening interact: Low-skill jobs associated with a given technology
spread out across space significantly faster than high-skill jobs. Our estimates suggest low-skilled
jobs that use or produce new technologies are almost fully dispersed geographically within 20
years. For example, as technologies like the smart phone, cloud computing, and electric cars
mature, the lower-skilled jobs associated with these ­ salespeople, technicians, repair specialists,
etc. ­ spread across the United States at a fast clip.


Fifth, despite region and skill broadening, disruptive technologies appear to yield long-lasting
benefits for their pioneer locations, particularly when it comes to high-skill employment. Our
estimates imply it takes almost 40 years for high-skilled job postings to fully disperse from their
original pioneer locations. Perhaps not surprisingly, these pioneer locations tend to be located
around universities and areas with more educated populations. Thus, regions with strong local
education, research institutions, and universities appear to benefit from successful disruptive
innovation for substantial periods of time.


While the focus of our analysis is on documenting the major stylized facts about the spread of
technologies, the granularity of our data also allows us to study the employment dynamics
associated with disruptive technologies for individual locations and firms. As an example of such
a more micro-focused analysis, we document a case study of the geographic footprints of two large
Detroit-based car manufacturers, and how they evolve after the emergence of technologies relating
to self-driving cars. In this instance, we show that both large incumbents shifted significant
numbers of job postings relating to self-driving cars towards the technology's pioneer locations
(particularly Silicon Valley) and away from their traditional hub in Detroit. We speculate that this
kind of "re-homing" of established firms may form part of the reason for the long-lasting hiring
advantages of pioneer locations.




4
 It should be acknowledged that we can look at the nature of jobs created through Burning Glass, but not the
destruction of existing positions.

                                                     5
In the final part of the paper, we look at the generality of our results by studying the diffusion of
disruptive technologies across firms, industries, and occupations. We show that similar patterns
predominate. While technology-related job postings spread out over time, the original firms,
industries, and occupations associated with the development and early employment in the
technology retain an advantage over time. Generally, we find a faster spread across locations and
firms than industries and occupations.


Our work builds on a large literature that studies the relationship between technology and labor
markets. One strand of this literature studies the diffusion of technology. This literature has
focused on patterns in a single specific (though important) new technology, from computers
(Autor, Levy, and Murnane, 2002) to broadband (Akerman, Gaarder, and Mogstad, 2015) to robots
(Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020) and artificial intelligence (Agrawal, Gans, and Goldfarb, 2019;
Webb, 2020).5 A second strand focuses on specific innovations during important historical
episodes. Examples include studies of hybrid corn (Griliches, 1959), electrification (Goldin and
Katz, 1998), threshing machines (Caprettini and Voth, 2020) and encyclopedias (Squicciarini and
Voigtlander, 2015). Mokyr (1992) and Gordon (2016) trace out the impact on economic
development and the standard of living of a range of great inventions. Both of these classes of
studies use technology- and industry-specific approaches to measure the diffusion and impact of
individual technologies. A third strand examines the impact of technological progress more
generally on the labor market, including inputs like research and development spending (e.g.
Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994; Machin and Van Reenen, 1998; and Aghion et al., 2019)
and outputs like computerization (e.g., Krueger, 1993; Autor, Katz, and Krueger, 1998; Michaels,
Natraj, and Van Reenen, 2014). We contribute to this literature by providing a flexible
methodology to systematically isolate those innovations that have a large impact on firms and
labor markets, and to track their spread across firms, industries, occupations, and jobs requiring
different skill levels. Aside from the 29 disruptive technologies we identify in this paper, variants
of our approach could also be used to study the adoption and spread of some of the other specific
innovations highlighted by this literature.


5
  This work is related to Comin and Hobijn (2004, 2010) and their associated work. Their 2010 paper, for instance,
looks at the diffusion of 15 technologies across 166 countries, employing a variety of measures of technological
utilization. The rich data that we are able to exploit allows us to analyze (albeit for one nation and a much shorter time
period) the interactions between innovation and employment at the firm level on a temporal and regional basis.

                                                            6
A second broad literature examines regional development, in particular questions relating to the
mechanisms behind the continued advantage of pioneer locations. One literature argues these
patterns are driven by continued entrepreneurial activity, or localized knowledge spillovers (e.g.
Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993). Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005) posit that
entrepreneurial firms in venture-rich regions are particularly likely to spawn other ventures,
leading to self-reinforcing cycle of activity. These claims are supported by Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr
(2015), who highlight the extent to which cities' initial endowments affect the long-term
distribution of entrepreneurship. Moretti (2019) shows that productivity of inventors is increasing
with the volume of invention in the same city, field, and year. These differentials in innovative
efficiency may attract a broad set of firms to locate facilities in the initial hub. We contribute to
this literature by providing a systematic approach to identifying pioneer locations, characterizing
their distribution across the United States, and showing there is a general relationship between
successful innovation, early employment in a given new technology, and the long-term advantage
that these locations preserve in high-skill employment. Moreover, we hope future work may use
our granular data to study in detail the anatomy and evolution of technology hubs.


Finally, our work relates to a broader literature on the diffusion of new technologies. Since the
pioneering work of Griliches (1957), the diffusion process has long been understood by economists
to be a gradual one. While broader sociological and organizational literature has examined the
barriers to innovation, recent work in economics has focused on understanding the importance of
supply and demand factors on the speed of diffusion (e.g., Popp, 2002; Acemoglu and Linn, 2004;
Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti, 2010; Moser, Voena, and Waldinger, 2014; Moscona, 2019;
Arora, Belenzon, and Sheer, 2021). Despite this interesting work, Hall's (2006) characterization
of the study of diffusion as "a somewhat neglected one in the economics of innovation" still
remains a fair observation. Our contribution is to provide a first assessment of the rate at which
disruptive technologies spread across locations, firms, occupations, and industries.


The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe the construction of
our data. In Section 3, we present our region-broadening and skill-broadening results. In addition,
we examine the differential patterns across geographic regions. In Section 4, we examine the

                                                 7
association between academia and technology hubs. In Section 5, we examine the diffusion across
three other dimensions: industries, occupations, and firms. In Section 6, we investigate a potential
mechanism for region broadening: firm rehoming towards pioneer locations. Section 7 shows a
number of additional robustness checks.


2. Data Construction


In this paper, we identify a set of recent disruptive technologies. We associate with each new
technology a set of business-relevant keywords, which will allow us to identify the evolution of
these technologies. In particular, we seek to (a) build a firm-quarter level measure of technology
exposure, (b) use this measure to pinpoint when a given technology starts affecting businesses; (c)
create a measure of technology adoption at the job-posting level, and (d) aggregate the data (in
various ways) to measure technology adoption at the region and firm level. This section describes
our approach in more detail.


    2.1. List of new technologies and associated keywords


As a first step, we want to identify influential technologies in as systematic manner as possible.
We begin by examining U.S. patent filings. Patents are an attractive starting point for our analysis
for two reasons. First, they are by definition novel, particularly when we focus on the most
influential patents. Second, they must describe their technology and (at least some) key ways in
which it is applied.6 We focus solely on patent awards by the USPTO: because of the importance
of the U.S. market, inventors worldwide typically file important discoveries with the USPTO. 7


In order to obtain set of technical bigrams, we collect all utility patents awarded by the USPTO to
either U.S. assignees or inventors between 1976 and 2016, a total of approximately three million
awards. From the text of these patents (abstract, summary, claims, and background description)


6
 The reduction to practice enablement requirement refers to the requirement of 35 U.S.C. 112(a).
7
 About half of all patent applications to the USPTO are filed by residents of foreign countries (USPTO, 2020). This
pattern reflects the fact that patent protection in a given nation depends critically on having a patent issued in that
specific nation. Important discoveries (the focus of our analysis) are disproportionately likely to be filed in major
patent offices world-wide (Lanjouw, Pakes, and Putnam, 1997).

                                                          8
we remove stop words (such as "of," "the," and "from") and decompose the remaining text into
about 17 million unique two-word combinations ("bigrams"). We focus on bigrams because they
are less ambiguous than single-word keywords: while words like "autopilot" or "cloud" could have
a variety of colloquial meanings, "autonomous vehicle" and "cloud computing" are much less
ambiguous (e.g., Tan, Wang, and Lee, 2002; Bekkerman and Allan, 2004). To undertake this
processing, we follow the methodology in papers undertaking textual analyses of patents and
earnings calls, such as Kelly et al. (forthcoming) and Hassan et al. (2019).


At the same time, many of the bigrams collected from the patents are too general for our purposes.
Moreover, many of the bigrams, while related to a specific technology, are not frequently
encountered in business contexts, being too scientific or technical in nature. We address these
concerns in two ways.


First, we narrow the text down to "technical" bigrams by dropping "non-technical" bigrams that
were in common use long before the emergence of our disruptive technologies. To this end, we
select all text dating prior to 1970 from the Corpus of Historical American English (COHA), a
representative sample of text constructed by linguists from prominent fiction and non-fiction
sources (Davies, 2009). We then similarly decompose this historical text into bigrams and remove
any bigram appearing in this source (for instance, "of the" or "equipment used") from the set of
bigrams obtained from patents.



Second, to identify bigrams associated with influential inventions in the remaining list of 1.5
million bigrams, we collect citations for all the patents that mention these bigrams between 1976
and 2016. We normalize the citations to each patent by the mean within each technology class and
application year.8 We then retain bigrams that cumulatively obtain at least 1000 normalized
citations. Thus, we would include a phrase that appeared in a thousand average-cited patents, or in
a single patent that was one thousand times more cited than its peers.




8
 Citation rates vary considerably over time and across technology classes. Lerner and Seru (forthcoming) document
this heterogeneity and the biases that can result from failing to correct properly for these differences.

                                                       9
After these eliminations, we have a list of 35,063 "technical" bigrams in influential patents from
1976 to 2016. Appendix Table 1 lists those bigrams that most frequently appeared in the sample,
weighting the count of patents in which they appeared by the number of citations to these patents.
As above, each patent count is normalized by the mean of citations within each technology class
and year.



In the second step, we focus on which of our technical bigrams figured increasingly into the
business discussions of firms, to gauge the extent to which each innovation changed or disrupted
how firms operated. Here we use earnings conference calls from publicly listed firms.


       2.2. Earnings calls data


Quarterly earnings call transcripts consist of two sections: a presentation by management (typically
the chief executive and/or financial officer(s)) and then questions posed by investment analysts
with answers provided by the executives. These calls have been shown to be indicators of some of
the most important issues facing these organizations (Bushee, Matsumoto, and Miller, 2003;
Matsumoto, Prank, and Roelofsen, 2011; Hassan et al., 2019, 2020).


We tabulate the bigrams in 321,373 conference calls held by 11,905 publicly held companies and
compiled by Refinitiv EIKON (formerly Thomson Reuters) between 2002 and 2019. Through this
examination, we eliminate about 43% of the bigrams from the patents that are never mentioned in
these calls.


We trim the remaining bigrams in two ways. First, we require that they appear in more than 100
transcripts, to focus on economically important bigrams associated with innovations that became
major topics in earnings discussions. Second, we require these are increasing in their incidence in
earnings calls over time, to focus on relatively recent technologies that affect a growing number
of firms during our sample period. To do this, we keep bigrams which appear at least ten times as
frequently in their peak year as in the first year of the earnings call data in 2002. 9 After these steps,


9
    Bigrams that do not appear at all in 2002 automatically meet this criteria.

                                                             10
we end up with 305 technical bigrams describing technologies which are widely used and rising
in importance, which we label as disruptive technologies.


Table 1 shows the 30 technical bigrams most frequently appearing in earnings calls. It shows that
our simple two-step approach of cross-referencing bigrams from influential patents with those
featuring increasingly in business discussions clearly identifies some of the major disruptive
technological advances of the past two decades. The first four bigrams on the list are "mobile
devices," "machine learning," "cloud computing," and "cloud services." Other top-ranking
bigrams on the list include "social networking" and "smart grid."


In order to obtain a coherent set of technologies from our 305 bigrams, we take two approaches.
In the first, described in detail below, we manually group the 305 bigrams into a set of
technologies, recognizing the fact that, for example, "cloud computing" and "cloud services" refer
to related innovations. We apply a number of further refinements, allowing us to quantify the
spread of specific technologies along a variety of dimensions. This approach inevitably relies on
human judgment, aided by machine learning methodologies. This "supervised" approach is the
basis for the analyses presented in the main body of the paper. We describe it in detail below.


An alternative "unsupervised" approach is to use all 305 bigrams "as is"--i.e., with no human
processing. We show later on that all of our main results are robust to this approach, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. In this sense, all human intervention from this point on serves the
purpose of measuring the spread of specific technologies and making our results more easily
interpretable, but has no bearing on the validity of our main stylized facts about disruptive
technologies as a whole.


In our "supervised" approach, we take four additional steps. First, we eliminate those bigrams
(from the list of 305 bigrams) that, in our reading, do not clearly and unambiguously reflect specific
technological advances. This approach allows us to eliminate bigrams that refer to problems but
not technological solutions, such as "carbon footprint" or "power outage." Similarly, we drop
bigrams referring to older technologies, such as "smart grid," which refers to a technology that has
been available since the 1980s but is enjoying renewed interest in recent years, and "nand flash"

                                                 11
(flash memory), which has a surge of references when a global supply issue occurred. We also
drop any bigram that is vague or refers to multiple innovations, such as "flow profile," which may
refer interchangeably to a genomic flow or firms' cash flows, or "digital channel," which can refer
to interchangeably to digital marketing or digital transmission. At the end of our supervised
approach, we keep 105 out of the original 305 bigrams.


We then cross-reference each of our remaining bigrams with Wikipedia and form 29 groups of
bigrams ("technologies") that each refer to a specific technological advance defined in this source.
For example, the bigrams "mobile devices," "smart phones," and "mobile platform" all refer to
"smart devices," which Wikipdia defines as "an electronic device, generally connected to other
devices or networks via different wireless protocols." Appendix Table 11 lists the definition used
for each of the technologies.10


Another concern was that the language used by executives to characterize new technologies might
not appear in patent awards. To explore the possibility that there was a business-specific
vocabulary, we use an embedding vector algorithm (Mikolov et. al, 2013) trained on the set of
earnings calls. This algorithm provides us with a set of bigrams used in a similar context to a given
technology bigram. For each bigram in a given technology grouping, the algorithm suggests a list
of "proximate" other bigrams. For example, the most proximate bigrams to those in the technology
grouping "artificial intelligence" are "machine learning" and "deep learning." From this list, we
then add to the bigrams forming each technology those that, in our reading, also clearly and
unambiguously describe the technology in question.


At the end of the process, we wish to ensure that the shortlisted bigrams correctly captured the use
or adoption of a given technology in a given job. To this end, we performed an iterative human
audit where a team member went through the randomly sampled excerpts of the text from job


10
  We explored the possibility of doing this grouping using automated approaches. For instance, we did one grouping
where we clustered two bigrams into a group if the average similarity from the patent and EC embedding vectors were
more than 70%. This gave a similar grouping as using our human judgement. When differences arose between the
automated and human approaches, we generally preferred the results using our human judgement, so we used the latter
as our preferred approach. For example, in the automated approach, "virtual reality" and "augmented reality" were
clustered together with "machine learning" and "neural network," while in our human approach we split these into
two technologies: "virtual reality" for the first two and "machine learning/AI" for the second two.

                                                        12
postings for each bigram. He or she classified the snippet into true positive and false positive
categories, along with suggestions regarding new keywords discovered and how the accuracy of
the existing keywords could be improved.11 We allowed only bigrams that, according to our
reading, unambiguously reflected discussion of the technology in question at least 80% of the time.
For example, we find that the bigram "automated car" rarely refers to the "Autonomous Car"
technology but instead to automated car washes. Appendix Table 2 shows this human audit process
in detail.


Following these additions and subtractions, we obtain a list of 221 technical bigrams associated
with our 29 disruptive technologies.


Table 2 lists the 29 disruptive technologies from our supervised approach and the associated
number of Burning Glass job postings in which associated bigrams appear (see the discussion in
the next section). In addition to the major innovations already mentioned above, they include well-
known green technologies ("Solar Power," "Hybrid Vehicle"/"Electric Car") and process
innovations, such as "3D Printing," "Fracking," and "Machine Learning," but also less well-known
technical and medical advances (e.g., "Millimeter Wave," a novel band of radio frequency, and
"Antibody Drug Conjugates," a class of drugs used for the treatment of cancer).


Taken together, they cover a broad range of new methods and consumer applications. In total,
21.7% of all patents granted by the USPTO between 1992 and 2016 mention at least one of our
technologies. In this sense, our disruptive technologies cover a significant part of recent innovative
activity. While we make no claim of completeness -- other methods might well yield different
groupings and definitions of technologies ­ we show below that each of these 29 advancements
had significant implications for businesses and jobs in the United States.




11
   As an example of a false positive, an ad for a truck driver asked "do you hold a current Class A or B commercial
driver's license with an air brake endorsement? ... do you enjoy playing video games or computer games with a joy
stick? are you good at backing up in tight spaces?" The second question led the job to be (incorrectly) classified under
"electronic gaming."

                                                          13
Table 3 indicates the most frequent bigrams associated with the "Hybrid Vehicle"/"Electric Car,"
"Cloud Computing," "Autonomous Car," and "3D Printing" technologies. Appendix Table 3
provides the full set of bigrams used for each technology.


     2.3. Burning Glass Job Postings


Burning Glass (BG) aggregates online job postings using "spider bots" from online job boards
(such as indeed.com), employer websites (such as stanford.edu), and other sources into a machine
readable, de-duplicated database. From Burning Glass, we employ two datasets. The first is a
standardized dataset (used recently by Hershbein and Kahn, 2018; Demming, 2020; and Atalay et
al., 2020) where each de-duplicated job posting is geo-coded and assigned to a Standard
Occupational Classification (SOC) code, a United States government system of classifying
occupations, and a North American Industry Classification (NAICS) code based on the job
posting's title.12 The second dataset has thus far received less attention by researchers. It contains
the raw unprocessed text of the job postings, which we use text to assign exposure to our
technology.


We use these data from BG for all available years, 2007 and 2010-2020, a total of roughly 200
million job postings. We show below that all of our main results are robust to dropping the 2007
vintage from the sample.13


We associate each posting with an occupation, geography, industry, and firm as follows:
         Skill level: We construct a skill level for each six-digit SOC code from BG by measuring
         the share of persons with a college degree, the share of persons with a PhD, the average
         wage, and the average years of schooling in the American Communities Survey (ACS 2015
         release), using respondents reporting their occupation as in that six-digit SOC code. 14

12
   We make extensive use of the former, which are available for 80% of all postings. Industry classifications are
available for a more limited 41% of postings. We use these only in our calculations in Section 5. The strings with firm
names are available for 66% of all postings.
13
   BG's efforts to compile job postings data were interrupted by the 2008-09 recession. We show below that none of
our main results depend on including job postings from 2007 in the sample.
14
   For SOC codes in job postings where we do not find any persons surveyed in the ACS, we match them to the closest
available SOC code in the ACS. For example, data for SOC Code 38-1967 was not available, so we match it to 38-
1960. In total, the dataset includes 837 SOC codes.

                                                          14
        Location: We use the geo-coded dataset to assign job postings to a core-based statistical
        area (CBSA), a U.S. government-defined geographic area that consists of one or more
        counties (or equivalents) with an urban center of at least 10,000 people, plus adjacent
        counties that are socioeconomically tied to the urban center. In total, the dataset includes
        917 CBSAs.
        Industry: We allocate a job posting to an industry using the four-digit NAICS code
        provided by BG.
        Firm: BG reports an employer string for about 60% of their job postings. In order to match
        these employer strings to firms, we extend the methodology of Autor et. al. (2020) as
        follows: We search for the employer string (lower case and only letters a-z) on Bing.com,
        and collect the top five search results. We identify pairs of employer strings as the same
        firm if they share at least two out of top five search results. We then cluster together all
        employer strings that have at least two results for the same firm, and associate them with
        that firm.


   2.4. Constructing the Exposure Measures


Using these data, we then construct measures of exposure to the set of technologies for job
postings, earnings calls, and patents using the following rule:


                                              , ,   =1        ,   ,                              (1)


where     ,   is the set of bigrams contained in a job posting/earnings call/patent that was
posted/held/filed at time    and     is a bigram associated with a technology . Essentially, a
document is classified as exposed to a technology if it contains a bigram associated with the
technology.


Though we use the same terminology to refer to exposed job postings, earnings calls, and patents,
it is worth emphasizing that these three types of exposures naturally have different interpretations.
Patents that mention one of our technologies are, of course, in some way related to the development
of the technology. Appendix Figure 1 provides an example of a patent concerned with object

                                                    15
recognition, which mentions the bigram "object recognition" (a keyword associated with our
"Computer Vision" technology) 52 times. Similarly, firms exposed to a given technology might
be involved in developing, producing, or using a given technology, but they may also compete
with or be disrupted by the technology. Appendix Table 4 gives text-based examples of these
different kinds of firm-level exposures measured from earnings calls.


Most importantly, the vast majority of job postings that mention a given technology advertise jobs
that either develop, produce, or use a given technology. Figure 1 and Figure 2 provide examples
of two illustrative Burning Glass job postings exposed to AI and solar technology, respectively.
The first is for an applied research scientist and requires "knowledge of machine learning, neural
networks, and deep learning" ­ all bigrams we associate with the "Artificial Intelligence"
technology. The second is for a solar panel installer, and lists as part of the job's responsibilities
"install the racking system and solar panels." Further down, this posting also contains another,
more problematic mention of the same technology in the context of the company description, not
the job itself.


To investigate the context of technology exposure in job postings more systematically, one of our
team members went through 100 randomly sampled job postings for each of our 29 technologies.
He or she classified them into two sets of categories, whether technology exposure in the posting
referred to 1) either the overall company description or the specific task of the job in the posting,
and 2) either the use or the production of the technology.


Appendix Table 5 summarizes the findings from the analysis. In Panel A, we report that in 80%
of the postings, the technology mentions refer specifically to the job task (as in Figures 1 and 2).
These are split about half and half into the use and the production of the technology. An example
of produce would be "You will be designing the graphics module for our virtual reality training
system" while an example of use would be "The role will involve assisting customers and selling
tickets from your smart tablet in the entrance of the cinema". During the audit, we also noted that
company descriptions are usually mentioned in the beginning or towards the end of job postings.
For this reason, we disregard any technology mentions in the top and bottom 50 words of each job
posting. This procedure increased the rate of capturing specific job-related tasks associated with

                                                 16
the technology to 88% in our human audit. An additional 6% of mentions were unspecific (for
example, mentions of these technologies being available in the workspace), and only 6% referred
to the company but not the job.


In total, we find our 221 technical bigrams mentioned in 13 million job postings, where on average
each bigram appears in 59,013 postings. To put this number into perspective, it is useful to compare
this frequency with the frequency of other, "non-technical," bigrams often used by investors and
executives in earnings conference calls. As documented in Appendix Tables 6 and 7, we here
reverse our methodology and, instead of selecting bigrams that appear in both patents and earnings
calls, select those that appear in earnings calls but not in patents. We find that the top 221 most
frequent non-technical bigrams from earnings calls are on average mentioned in only 142 job
postings. That is, our technical bigrams are four hundred times more frequent in job postings than
other language frequently used by investors and executives, already suggesting that our 29
disruptive technologies indeed had a large impact on the U.S. labor market.


Having constructed our document-level exposure measures, we next aggregate over various
documents D (job postings, earnings calls, and patents) to construct measures at the occupation,
firm, and geographic levels:


                                                               ,   1           ,
                                              , ,   =                                           (2)
                                                                   ,   1   ,



where    may be a firm, sector, region, or occupation, and is time. Appendix Table 8 illustrates a
list of top occupations exposed to one of our technologies, virtual reality. Appendix Table 9
provides a shorter list of the top three most exposed occupations for each technology.


3. Region and Skill Broadening


We first seek to understand the overall patterns in the diffusion of these 29 technologies. The
analysis suggests that job postings referring to given technologies grows in tandem with references



                                                    17
in earning calls; and that over time, hiring to move from a sharp focus on high-skilled jobs to a
much broader intake of workers with lower skills.


Figure 3 takes a first look at the diffusion of disruptive technologies. The 29 images plot measures
of activity in job postings and in earnings calls on an annual basis for each technology. The red
line denotes the percentage of firms in earnings calls that mention the given technology. In some
cases, such as touchscreen and RFID, the number of mentions climb and then fade, presumably
reflecting the increasing ubiquity, and hence the declining competitive relevance, of the
technologies for firms. In others, such as 3-D printing and artificial intelligence, there is a steady
climb over time.


In each plot, we mark the year in which the technology became economically significant, which
we henceforth refer to as the "emergence year." To compute this, for each of our technologies, we
calculate the maximum of the "percentage of earnings calls" time series graphed in Figure 3. We
define the emergence date to be the year in which the time series first attains at least 10% of this
value. Appendix Table 10 lists the emergence date for each technology, along with an alternative
definition using the time series of the share of patents exposed to the technology. All of our main
results are unchanged when we use this alternative definition. 15 Appendix Table 11 lists each
technology, its definition as discussed above, and a suggested contemporaneous event around the
year of emergence of the technology.


The second series in Figure 3, denoted with gray dots, indicates the share of positions in Burning
Glass that mention a given technology (the size of the dots scale with the number of jobs posted).
While in some cases a given technology continues to be important in hiring even after its mentions
in earning calls drop off (e.g., GPS technology), in general, the two series are quite closely
correlated. The correlation coefficient between them across the figures is 0.81. The close tie
between these series helps validate the reasonableness of our empirical methodology: when a
technology becomes more commercially relevant for firms, it also becomes more relevant for jobs.




15
     These robustness checks are reported in Appendix Tables 16 and 17.

                                                         18
Consistent with this pattern, we also find that more extensive discussions of a technology in
earnings calls correlate strongly with more patenting activity in that technology. Appendix Figure
2 shows the share of firms exposed to each technology (in red-solid), and the share of citation-
weighted patents (normalized by the average number citations within each technology class and
year) associated with each of our 29 technologies (in black-dashes). Again, the series are highly
correlated: the correlation coefficient is 0.80.


Figure 3 suggests that there is an increase in the representation of these disruptive technologies
over time, which of course reflects the criteria we used to identify them. Figure 4 highlights a
related feature: the increase in the usage of these technologies in job announcements over time is
associated with greater geographic diffusion. To show this, we compute the coefficient of variation
in the years after the emergence of a technology (defined as above) measured across locations.
More specifically, we create the normalized share of job postings in technology  and year t for
each CBSA-technology-year triple by calculating:


                                                                                     , ,
                                                   , ,   =                                 ,           (3)
                                                                                 ,



where the numerator is defined as in (2) and the denominator is the average share of jobs exposed
to technology     across CBSAs.                                    , ,   thus measures the regional over or
underrepresentation of job postings associated with each technology relative to the overall
distribution. This normalization allows us to control for the facts that, for instance, Los Angeles,
the largest CBSA, will have a large share of job postings of nearly every type and that different
technologies may be implemented at very different scales at a given point in time. Appendix Table
12 summarizes the data used in the analysis.


Figure 4 depicts, for each technology and year since emergence, the ratio of the standard deviation
and the mean of this measure across CBSAs, also known as the coefficient of variation. The
analysis reveals an intriguing pattern: 28 of 29 technologies exhibit a decline in the coefficient of
variation over time (the only exception being job postings associated with the "Search Engine"
technology). Put another way, although job postings in a given technology are highly regionally


                                                     19
concentrated in the early years after their emergence, the geographic distribution of adoption over
time becomes more homogeneous.


Figure 4 is corroborated by Table 4, which examines these patterns using a regression framework.
The table presents the results of a regression of the coefficient of variation on the years since
emergence for an annual panel of technologies, with technology and year fixed effects (column 1).
Observations are weighted by the square root of the number of job postings associated with a given
technology in the year, in order to give more weight to coefficients of variation that are measured
more accurately.16


Our preferred estimate in Column 1 shows that the coefficient of variation declines by 0.105
(s.e.=0.027) per year. The mean coefficient of variation across technologies and years is 4.74.
Thus, this estimate implies that the regional concentration of technology job postings declines by
22.1% of the sample average in the ten years after the emergence of the technology.


The remaining columns show the same pattern, using alternative measures of concentration.
Column 2 uses the ratio of the normalized share of technology jobs of the top five CBSAs relative
to all CBSAs. Column 3 uses the share of CBSAs with a normalized share of technology
employment of less than 1%. Both variations show concentration at the top significantly
decreasing over time.


We next examine the hiring advantage of pioneer locations that excel in initial technology-related
inventions. More specifically, we define pioneer locations as those which collectively accounted
for 50% of the cite-weighted patent grants associated with a given technology in the ten years
before its emergence year.17 For example, the CBSAs surrounding Trenton (NJ, 21.7%), New York
(NY, 11.5%), Rochester (NY, 9.9%) and Los Angeles (CA, 9.3%) are pioneer locations for OLED




16
   This weighting scheme is for accuracy of our estimates and has no impact on the qualitative results. See Appendix
Table 17 for details.
17
   An alternative approach is to define pioneer locations using the regional distribution of a given technology's job
postings prior to the technology's emergence year. This approach yields a very similar allocation, as can be seen from
comparing the figures in Panels A and B.

                                                         20
Display technology because they together accounted for 52.2% of total OLED Display patenting
in the U.S. Appendix Table 13 shows the top pioneer location for each of our 29 technologies.


Panel A of Figure 5 shows the geographical distribution of pioneer locations across the United
States, where the size of the blue circles is proportional to the share of the 189 technology-pioneer
location pairs situated in a given CBSA. Although 23 of the 50 states host at least one pioneer
location, the map shows remarkable concentration in this kind of successful innovative activity.
Silicon Valley (the San Jose Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara CBSA) and San Francisco were each
involved in the development of 23 of our disruptive technologies, followed by New York (21),
Boston (18), and Los Angeles (17). Collectively, locations in California alone host a remarkable
40.2% of our pioneer locations.18 Another cluster along the northeast corridor from Washington to
Boston accounts for another 21.2%.


Consistent with this pattern, we also find that the geographic distribution of patenting related to
our 29 disruptive technologies is even more skewed than that of general patenting, which as
discussed by Moretti (2019), is unevenly distributed geographically. Figure 6 depicts the
population-normalized share for the top 20 CBSAs of patents linked to disruptive technologies,
and the population-normalized share for all patents over the same period.


These differences can also be shown through summary statistics, The coefficient of variation of
the geographic distribution of overall cite-weighted patenting is 1.21, while that of patents exposed
to our 29 disruptive technologies is 1.42. Similarly, for overall patenting, it takes 12 CBSAs to
account for 50% of the patenting, while the top five urban regions represent 33.8% of the patenting.
Looking only at disruptive patents, it takes 7 CBSAs to account for 50%, and the top five represent
42.2%. When we look at the 189 technology-pioneer location pairs discussed above, the
corresponding numbers are 5 and 54.5%.


Panels B through E continue to mark pioneer locations with hollow blue circles, but now also add
the location of technology job postings in the start year of the technology (the average
                            , ,   across technologies at      = 0), where darker dots correspond to a higher

18
     This fact notwithstanding, all of our main results are robust to removing California from the sample.

                                                            21
normalized share of jobs.19 The figure shows a remarkable alignment between innovation and early
employment. Even after accounting for differences in the size of the local labor market, early
employment is strongly concentrated in the same places where the technology was developed. The
remaining panels (C-E) show the evolution of this relationship as the technology matures (in years
1-2, 3-4, and 5-6, respectively). Although pioneer locations retain a higher share of technology
employment throughout this period, we see a gradual diffusion of technology job postings, away
from the pioneer locations and spreading out across the country.


In Table 5, we explore this relationship more formally using the specification:


                                , ,   =    0   +   1             ,   +   2        ,   -    ,   +   ,   +    , ,    (4)


where denotes a CBSA, denotes one of our 29 technologies, t denotes year, and                              denotes year
of emergence for the technology.                           ,   is a dummy which denotes the pioneer status of a
CBSA-technology pair. In all specifications in Table 5, we control for technology, CBSA, and
year fixed effects.


In Column 1, we see that while there is diffusion over time, the initial CBSAs where the new
technology      was     invented          retain   their       privileged    positions.   More     specifically,   the
                         , ,   of a technology's job postings is about 92 percentage points higher in its
pioneer locations on average throughout the lifecycle of the technology. Table 5, Column 2,
however, shows that the initial advantage of pioneer locations in job postings (231 percentage
points at the year of emergence) decreases at a rate of about 6% per year. The initial advantage
thus has a half-life of about 8.3 years. Column 3 shows that this pattern is unchanged when we add
CBSA x Year fixed effects.


We next turn to examining the skill component of technology job postings over time. Figure 7
plots a measure of skill requirements of these job postings (the red circles). We compute for each


19
  To facilitate comparison between panels, we calculate this average of normalized shares only for the 13 technologies
that emerge during our Burning Glass sample and for which we have at least six years of data, that is, those emerging
between 2007 and 2014.

                                                               22
SOC code, as reported by Burning Glass, the corresponding skill level as reported in the U.S.
Census Bureau's American Community Survey for 2015. When multiple SOC codes are associated
with a given technology  in year t, we compute a weighted average of the skill measure as follows:


                                                           ;          ;
                                             =
                                                                  ;



where o is a Census SOC code,         ;   is the number of Burning Glass job postings exposed to
technology  and SOC code o at time t, and              ;          is the average skill level for SOC o, as
measured by the 2015 ACS sample. We consider four different measures of skill at the SOC level:
the share of college educated persons (baseline), the share of persons with post-graduate
qualifications, the average wage of persons, and the average years of schooling for persons in the
SOC.


Figure 7 plots the average share of college-educated persons associated with job postings against
the year since emergence on a technology-by-technology basis. The figure suggests that for the
vast majority of technologies, there is a sharp decline in the skill level required for the positions
associated with new technologies over time. Even in cases where demand for positions is sharply
accelerating (such as AI and virtual reality), the share of skilled positions subsides over time. These
results are consistent with the view that new technologies typically start with high-skill
occupations and then involve larger parts of the workforce over time. The figure also shows a few
notable exceptions to this general pattern: positions exposed to the Online Streaming, Cloud
Computing, Search Engine, and Software Defined Radio technologies show no evidence of a
declining average skill level over time (in fact, the trend for Online Streaming appears significantly
positive).


We summarize this information by presenting a binned scatterplot in Figure 8. This depiction
shows the relationship across all 29 technologies between time elapsed after the emergence year
and the mean share of the postings for college-educated people. It shows, on average, a strong
negative linear trend, implying a declining requirement for a college-trained workforce as
technologies mature.

                                                  23
Table 6 looks at this relationship formally. The sample consists of annual observations of each
technology between 2007 and 2019. Here, we use the alternative measures of the skills required in
the job postings associated with a given technology: the dependent variables include the share of
the weighted SOC classes that are college educated (as of 2015), the share with graduate degrees,
mean wages, and the mean years of schooling. Each regression uses as the key independent
variable the years since the emergence date and controls for technology and calendar year fixed
effects. The specification again follows Table 4 regarding the criteria for inclusion in the analysis
and weighting.


Using each measure, there is a strong negative relationship between the maturity of the technology
and the reliance on a highly educated workforce. For instance, Columns 1 and 3 show that each
additional year since the emergence of the technology is associated with a fall of about 0.96
percentage points in the share of job postings requiring a college education (an annual decline of
-1.71%) and a decline of $1,023 in annual wages (measured in 2015 constant dollars) for the job
postings associated with the technology. Similarly, the share of job postings in occupations
requiring a post-graduate degree declines by a rate of 1.80% per year on average.


This skill-broadening effect sheds an interesting light on how high-skilled labor is complementary
with low-skilled work. While there is an important body of work highlighting the way in which
technological change has favored high-skilled occupations and contributed to wage inequality
(Acemoglu, 2002; Goldin and Katz, 2009; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011 are examples), the way in
which the hiring associated with new technologies can transition over time highlights the dynamics
in this relationship.


We next explore the heterogeneity of our region-broadening and pioneer persistence facts across
skill categories. We use the SOC codes to divide our sample of job postings into three categories
using the share of college-educated people in each SOC code. Again, we use information from the
2015 ACS to determine the qualifications of individuals in various SOCs. We termed these high
(job postings for occupations with at least 60% college educated), medium (with 30% to 59%
college educated) and low skilled (less than 30% college educated). For instance, almost all

                                                 24
optometrists in the ACS are college educated: thus, all job postings for optometrists are allocated
to the high-skill category. We then examine how the decline in the coefficient of variation
described above changes after the emergence year, and how these shifts differ across different skill
levels.


Figure 9 takes a first look at these patterns. It again is a binned scatterplot of the coefficient of
variation by year, but with the two extremes (low and high skill) of this three-fold division. It
shows that the decline in the coefficient of variation across regions is substantially steeper for low-
skilled jobs than that for high-skilled ones. While the low-skilled jobs rapidly disperse across the
country, the higher-end ones remain more bunched together.


Table 7 studies these patterns in more detail, emulating the structure of the specification in Table
4, but now breaking the observations of technologies into high and low-skill buckets (omitting the
medium-skill bucket) and adding an interaction between the years since emergence variable and a
dummy for low-skill occupations. All specifications show a significantly larger decline in
concentration for lower-skill occupations. In terms of magnitudes, the annual decline in the
coefficient of variation for low-skill job postings is more than three times larger than that for high-
skill jobs, so that it declines by 3.7% annually for low-skill jobs and only 1.1% for high-skill jobs.
Appendix Table 14 shows this specification separately for job postings in the three skill buckets.
Again, high-skill professions show a less steep decline in geographic concentration, although the
coefficient of variation declines significantly for all three groupings over time.


We obtain similar results for the persistence of pioneer advantage result in Table 8. This table
repeats the analysis of Table 5, column 2 separately for each bucket (low, medium, and high skill)
of job postings. Rather than looking at dispersion, however, it focuses on the related concept of
the persistence of the pioneer region. Consistent with the earlier results, we find the decline in
initial pioneer advantage is greater in the case of low-skilled than high-skilled positions. The
degradation in geographic concentration is about 6.7% for low-skill job postings, which is about
twice the magnitude for high-skill job postings (3.5%). That is, pioneer locations where disruptive
technologies were developed retain a long-term advantage in attracting job postings in that



                                                  25
technology, particularly in high-skill occupations. The estimates in column 3 suggest the half-life
of this high-skill advantage is 14.3 years.


4. Properties of Technology Hubs


Up until this point, we have ignored the characteristics of the original pioneer locations where the
technologies were developed (and also did the bulk of their hiring at the time of the emergence
date). In this section, we explore their features. In particular, we highlight that there is a strong
relationship between academic centers and the pioneer locations where nascent disruptive
technologies originate.


To this end, we calculate for each CBSA-technology pair the number of patents exposed to that
technology ten years prior to the technology's emergence year. (Recall our definition of pioneer
locations is based on this variable: a dummy that is one for locations that account for 50% of a
technology's patents in that year). We normalize this number by CBSA population in the
emergence year. We then regress this variable (patents in technology                    per 1000 inhabitants) on
region characteristics in 2015 (using data from the ACS).


The key independent variables, which measure the presence of research universities and skilled
persons in a CBSA, are the logarithm of the volume of university assets (standardized by
population), the university enrollment (standardized by population), the share of the population in
the CBSA that is college educated or has a post-graduate degree, and the log average wage in the
CBSA.20 Finally, this all specifications control for technology-specific fixed effects.


Panel A of Table 9 shows a strong cross-sectional pattern. Regions with a greater academic or skill
presence--whether manifested by greater research university presence or a more educated

20
  We obtain university data for 642 research universities from Higher Education Research and Development Survey
(HERD), and map these universities to CBSAs. Research universities are defined as "public and private nonprofit
postsecondary institutions in the United States, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands that granted a
bachelor's degree or higher in any field; expended at least $150,000 in separately budgeted R&D in FY 2015; and
were geographically separate campuses headed by a president, chancellor, or equivalent." We normalize university
assets and the university enrollment by CBSA population from the ACS at the time of the year of emergence. We
obtain skill level variables for a particular CBSA from the ACS, by normalizing the share of graduate and post graduate
persons in a CBSA by the total number of persons in the CBSA.

                                                          26
workforce--were more likely to be involved in the early development of disruptive technologies.
These patterns are illustrated graphically in Appendix Figure 3.


Perhaps more importantly, and consistent with our results above, Panel B shows that these same
variables also account for higher per capita technology job postings in the emergence year. That
is, the same variables that account for the location of innovative activity also account for early
employment in that technology.


5. Diffusion across Other Dimensions


In this section, we characterize the spread of disruptive technologies across industries, occupations,
and firms. First, we compare the region-broadening result against broadening across industries,
occupations, and firms; second, similar to Table 5, we also study initial advantage of pioneers,
separately defined across the four segments, and the degradation in this advantage over time.


To that end, we extend the definition of                                  , ,   in Section 3 to NAICS four-digit
industries, SOC six-digit occupations, and firms for each technology ( ) and time ( ). While the
former two variables are included in the BG data (in each case, we use the finest level of
disaggregation available), the latter relies on our own matching algorithm described in Section 2.


We then measure the coefficient of variation of                                         , ,   across the segments.
Because the number of firms posting job advertisements online expands over time (with more and
more small firms appearing in the BG data over time), we stratify our firm-technology-year sample
by including only firms that post at least one job in each of our sample-years, before calculating
the coefficient of variation.21 This step focuses attention on 10,231 larger firms which on average
post 1,628 jobs per year, effectively excluding variation coming from small and medium-sized
businesses.




21
   Hershbein and Kahn (2018) discuss this fact in some detail. The general increase in coverage of the BG data over
time should not affect any of our main results. We discuss robustness to various weighting schemes in detail in Section
7.

                                                          27
Table 10, Panel A shows the results of a regression of the coefficient of variation calculated for
each technology ( ) and time ( ) on year since emergence. Column 1 shows our already
established results for pioneer locations for comparison.22 We find that while there is a decline in
concentration as measured by coefficient of variation for all four segments, there appears to be a
larger decline across locations and firms (Columns 1 and 4) than across industries and occupations
(Columns 2 and 3). While the coefficient of variation declines on average by 2.48% and 2.32% for
CBSAs and firms, respectively, the corresponding declines are 1.06% and 0.81% for (four-digit
NAICS) industries and (six-digit SOC) occupations, respectively. Figure 10 illustrates these
patterns graphically.


While it is perhaps natural to expect disruptive technologies to spread faster across firms and space
than they do across industries and occupations, any quantitative comparison of course depends on
the classifications of industries and occupations used. Appendix Figures 4 through 6 shows some
differences across technologies in diffusion across industries, occupations, and firms. For example,
the 3D Printing, Computer Vision, and Wi-Fi technologies show a clear decrease in concentration
across industries over time.


In Table 10, Panel B, we estimate specification (1) for all four dimensions to examine the initial
hiring advantage of pioneer cells in the four segments. The pioneer cells, as defined before, are
ones that excel in initial technology-related inventions. More specifically, we define pioneer cells
as those which collectively accounted for 50% of the patent grants associated with a given
technology in the ten years before its emergence.


To determine the pioneer cells, we merge various public-use datasets to assign patents to our three
additional segments of industries, occupations and firms: For industries, we allocate patents to
individual NAICS four-digit industries by mapping patents to Compustat firms (since patents
themselves do not contain industry codes), and then from firms to industries. A total of 44% of all
patents exposed to any one of our 29 technologies are owned by Compustat firms, so that this



22
  In order to avoid calculating coefficients of variation for unreasonably sparse data, we only keep technology x year
observations with at least 100 postings with industry coverage. This issue arises because BG provides NAICS codes
for only 41% of all postings.

                                                         28
procedure implicitly assumes that the distribution of patents across industries is similar for
Compustat firms as for all firms23. To obtain the patent-to-Compustat match we use the crosswalk
provided by Autor et al. (2020). Once patents are matched to firms, we then link to industries using
the Compustat Segments dataset, which gives firms' breakdown of sales across NAICS four-digit
industries. So, for example, if a patent is owned by "Amazon North America," it is matched by
Bing to "Amazon Inc.," and then allocated proportionally to Amazon's NAICS four-digit
industries by its sales breakdowns (exclusively to "Electronic shopping and mail-order houses" in
Amazon's case).


For occupations, we further construct an industry-to-occupation crosswalk from employment data
within an occupation-industry cell from the Occupational Employment Statistics. We assume that
the share of patenting in an industry allocated to an occupation is same as the share of employment
allocated to an occupation. We can, thus, calculate the share of patents for a particular technology
allocated to an occupation.


Finally, for firms, we string match patent assignees from USPTO to firm names in job postings.
Using this procedure, we are able to match 36% of all patents assigned to U.S. inventors between
1976 and 2016 to 30,123 unique firms in our sample.


Following our procedure for pioneer locations, we define pioneer industries, occupations, and
firms for each technology as those with the most assigned patents in the ten years prior to the
technology's emergence year that collectively account for 50% of the matched patents in a given
disruptive technology. Appendix Table 15 shows the top pioneer industry and occupation for each
technology. For example, the top pioneer industry for 3D Printing is "Computer and Peripheral
Equipment Manufacturing" (accounting for 41.9% of early patents) and that of Fracking is "Oil
and Gas Extraction" (accounting for 88.1% of early patents).




23
   In order to compare patents by Compustat and non-Compustat firms, we analyze the share of patents by Compustat-
firms across technology classes. We find that for the median technology class, about 50% of patents are produced by
Compustat firms, and that the distribution is quite homogenous: the 25th percentile is 39.0% and 75th percentile is
58.8%.

                                                        29
The analysis in Table 10, Panel B shows that pioneering cells have a strong initial advantage in
job postings for all four segments. However, the advantage appears more persistent for industries,
occupations, and firms than for locations. In terms of magnitudes, the degradation in the advantage
( (         ,   ( -   ))/ (          ,   )) for locations is 6.2%, compared to 4.4% for firms, 4.0%
for industries, and 3.4% for occupations.


Taken together, this evidence suggests disruptive technologies initially generate hiring that is
highly localized by location, firm, industry and occupation. Over time, this hiring disperses,
particularly across locations and across firms.


6. Firm Rehoming towards Pioneer Locations


As a final analysis, we explore one of the mechanisms behind the region-broadening results: the
rehoming of firms towards pioneer locations. More specifically, we investigate whether large and
established firms' shift their geographical footprint towards pioneer locations as a technology
progresses in its life cycle. For now, we perform the analysis with a case study; we plan to provide
systematic evidence in future drafts of the paper.


To explore this, we consider geographical footprint of Ford Motor Company and General Motor
Corporation before and after the emergence year of the autonomous cars technology (2014). In
Figure 11, we plot these firms' job postings in three groups of places: (a) the three autonomous car
pioneer locations, San Jose (CA), San Francisco (CA), and Boston (MA) (but excluding Detroit
(MI)); (b) their headquarters, Detroit (MI), and (c) all other locations. Postings in red are before
the emergence year of autonomous car technology, and postings in blue are post-emergence year.
Black crosses in the picture denote the share of job postings exposed to autonomous vehicles post
emergence year.


The figure shows that both firms, traditionally concentrated in Detroit, shifted their geographic
footprint towards the autonomous cars pioneer locations, particularly in Silicon Valley (San Jose
and San Francisco). A large share of new job postings in the pioneer locations involved
autonomous car technologies, accounting for 22% and 65% of Ford and GM postings respectively

                                                  30
(compared to less than 5% in all other locations). The data thus suggest that the purpose of both
firms' expanding presence in autonomous cars' pioneer locations related to this new technology.


7. Additional Robustness Checks


Before concluding, we perform a number of additional robustness checks for our primary results:
"region broadening," "pioneer-location persistence," "skill broadening," and "differential region-
broadening by skill level."


First, we replicate our results using our "unsupervised" approach to defining technologies. That is,
we treat each of the original 305 technology bigrams we obtained from our algorithm intersecting
the texts of patents and earnings calls as a separate technology, without attempting to group or
otherwise audit these bigrams. The goal of this exercise is to replicate our main findings in a dataset
created without any human intervention.


In Table 11, columns 1 through 4 of Panel A replicate the main specifications of Tables 4 through
8, respectively. We find that all the coefficients of interest are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar to our main specification.24


Panel B of Table 11 replicates the results of Table 10, estimating the spread of disruptive
technologies across industries, occupations, and firms. The results are again similar, although this
unsupervised approach yields somewhat faster spread across occupations than in our baseline
specification.




24
   Column 1 shows our region-broadening result, regressing each technology-year's coefficient of variation across
locations on the number of years since the emergence of the technology. The estimated coefficient (-0.140, s.e.=0.017)
implies a 2.54% reduction in concentration in technology job postings per year, comparted to 2.21% in our baseline
specification (Table 4, column 1). Similarly, the estimates in column 2 imply a large advantage of pioneer locations
in job postings that decreases at a rate of 6.0% per year, compared to 6.6% in Table 5 column 3. Column 3 also shows
significant skill broadening over time, with a decreasing share of job postings that require a college education over
the life-cycle of the technology. However, the estimate here (-0.325, s.e.=0.099) is only one third the size of that in
Table 6, column 1. Finally, column 4 shows that the geographic concentration of low-skill jobs exposed to disruptive
technologies decays significantly faster than that of high-skill jobs, though the coefficient of interest is again somewhat
smaller (-0.108, s.e.=0.028 vs -0.167, s.e.=0.048 in our baseline specification).

                                                            31
We conclude that the human judgement that we exerted to enable us to measure the spread of
specific technologies has no bearing on the validity of our main stylized facts about disruptive
technologies as a whole.


Second, in Appendix Table 16, we check for robustness with respect to our methodology for
calculating the year of emergence for our technologies, with respect to the missing years (2008
and 2009) in the BG sample, and with respect to standard errors:
       In Panel A, we find that our results are robust to calculating years of emergence exclusively
       from patents instead of earnings calls. To calculate this alternative measure, we use our
       patent data, which extends back to 1975. The year of emergence for each technology is
       here calculated as the year in which the share of U.S. patents exposed to the technology
       reach 50% of their maximum value between 1976 and 2015.
       In Panel B, we find that our results are robust to excluding 2007, the first year of availability
       of Burning Glass job postings and immediately before the missing BG job postings in 2008
       and 2009.
       In Panel C, we check for robustness of standard errors and find that if anything the
       statistical significance is stronger with robust standard errors (vs. clustered standard errors
       in the baseline specification).


Third, we deal with a potential concern with all the analyses: that they may reflect changes in the
composition of the job announcements in Burning Glass, not hiring overall. Appendix Figure 7a
shows that the number of job postings began increasing sharply in the mid-2010s (the blue line),
which could reflect an increase in the share of jobs posted online. We note, however, that this trend
also parallels the increase in overall U.S. job openings after the 2008/09 recession, as reported by
the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (the red line).


A more substantive compositional concern is raised by Appendix Figure 7b. The figure shows that
much of the growth in Burning Glass online job postings was driven by job postings in low-skill
occupations. It is natural to speculate that many of these jobs may have previously not been posted
online. Thus, the increase in BG postings shown in Appendix Figure 7a likely reflects both
increasing overall U.S. hiring and a growing tendency for lower-skill job announcements to be

                                                  32
posted online. It is thus natural to wonder whether the changing composition of BG job
announcements may have impacted the results above.


After three additional analyses, we do not believe these changes affect the results in our analyses.
First, it is important to note, as demonstrated in Appendix Figure 7c, that the compositional
patterns documented in Appendix Figure 7b are much less pronounced among job announcements
associated with our 29 technologies. Second, our entire analysis uses the normalized share of job
postings (except skill broadening), and controls throughout for year fixed effects. The
normalization and year controls should address many of these compositional concerns. As a final
check for our skill broadening result, we reweight the occupations in our sample to match hiring
in that occupation in the U.S. economy. We compute hiring in each occupation by using hiring in
each industry in the LEHD and then constructing a crosswalk between industry employment and
occupation employment using the OES. In Appendix Table 17, we find that our skill-broadening
results are robust to this reweighting exercise.

As a final check of our broadening results, we check their sensitivity to technology selection: in
other words, could the results be driven by a handful; of industries out of our 29? To do this, we
exclude three technologies at a time and recalculate the degradation in coefficient of variation, this
provides us with 7,308 permutation estimates. In Appendix Figure 8, we plot the 10 th and 90th
percentile of these jackknife estimates, and show that the results are robust to randomly removing
a subset of technologies.



8. Conclusion


Policymakers in many parts of the world devote enormous energy to foster nascent technologies,
ranging from efforts to support academic research to luring start-ups from other cities and nations.
Such an infant industry strategy is predicated on the notion that early advantages in innovation and
employment will yield lasting benefits for regions, particularly in the form of high-quality
employment.




                                                   33
Using the full text of millions of patents, job postings, and earnings conference calls over the past
two decades, we introduce in this paper an approach to understand which new technologies affect
businesses and to trace their diffusion across regions, industries, occupations, and firms. We can
then map the spread of disruptive technologies in these dimensions, focusing on the hiring
associated with each important innovation.


We highlight five main conclusions. First, the locations where disruptive technologies are
developed are geographically highly concentrated, with a handful of urban areas contributing the
bulk of the early patenting and early activity within each technology. Second, despite this initial
concentration, jobs relating to use or production of the new technologies gradually spread out
geographically. Third, while initial jobs associated with a given technology are typically high-
skilled, over time the mean required skill levels of the new jobs declines. Fourth, these trends
towards region and skill broadening are related: low-skill jobs associated with a given technology
spread out geographically significantly faster than high-skill ones. Finally, because of the slower
spread of high-skill jobs, disruptive technologies continue to offer long-lasting benefits for their
pioneer locations, which retain a long-term advantage in these high-quality jobs for multiple
decades.


Beyond these core results of our analysis, the development and spread of disruptive technologies
are key objects of interest in multiple fields of economics. We therefore hope that the data we
provide as part of this paper may prove useful to address a range of additional research questions
in the study of economic growth, inequality, entrepreneurship, and firm dynamics.


One additional avenue for future research relates to the microeconomic dynamics of pioneer
locations. To what extent is their persistent advantage in high-skill job openings driven by re-
homing of established firms as opposed to the initial developers of the technology? How much of
this effect is the consequence of knowledge spillovers or feedback to universities?


Another avenue would investigate the determinants and consequences of success: Why do some
regions appear to develop a disproportionate share of disruptive innovations, and how does such
serial success affect the local markets for labor and housing?

                                                 34
A related question is around the spread of technologies across firms and locations. To what extent
is this firms expanding or rehoming, and what types of firms were particularly prescient in
identifying the new technologies? Is it those who saw it as an especial competitive threat? Answers
to these questions will help us better explain these fascinating phenomena.




                                                35
References

Acemoglu, Daron. "Directed technical change." Review of Economic Studies 69 (2002): 781-809.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment
       and earnings," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (editors), Handbook of Labor
       Economics. New York, Elsevier, volume 4, chapter 12, pages 1043-1171 (2011).
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. "Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence from the
       pharmaceutical industry." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2004): 1049-1090.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. "Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets."
       Journal of Political Economy 128 (2020) 2188-2244.
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Antonin Bergeaud, Richard Blundell, and David Hemous.
       "Innovation and Top Income Inequality." Review of Economic Studies 86 (2019): 1­45.
Agrawal, Ajay. Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, editors. The Economics of Artificial Intelligence:
       An Agenda. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (2019).
Akerman, Anders, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad. "The skill complementarity of broadband
       internet." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2015): 1781-1824.
Arora, Ashish, Sharon Belenzon and Lia Sheer. "Knowledge spillovers and corporate investment
       in scientific research." American Economic Review 111 (2021) 871-898.
Atalay, Enghin, Phai Phongthiengtham, Sebastian Sotelo, and Daniel Tannenbaum. "The evolution
       of work in the United States." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12 (2020):
       1-34.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu. "Foreign
       competition and domestic innovation: Evidence from US patents." American Economic
       Review: Insights 2 (2020): 357-74.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. "Trends in US wage inequality:
       Revising the revisionists." Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2008): 300-323.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan Krueger. "Computing inequality: Have computers
       changed the labor market?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1998): 1169-1213.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. "The skill content of recent technological
       change: An empirical exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003): 1279-
       1334.
Bekkerman, Ron and James Allan. "Using bigrams in text categorization." Technical Report IR-
       408, Center of Intelligent Information Retrieval, University of Massachusetts-Amherst
       (2003).
Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. "Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
       U.S. manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers." Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 109 (1994): 367-397.
Bushee, Brian J., Dawn A. Matsumoto, and Gregory S. Miller. "Open versus closed conference
       calls: The determinants and effects of broadening access to disclosure." Journal of
       Accounting and Economics 34 (2003): 149-180.
Caprettini, Bruno, and Hans-Joachim Voth. "Rage against the machines: Labor-saving technology
       and unrest in industrializing England." American Economic Review: Insights 2 (2020) 305-
       320.
Comin, Diego, and Bart Hobijn. "Cross-country technology adoption: Making the theories face
       the facts." Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (2004): 39-83.



                                              36
Comin, Diego, and Bart Hobijn. "An exploration of technology diffusion." American Economic
       Review 100 (2010): 2031­59.
Davies, Mark. "The 385+ million word Corpus of Contemporary American English (1990­2008+):
       Design, architecture, and linguistic insights." International Journal of Corpus Linguistics
       14 (2009): 159-190.
Deming, David J., and Kadeem Noray. "Earnings dynamics, changing job skills, and STEM
       careers." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2020): 1965-2005.
Glaeser, Edward L., Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr. "Entrepreneurship and urban growth:
       An empirical assessment with historical mines." Review of Economics and Statistics 97
       (2015): 498-520.
Goldin, Claudia D., and Lawrence F. Katz. "The origins of technology-skill complementarity,"
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1998): 683-732
Goldin, Claudia D., and Lawrence F. Katz. The Race Between Education and Technology.
       Cambridge, Harvard University Press (2009).
Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. "Entrepreneurial spawning: Public
       corporations and the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999." Journal of Finance 60 (2005):
       577-614.
Gordon, Robert J. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the
       Civil War. Princton, Princeton University Press (2016).
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti, "Identifying agglomeration
       spillovers: Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings." Journal of Political
       Economy, 118 (2010): 536-598.
Griliches, Zvi. "Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change."
       Econometrica 25 (1957): 501-522.
Hall, Bronwyn H. "Innovation and diffusion." Working paper no. 10212, National Bureau of
       Economic Research (2004).
Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. "Firm-level
       political risk: Measurement and effects." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2019):
       2135-2202.
Hassan, Tarek Alexander, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. "Firm-
       level exposure to epidemic diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1." Working paper no.
       26971, National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn. "Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological
       change? Evidence from vacancy postings." American Economic Review 108 (2018): 1737-
       72.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. "Geographic localization of
       knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       108 (1993): 577­98
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. "Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
       demand factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1992): 35-78.
Kelly, Bryan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Matt Taddy. "Measuring technological
       innovation over the long run." American Economic Review: Insights (forthcoming).
Krueger, Alan B. "How computers have changed the wage structure: Evidence from microdata,
       1984-1989." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1993): 33-60.




                                               37
Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes, Jonathan Putnam. "How to count patents and value intellectual
        property: The uses of patent renewal and application data." Journal of Industrial
        Economics 46 (1998): 405-432.
Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru. "The use and misuse of patent data: Issues for corporate finance and
        beyond." Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Machin, Stephen, and John van Reenen. "Technology and changes in skill structure: Evidence
        from seven OECD countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1998) 1215-44.
Matsumoto, Dawn, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen. "What makes conference calls useful?
        The information content of managers' presentations and analysts' discussion sessions."
        Accounting Review 86 (2011): 1383-1414.
Michaels, Guy, Natraj, Ashwini and Van Reenen, John. "Has ICT polarized skill demand?
        Evidence from eleven countries over 25 years." Review of Economics and Statistics 96
        (2014): 60-77
Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. "Efficient estimation of word
        representations in vector space." arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
Moretti, Enrico. "The effect of high-tech clusters on the productivity of top inventors." Working
        paper no. 26270, National Bureau of Economic Research (2019).
Moscona, Jacob. "Environmental catastrophe and the direction of invention: Evidence from the
        American Dust Bowl." Unpublished working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
        (2020).
Mokyr, Joel. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress . New York:
        Oxford University Press (1992).
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. "German Jewish Émigrés and US
        Invention." American Economic Review 104 (2014): 3222­55.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. "Income inequality in the United States, 1913­1998."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003): 1-41.
Popp, David. "Induced innovation and energy prices." American Economic Review 92 (2002): 160-
        180.
Song, Jae, David J. Price, Faith Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till Von Wachter. "Firming up
        inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2019): 1-50.
Squicciarini, Mara P., and Nico Voigtländer. "Human capital and industrialization: Evidence from
        the age of enlightenment." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 130 (2015): 1825-1883.
Tan, Chade-Meng, Yuan-Fang Wang, and Chan-Do Lee. "The use of bigrams to enhance text
        categorization." Information Processing & Management 38 (2002): 529­546.
United States Patent and Trademark Office. "Performance and Accountability Report." (2020).
Webb, Michael. "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Labor Market." Unpublished
        working paper, Stanford University (2020).




                                               38
                    Tables and Figures
      Table 1 - Top bigrams from patenting and ECs

Bigram               # transcripts Technology group
mobile devices               6597        Smart devices
machine learning             2860 Machine learning/AI
cloud computing             2781      Cloud computing
cloud services              2450      Cloud computing
quality metrics              2029                   NA
flow profile                 1966                   NA
smart phones                 1957        Smart devices
mobile platform             1605         Smart devices
public cloud                1569      Cloud computing
social networking            1548      Social networks
smart grid                   1441                   NA
cloud service                1393     Cloud computing
connected devices           1304         Smart devices
cloud infrastructure         1136     Cloud computing
carbon footprint            1071                    NA
nand flash                   1002                   NA
virtual reality               903        Virtual reality
digital channel               896                   NA
delivery network              887                   NA
social networks               883      Social networks
autonomous driving            839    Autonomous Cars
smart devices                 765        Smart devices
active user                   735      Social networks
augmented reality             730        Virtual reality
mobile payment                717      Mobile payment
cloud environment             668     Cloud computing
production site               664                   NA
ethanol production            662                   NA
power outage                  643                   NA
multiple segments             595                   NA

 Notes: This table list top 30 out of the total initial 305 bigrams (in
 Column 1) that appear frequently in patents and earnings calls, and
 increase in their mentions between 2002 and 2019. The bigrams are
 sorted by the number of earnings calls that they are mentioned in
 (Column 2). The table also reports the technology group that they
 are classified in (Column 3). Note that some of the bigrams are not
 classified in any technology group because they do not refer to a
 recent disruptive technology.
   Table 2 - Technologies by total job postings

 Technology                                   Postings
 Cloud computing                              3684901
 Social Networking                            3457390
 Smart devices                                2376510
 Machine Learning/AI                           679776
 Search Engine                                 535784
 Online streaming                              487731
 Wi-Fi                                         388844
 Electronic gaming                             247201
 Solar Power                                   201296
 Injection molding                             190538
 Hybrid vehicle/Electric car                   118550
 Touch Screen                                  109538
 Rfid                                           80894
 Computer vision                                76350
 GPS                                            65922
 Mobile payment                                 65482
 Virtual Reality                                61102
  3d printing                                   57904
 Autonomous Cars                                52974
 Lane departure warning                         32107
 Lithium battery                                16926
 Software defined radio                         14187
 Drug conjugates                                10603
 Fracking                                        8966
 Millimeter wave                                 6161
 Oled display                                    5528
 Bispecific monoclonal antibody                  2702
 Inkjet printing                                 2583
 Wireless charging                               1649
 Stent graft                                     1270
 Fingerprint sensor                                711
Notes: This table lists our 29 technologies (in Column 1)
and the number of job postings that they appear in (Column
2) Burning Glass during 2007-2019.
Table 3 - Top keywords for sample technologies by number of online job postings

        Hybrid vehicle/Electric car                          Cloud computing
    keyword                   postings           Keyword                          postings
    electric vehicles            87948           Saas                              961142
    electric vehicle             11647           cloud based                       663357
    vehicle charging             11402           enterprise applications           558611
    hybrid electric              10284           cloud computing                   485333
    electric car                  8219           cloud services                    276906
    hybrid vehicle                7926           cloud platform                    241376
    electrical vehicles           3875           paas                              220732
    electric buses                  782          cloud infrastructure              216271
    electric motorcycle             125          cloud environments                190832
    plugin hybrids                   40          iaas                              187695

             Autonomous cars                                  3dprinting
    keyword                  postings            word                             postings
    autonomous vehicles        22099             3d printing                        33398
    self-driving car           17533             additive manufacturing             17008
    autonomous driving         12992             3d printer                         14962
    automated driving           6564             3d printed                          2481
    autonomous cars             1489
    driverless car              1215
    robot car                   1060
    driverless truck              129
    selfdriving car                19
  Notes: The table lists top bigrams (in Column 1 in each section) by the number of online job
  postings that they are mentioned in (Column 2), 2007-19, for a sample set of technologies.
                                            Table 4 - Region broadening and persistence

                                                                    Coefficient of                  (    )            Share CBSAs
                                                                     Variation                       ( )             with (     < 1%)
                                                                          (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                                        ,                            -0.105***                  -0.028***               -1.078***
                                                                       (0.027)                   (0.006)                  (0.338)
 R2                                                                     0.861                     0.927                    0.776
 N                                                                       287                       287                      287
 Tech FE                                                                YES                        YES                      YES
 Year FE                                                                YES                        YES                      YES
 Mean                                                                    4.74                      0.67                    53.33
 % Mean per year                                                       2.21%                      4.17%                    2.02%
Notes: This table reports results from a regression of three separate measures of geographic concentration of technology
                                                                                     , ,
hiring, calculated over                                  , ,   (   )=                      , where i is a location (CBSA), technology , and
                                                                                      ,
time . The three measures are: coefficient of variation, normalized share of hiring at top 5 CBSAs relative to bottom 5
CBSAs, and share of CBSAs with normalized share more than 1%. The regression is weighted by square root of total
technology postings in a year. Normalized share is capped at 99th percentile of non-zero observations. Standard errors are
clustered by technology. Standard errors are clustered by technology. The last row specifies the magnitude of the coefficient
of                           , as a percentage of the sample mean per year.




                                             Table 5 - Persistence of pioneer locations

                                                                                            Normalized Share
                                                                           (1)                     (2)                       (3)
              ,                                                         0.918***               2.313***                  2.474***
                                                                         (0.285)                (0.580)                   (0.699)
          ,                                      ,                                             -0.146***                 -0.163***
                                                                                                (0.042)                   (0.057)
 R2                                                                      0.074                   0.075                     0.104
 N                                                                      266,467                 266,467                   266,467
  (               ,   ( -   0 ))/   (                ,   )                                     -0.063***                 -0.066***
                                                                                                (0.007)                   (0.009)
 Tech FE                                                                 YES                      YES                       YES
 Year FE                                                                 YES                      YES                       YES
 CBSA FE                                                                 YES                      YES                       YES
 CBSA x Year FE                                                          NO                       NO                        YES
Notes: This table reports results from a regression of the                     , , (for each CBSA, technology, and year) on
pioneer status of the CBSA and its interaction with year since technology emergence. Normalized share is capped at 99 th
percentile of non-zero observations. Standard errors are clustered by technology. Standard errors are clustered by CBSA.
                 Table 6 - Skill measure of technology job postings and years since emergence

                                                (1)                     (2)                        (3)                  (4)
                                          Share of college         Share of post                                    Average
                                                                                          Average wage
                                          educated * 100          graduate * 100                                   schooling
  Years since emergence                     -0.954***               -0.361***            -1,022.929***             -0.050***
                                              (0.260)                 (0.121)              (241.521)                 (0.014)
  R2                                           0.847                   0.878                  0.845                   0.859
  N                                             287                     287                    287                      287
  Tech FE                                      YES                     YES                    YES                      YES
  Year FE                                      YES                     YES                    YES                      YES
  Mean                                         55.90                   19.95                 64,463                   15.07
  %Mean/year                                  -1.71%                  -1.80%                 -1.59%                   -.33%
Notes: This table reports the results from a regression of approximate skill composition of technology jobs as the dependent
                                ;   ;
variable,       =            
                                         where    ;     is the skill measure of interest from ACS 2015 at the occupation level, on the
                                    ;
years since inception of the technology as the independent variable. Occupation in the sample is at the six-digit SOC code. These
results exclude observations before the start year of a technology. The regression is weighted by square root of technology job
postings in a year. Standard errors are clustered by technology.



              Table 7 ­ Concentration across locations during the life cycle - High vs low skill

                                                          Coefficient of                  (    )           Share CBSAs with
                                                           Variation                       ( )                (   < 1%)
                                                               (1)                        (2)                     (3)

    (Years since t0) * 1{Low skill}                         -0.167***                 -2.218***                 -0.022***
                                                              (0.048)                   (0.621)                   (0.006)
    (Year since t0)                                          -0.074**                   -0.657                  -0.017***
                                                              (0.036)                   (0.464)                   (0.005)
    R2                                                         0.773                     0.653                     0.827
    N                                                           567                       567                       567
    Skill FE                                                   YES                       YES                       YES
    Tech FE                                                    YES                       YES                       YES
    Year FE                                                    YES                       YES                       YES
    Mean                                                        6.53                     16.85                      0.78
    % Mean/year                                               2.56%                    13.16%                     2.82%
   Notes: This table reports the results from regressions of coefficient of variation during lifecycle of a technology by skill
   (high skill and low skill occupations) on year since technology emergence. The interaction term (year since t0) * 1{low
   skill} tests for differential concentration trends between low and high skill technology jobs. To calculate the coefficient
   of variation by skill x technology x year, we aggregate the job postings data over occupation, CBSA and year, and then
   separately for high skill occupations (with share of college educated people > 60 %), and low skill occupations (with share
   of college educated people < 30 %). Finally, coefficient of variation is calculated over                          , , ,  =
                    , , ,
                                    across CBSAs by skill group, technology and time. These results exclude observations before the
                       , ,
   start year of a technology, and they are weighted by technology hiring in the skill-technology-year observation. Regression
   controls for skill, technology, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by technology.
                              Table 8 - Differential hiring for locations by skill

                                                                                              , ,
                                                           (1)               (2)                        (3)
                                                       Low Skill         Medium Skill               High Skill
            ,                                          1.607***           1.193***                   1.108**
                                                         (0.403)           (0.453)                   (0.484)
            ,   ( -       )                            -0.108***          -0.057**                   -0.039*
                                                         (0.030)           (0.025)                   (0.020)
 R2                                                       0.053             0.044                     0.049
 N                                                      181,598            181,598                   181,598
  (             ,   ( -       ))/ (           ,   )    -0.067***          -0.048**                  -0.035**
                                                         (0.007)           (0.016)                   (0.014)

Notes: This table reports the results from regressions of                    , , ,  on pioneer status dummy for the
CBSA i, separately for low skill (Column 1), medium skill (Column 2) and high skill (Column 3). To construct the
sample at skill x CBSA x year level. We aggregate the job postings data over occupation, CBSA and year, and then
separately for high skill occupations (with share of college educated people > 60%), medium skill occupations (with
share of college educated people > 30%), and low skill occupations (with share of college educated people < 30%).
These results exclude observations before the start year of a technology. Standard errors are clustered by CBSA.
Standard errors for (Pioneer ,  (t - t ))/ (Pioneer , ) are calculated using delta method.
             Table 9 - Technology patenting before technology emergence versus skill composition

  Panel A:                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                                           1000           , ,
 log(1 + university assets (in $1,000 per capita))      0.129***
                                                         (0.022)
 University enrollment per capita                                       0.346***
                                                                         (0.085)
 Share College Educated (in pct.)                                                      0.0178***
                                                                                        (0.0017)
 Share post graduate (in pct.)                                                                         0.0421***
                                                                                                        (0.0041)
 Log(wage)                                                                                                             1.004***
                                                                                                                        (0.117)

 Observations                                             24,731         24,731          24,731          24,731         24,731
 R-squared                                                 0.107          0.093           0.158           0.162          0.133

 Panel B:                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                                            1000           , ,


 log(1 + university assets (in $1,000 per capita))      0.0595***
                                                         (0.0075)
 university enrollment per capita                                       0.217***
                                                                        (0.0313)
 Share College Educated                                                               0.00657***
                                                                                       (0.00063)
 Share post graduate                                                                                   0.0149***
                                                                                                        (0.0015)
 Log(wage)                                                                                                             0.426***
                                                                                                                        (0.045)

 Observations                                             24,759         24,759          24,759          24,759         24,759
 R-squared                                                 0.179          0.172           0.197           0.196          0.192
 Tech FE                                                   YES            YES             YES             YES            YES

Notes: The table presents results from a regression of patents per capita (in Panel A) and postings per capita (in panel B) in a CBSA
corresponding to a technology (during 10 years before year of emergence for the technology) on repeated values of various measures
of skill and income for the CBSA. University measures in row 1 and row 2 are calculated by aggregating university assets and
enrollment over all universities in a CBSA, and share of college educated/post graduate in row 3 and row 4 are calculated as the
share of people holding a college/postgraduate degree in a CBSA. Income measure in row 5 is log of wage, where wage for a CBSA
is calculated as the average yearly income of a working person. The university data is from US Dept. of Education, and the education
and income data is from American Communities Survey 2015. All specifications control for technology fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by CBSA.
       Table 10 ­ Dispersion and pioneer persistence: Comparison across different dimensions
  Panel A:                                                     Coefficient of Variation
                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                         (4)
                                        Locations           Industries         Occupations                     Firms
  Years since emergence                 -0.092***             -0.052             -0.054                     -0.360***
                                          (0.026)            (0.037)             (0.049)                      (0.093)
  R2                                       0.888               0.904              0.806                        0.917
  N                                         249                 249                249                          249
  Mean                                      3.71               4.89                6.65                        15.48
  % Mean/year                             -2.48%             -1.06%              -0.81%                       -2.32%
  Tech FE                                  YES                 YES                YES                          YES
  Year FE                                  YES                 YES                YES                          YES

  Panel B:                                                                                 , ,
                                            (1)                 (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                                        Locations           Industries              Occupations               Firms
                 ,                       2.393***           13.550***                10.746**              142.036***
                                          (0.528)             (3.204)                 (4.675)               (35.866)
             ,                          -0.149***            -0.547**                 -0.367                -6.215**
  
                                         (0.039)              (0.224)                  (0.269)                (2.990)

  R2                                      0.076                0.137                   0.033                  0.026
  N                                      266,467              26,883                  204,041              38,990,627
      (              ,   (              -0.062***           -0.040***                -0.034***             -0.044***
     - ))/ (                 ,   )
                                         (0.007)              (0.011)                  (0.013)                (0.013)
  Tech FE                                 YES                  YES                      YES                    YES
  Year FE                                 YES                  YES                      YES                    YES
  Cell FE                                 YES                  YES                      YES                    YES


Notes: This table reports: 1) in Panel A, the results from a regression of Coefficient of Variation calculated across
                                         , ,
                    , , =                    (where i is a location (Column 1), industry (Column 2), occupation (Column
                                               ,
3) or firm (Column 4)) for each technology and time . Location refers to a CBSA, industry is at NAICS 4-digit level,
and occupation is at SOC 6-digit level. Coefficient of variation in Column (4) is calculated across 10,231 firms which
have at least 1 job posting in each of the 11 years of Burning Glass. The results only include observations at the time of
and after the start year of a technology, and observations with more than 100 technology jobs which have an industry
associated with them. The regression is weighted by square root of total technology postings in a year. Normalized share
is capped at 99th percentile of non-zero observations. Standard errors are clustered by technology. 2) In Panel B, results
                                                               , ,
from regression of                       , ,   =                     on pioneer status of each cell for a panel of technologies
                                                                ,
( ) across time . Pioneer status is given to cells which account for more than 50% of patents in the 10 years before the
year of emergence for the technology. These results exclude observations before the start year of a technology. Normalized
share is capped at 99th percentile of non-zero observations. Standard errors are clustered by cell. (Pioneer ,  (t -
t ))/ (Pioneer , ) denotes the decrease in advantage for a pioneer cell every year, and we calculate its standard error
using the delta method.
                    Table 11 - Robustness - Dispersion with individual bigrams as technologies

                                                              Panel A
                                                CV               Normalized            Share College                  CV
 Dependent Variable:
                                                                    Share                Educated
                                             Region                Pioneer                                   Region Broadening
 Result:                                                                              Skill Broadening
                                           Broadening            Persistence                                      by Skill
                                               (1)                   (2)                     (3)                     (4)
 Years since emergence                     -0.140***                                     -0.325***               -0.244***
                                             (0.017)                                       (0.099)                 (0.024)
 Pioneer location                                                  1.454***
                                                                     (0.342)
 Pioneer location * (Years since                                   -0.087***
 emergence)                                                          (0.027)
 (Years since emergence) *                                                                                        -0.108***
 1{Low skill}                                                                                                       (0.028)

 R2                                            0.833                 0.022                  0.868                    0.724
 N                                             2,185               2,797,245                2,185                    5,807
 Estimate (per year)                          -2.54%                -5.98%                 -0.60%                   -0.98%


                                                              Panel B
                                                                         Coefficient of Variation
                                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)                      (4)
                                            Locations              Industries          Occupations                   Firms
 Years since emergence                      -0.140***                -0.018             -0.110***                 -0.377***
                                              (0.017)               (0.018)               (0.019)                   (0.066)
 R2                                            0.833                  0.890                0.725                     0.908
 N                                             2,185                  2,185                2,185                     2,185
 Mean(CV)                                       5.51                  5.94                  6.79                     25.82
 % Mean(CV)/year                              -2.54%                -0.30%                -1.62%                    -1.46%

Notes: This table reports our primary results replicated by treating each bigram as a separate technology. In panel A, we replicate
our primary results in table 4 column 1, table 5 column 2, table 6 column 1 and table 7 column 3. In panel B, we replicate results
from table 10 panel A, again treating each of the 305 bigrams as a technology. The regression is weighted by square root of total
technology postings in a year. Normalized share is capped at 99th percentile of non-zero observations. Standard errors are clustered
by technology for col 1, col 3 and col4 in panel A, and for all columns in Panel B. Standard errors are clustered by CBSA for col 2
in Panel A.
Figure 1 ­ Sample job for "AI Technology"                                                           Figure 2­ Sample job for "Solar Technology"




Notes: The picture is a sample job posting, which mentions AI technology related keywords, with a   Notes: The picture is a sample job posting, which mentions solar technology related keywords, with a
standardized job title, processed by Burning Glass, and the text of the job advertisement posted    standardized job title, processed by Burning Glass, and the text of the job advertisement posted online
online on glassdoor.com.                                                                            on glassdoor.com.
               Figure 3 ­ Technology exposure in earnings calls and jobs postings ­ Time series

                                        3dprinting                       autonomous cars                         bispecific antibody                         cloud computing                          computer vision                          drug conjugates
                               1                               .05      2                               .06      .3                              .003   8                                        1                               .06                                      .008
                                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                 .4
                                                               .04     1.5                                                                              6                                                                                                                 .006
                                                                                                        .04      .2                              .002                                   1.5                                      .04      .3
                                                               .03
                               .5                                       1                                                                               4                               1        .5                                       .2                              .004
                                                               .02
                                                                                                        .02      .1                              .001                                                                            .02
                                                               .01      .5                                                                              2                               .5                                                .1                              .002

                               0                               0        0                               0        0                               0      0                               0        0                               0        0                               0



                                electronic gaming                        fingerprint sensor                                 fracking                                  gps                     hybrid vehicle/electric car lane departure warning
                              1.2                              .25      .1                              .0005    2                               .008   .6                              .04                                              .15                              .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3                               .1
                               1                               .2                                       .0004   1.5                              .006                                   .03                                      .08
                                                                                                                                                        .4                                                                                .1                              .04
                                                               .15                                      .0003                                                                                    2                               .06
                               .8                                      .05                                       1                               .004                                   .02
                                                               .1                                       .0002                                                                                                                    .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Share of hiring in BG (Pct.)
Share of Firms in EC (Pct.)




                                                                                                                                                        .2                                       1                                       .05                              .02
                               .6                              .05                                      .0001    .5                              .002                                   .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
                               .4                              0        0                               0        0                               0      0                               0        0                               0        0                               0



                                     lithium battery                   machine learning/ai                            millimeter wave                        mobile payment                              oled display                          online streaming
                               .6                              .015     8                               .6       .5                                     1                               .04      .8                              .005    2.4                              .3
                                                                                                                                                 .004
                                                                        6                                                                                                               .03      .6                              .004    2.2
                                                               .01                                      .4                                       .003                                                                                                                     .2
                               .4                                                                                                                                                                                                .003
                                                                        4                                                                        .002   .5                              .02      .4                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .002
                               .2                              .005                                     .2                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                                                        2                                                                        .001                                   .01      .2                              .001    1.8

                               0                               0        0                               0        0                               0      0                               0        0                               0       1.6                              0



                                             rfid                             search engine                            smart devices                     social networking                     software defined radio                             solar power
                              1.5                              .06     1.5                              .6      10                               1.5    6                               2                                        .008     3                               .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                .08
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5     .06                              .006
                               1                               .04                                      .4                                       1      4                                                                                 2                               .1
                                                                        1                                        5                                                                      1       .04                              .004
                               .5                              .02                                      .2                                       .5     2                                                                                 1                               .05
                                                                                                                                                                                        .5      .02                              .002

                               0                               0        .5                              0        0                               0      0                               0        0                               0        0                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000 2005 2010 2015 2020


                                        stent graft                            touch screen                             virtual reality                               wifi                        wireless charging
                               .1                                       .6                              .08     1.5                              .06    3                               .25     .15                              .0015
                                                               .001
                                                                                                        .06                                                                             .2
                                                                        .4                                       1                               .04                                             .1                              .001
                                                                                                                                                        2                               .15
                              .05                              .0005                                    .04
                                                                        .2                                                                       .02                                    .1      .05                              .0005
                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                        .02
                                                                                                                                                                                        .05
                                                                                                                                                        1
                               0                               0        0                               0        0                               0                                      0        0                               0

                                    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020               2000 2005 2010 2015 2020                 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020



                                                                                                                                                 Year
               Notes: The pictures plot (year by year) the percentage of firms (red line) which mention technology-related keywords in earnings calls, and the percentage of job postings (grey circles) in Burning Glass
               which mention technology related keywords. Size of the grey circles denotes the level of hiring for the technology x year observation. The vertical grey line highlights the year of emergence of the
               technology, which is defined as the year in which firms time series (red line) attains at least 10% of sample max. The overall correlation between these two time series is 81\%.
            Figure 4 ­ Coefficient of Variation across locations by year since emergence

                                       3dprinting                   autonomous cars            bispecific antibody                 cloud computing                computer vision                 drug conjugates
                            6                              7                             30                              2.5                             6                              10
                            5
                                                           6                                                                                             5
                                                                                         20                                                                                              8
                            4                                                                                             2
                                                           5                                                                                             4
                            3
                                                                                         10                                                                                              6
                            2                              4                                                             1.5                             3



                                 electronic gaming                  fingerprint sensor                   fracking                          gps          hybrid vehicle/electric car lane departure warning
                            3                             14                             15                                                             4.5
                                                                                                                          3                                                             20
                           2.5
                                                          12                             10                                                              4                              15
                                                                                                                         2.5
                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                          10                              5                                                             3.5
                           1.5                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
Coefficient of Variation




                            1                              8
                                                                                          0                              1.5                             3                               0



                                     lithium battery            machine learning/ai                millimeter wave                 mobile payment                   oled display                  online streaming
                           6.5                            3.5                            7.5                              8                             12                              2.5

                            6                                                                                                                           10
                                                           3                              7                               6                                                              2
                           5.5
                                                                                                                                                         8
                            5                             2.5                            6.5                              4                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                         6
                           4.5
                                                           2                              6                               2                              4                               1



                                            rfid                     search engine                 smart devices                   social networking      software defined radio                    solar power
                                                           3                                                              3                              8                               4
                           3.5                                                            3
                                                          2.5                                                                                                                           3.5
                            3                                                                                             2                              7
                                                                                          2
                           2.5                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                          1                               1                              6
                            2                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                           1.5                             1                              0                               0                              5

                                                                                                                                                                                              0       5   10      15



                                       stent graft                    touch screen                  virtual reality                        wifi                   wireless charging
                            9                             3.5                            4.5                             1.6                            16

                           8.5                             3                              4                              1.4                            14

                            8                             2.5                            3.5                             1.2                            12

                           7.5                             2                              3                               1                             10

                            7                                                            2.5
                                                          1.5                                                             .8                             8

                                 0      5      10    15         0       5    10    15          0         5   10     15         0       5      10   15         0       5    10      15



                                                                                                         Year since emergence

         Notes: The figure plots coefficient of variation measured as coefficient of variation of normalized share of technology jobs for each of 29 technologies by year from 2007-2019 against the years since
                                                                                            , ,
         emergence of the technology, where                        , , =                        , where i is a CBSA. Only observations post year of emergence are included.
                                                                                                     ,
       Figure 5 ­ Technology diffusion from hubs




         Figure a: Location of Tech Hubs                                   Figure b: Technology Employment at t = 0                                Figure c: Technology Employment at t = 1-2




                                      Figure d: Technology Employment at t = 3-4                                      Figure e: Technology Employment at t = 5-6




Notes: This figures shows: 1) In Figure (a) the Core based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) which are technology hubs for at least one technology, where the size of the circles is proportional to the share of
technologies for which the CBSA is a hub; 2) In Figure (b) we show the share of technologies for which the                        , , of technology hiring at the CBSA in the year of emergence is greater than
1% (t=0). In Figure (c), (d) and (e), we repeat the mapping in (b) for years since emergence 1-2, 3-4, and 5-6, respectively. We plot these pictures only for 13 out of our 29 technologies which have year of
emergence after 2007 for a complete panel of each technology.
     Figure 6 ­ Disruptive vs. overall patents, by top CBSAs.




Notes: The figure shows, for disruptive patents (in red) and overall patents (in blue), the normalized share of patenting for top 20 CBSAs. Normalized share of patents for a CBSA is defined as the share of
total patents filed by US inventors in the CBSA (between 1992 and 2016) divided by the share of U.S. population in the CBSA (as of 2015). The figure is sorted by largest to smallest normalized share of
disruptive patenting.
        Figure 7 - Share of college educated by year since emergence

                                           3dprinting                         autonomous cars            bispecific antibody                  cloud computing                      computer vision                           drug conjugates
                                60                                   68                            100                             63.5                                72                                           80

                                                                     66                             80                              63                                 70                                           75
                                55
                                                                     64                             60                             62.5                                68                                           70

                                50                                   62                             40                              62                                 66                                           65



                                     electronic gaming                        fingerprint sensor                fracking                              gps              hybrid vehicle/electric car lane departure warning
                                60                                   65                             70                              60                                 55                                           80
                                                                                                    60                                                                                                              60
                                50                                   60                                                             50
Share College Educated (Pct.)




                                                                                                    50                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                40                                   55                                                             40
                                                                                                    40                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                       45
                                30                                   50                             30                              30                                                                               0



                                         lithium battery                  machine learning/ai                millimeter wave                  mobile payment                                oled display                     online streaming
                                65                                   74                             70                              65                                 80                                           56

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    54
                                60                                   72                             68                              60                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    52
                                                                                                    66
                                55                                   70                                                             55                                 40                                           50
                                                                                                    64                                                                                                              48
                                50                                   68                                                             50                                 20



                                                rfid                           search engine                 smart devices                    social networking             software defined radio                             solar power
                                                                     60                             70                              65                                 72
                                60                                                                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                    60
                                                                     58                                                             60                                 70                                           50
                                50
                                                                                                    50
                                                                     56                                                             55                                 68                                           45
                                40                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                       66                                           40
                                30                                   54                             30                              50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0       5   10      15



                                           stent graft                          touch screen                  virtual reality                         wifi                         wireless charging
                                70                                                                  68                              50                                 70
                                                                     50
                                                                                                    66                              45
                                65
                                                                     40                                                                                                65
                                                                                                    64                              40
                                60                                   30                             62                              35
                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                55                                   20                             60                              30

                                     0      5      10    15               0       5    10    15          0      5     10    15            0       5      10   15               0             5    10        15



                                                                                                                Year since emergence

Notes: The figure plots approximate share of technology job postings which require college-educated people (red circles, where the size of the circle represents the total number of technology job
                                                                                                                                                                               ;
postings) against year since emergence for the technology. Approximate share of college-educated people is calculated using                                        =                    ;
                                                                                                                                                                                             , where         is the share of college-educated people in
                                                                                                                                                                                    ;                   ;
an occupation in ACS 2015 and                                 ;   is the number of technology job postings in technology . Only observations post year of emergence are included.
Figure 8 - Share of college educated by year since emergence


                           65




                           60
  share college educated




                           55




                           50




                           45

                                0                                           5                                                        10                                                            15
                                                                                   year since emergence

Notes: The figure plots a bin scatter of the approximate share of college-educated technology job postings (in percentage) for each technology and calendar year against the years since emergence of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ;
technology. We weight observations by square root of hiring in that technology x year. The approximate share of college-educated job postings for a technology is measured as          =                   ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ;
where        is the share of college-educated people in an occupation in ACS 2015 and     ;   is the number of technology job postings in technology . Only observations post year of emergence are
included.; The figure controls for technology fixed effects.
Figure 9 ­ Coefficient of Variation by year since emergence of technology

                                  6




                                  5
     geographic concentrationt,




                                  4




                                  3



                                                                                                                                                                                       low skill
                                                                                                                                                                                       high skill
                                  2

                                      3                5                      7                      9                     11                     13                     15
                                                                        years since emergence

Notes: This figure plots a binned scatter plot with 30 bins of coefficient of variation by technology and time against year since the emergence of the technology for high skill and low skill occupations. The
picture controls for technology fixed effects, and we weigh observations by square root of hiring in technology x year observations. To calculate the coefficient of variation by skill, we aggregate the job
postings data over occupation, CBSA and year, and then separately for high skill occupations (with share of college-educated people > 60%), medium skill occupations (with share of college-educated
people > 30% and < 60%), and low skill occupations (with share of college-educated people < 30%). Coefficient of variation is calculated over the normalized share of technology jobs by skill group,
technology, and time.
                  Figure 10 ­ Coefficient of Variation across Locations, Industries, Occupations, Firms

                                              4a. Locations                                                                                                        4b. Industries




                                                                                                                                     CV across industries
CV across locations




                                              4c. Occupations                                                                                                      4d. Firms
CV across occupations




                                                                                                                                     CV across firms




                   Notes: The figure is a binned scatter plot of the coefficient of variation against year since emergence for our panel of 29 technologies. Coefficient of Variation is calculated across
                                                                , ,
                                        , ,   =                       (where i is a location (4a), industry (4b), occupation (4c), or firm (4d)) for each technology   and time . Location refers to a CBSA, industry is at NAICS
                                                                 ,
                   4-digit level, and occupation is at SOC 6-digit level. Coefficient of variation in column (4) is calculated across 10,231 firms which have at least one job posting in each of the 11 years of Burning Glass.
                   The results only include observations at the time of and after the emergence year of a technology, and observations with more than 100 technology jobs which have an industry associated with them.
                   The binscatter is weighted by square root of total technology postings in a year. Normalized share is capped at 99 th percentile of non-zero observations.
Figure 11 ­ Rehoming of firms to Technology hubs

                   Ford Motor Company                                                                            General Motors Corp.




Notes: The above figure plots decomposition of footprint between technology pioneers (HQ ­ when HQ coincide with pioneer), technology pioneers, and other locations. This
decomposition is done for Ford Motor Company (on the left) and General Motor Corporation (on the right). There are 4 hubs for Autonomus car technology: San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
Clara (CA), San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward (CA), Boston-Cambridge-Newton (MA-NH), Detroit-Warren-Dearborn (MI). Headquarter for Ford and GM are located in Detroit-Warren-
Dearborn (MI), which is labeled as Hub-HQ. Pre/post-period means period before/after year of emergence calculated for Autonomous Cars.
                                      Appendix Tables and Figures

                            Appendix Table 1 - Top technical bigrams in patents

Bigram                      Citations (stand.)                      Bigram                         Citations (stand.)
readable medium                        204379                       vapor deposition                            61255
user interface                         197444                       image data                                  59499
readable storage                       131350                       fiber optic                                 59395
fluid communication                    117896                       personal computer                           59216
storage media                           97478                       volatile memory                             58589
electrically conductive                 96715                       computer executable                         58501
transitory computer                     85426                       acceptable carrier                          57709
readable media                          82035                       disposed adjacent                           55760
conductive material                     80232                       computing system                            55655
machine readable                        80079                       optical fiber                               54593
user input                              76641                       disk drive                                  54282
polyethylene glycol                     75889                       plan view                                   53676
data stored                             72884                       digital data                                52337
proc natl                               71562                       acceptable salts                            52291
natl acad                               71523                       graphical user                              52256
computer implemented                    71392                       electrically coupled                        51310
acid sequence                           69521                       dielectric layer                            50642
pharmaceutical compositions             69082                       temperature sensor                          50612
positioned adjacent                     69018                       polymeric material                          50360
pharmaceutical composition              68895                       acceptable salt                             48690
data structures                         68401                       data stream                                 48320
service provider                        67424                       network interface                           47779
output signals                          66494                       support surface                             47497
data structure                          62563                       acid sequences                              47484
Notes: This table provides top 50 out of 35,063 bigrams by their citation score in patents. Citation score for a bigram is
calculated as  |                , which is the sum of citations attributed to all patents which contain the bigram and are
applied for between 1975 and 2015. Citations to the patent are standardized by the average citations in its primary
technology class.
     Appendix Table 2 - Example of human audit ­ "Autonomous car" keywords

              Bigrams                   True Positive         Comments                      Status
                                            Rate
 autonomous vehicle*                           100%                                         Keep
 autonomous vehicles*                          100%                                         Keep
 autonomous driving*                           100%                                         Keep
 self-driving car                                90%                                        Keep
 automated car                                     0% -automated car washes.                Drop
 robotic car                                       0% - robotic car wash,                   Drop
                                                      - "robotics, car,"
                                                      - Shelley the robotic car
                                                      from a video
 robot car                                       100%                                       Keep
 driverless car                                   90%                                       Keep
 driverless truck                                100%                                       Keep
 autonomous car                                  100%                                       Keep
 driver assistance                                 0% - [role of a] senior living           Drop
                                                      team members who is
                                                      performing in a driver
                                                      assistance role, spotter,
                                                      or resident care.
 automated driving                               100%                                       Keep
 autonomous cars                                 100%                                       Keep
Notes: The table presents results for human audit on keywords for "autonomous car" technology. For the
audit, we go through each of the shortlisted bigrams (in Column 1) and randomly sample 10 job postings
from BG between 2007 and 2019. Column 2 presents the true positive rate and Column 3 shows comments
from auditor. Column 4 shows whether we keep or drop the bigram for the final list. * Bigrams are ones
which we originally obtained from the intersection of patent corpus with earnings calls.
                                                   Appendix Table 3 - Keywords by technology

Technology                       Keywords
d printing                       d printer; d printing; additive manufacturing; d printed
Autonomous Cars                  Self-driving car; robot car; autonomous vehicles; autonomous car; autonomous cars; automated driving; driverless car; autonomous
                                 driving; autonomous vehicle; driverless truck
Bispecific monoclonal antibody   bispecific monoclonal; the bispecific; bispecific antibody
Cloud computing                  paas; cloud infrastructure; distributed cloud; cloud provider; cloud offerings; cloud service; cloud applications; community cloud;
                                 private cloud; public cloud; cloud deployments; cloud environments; cloud management; cloud services; cloud security; enterprise
                                 class; iaas; hybrid cloud; cloud platform; cloud providers; cloud hosting; personal cloud; enterprise network; cloud computing;
                                 cloud based; saas; cloud storage; enterprise applications; cloud solution; enterprise cloud; cloud solutions; cloud deployment
Computer vision                  pose estimation; motion estimation; visual servoing; facial recognition; gesture recognition; computer vision; image recognition;
                                 sensor fusion; object recognition
Drug conjugates                  kinase inhibitor; drug conjugate; antibody drug; drug conjugates
Electronic gaming                social game; video games; social games; video game; game content; electronic gaming; gaming products
Millimeter wave                  millimeter wave
Fingerprint sensor               fingerprint sensor; fingerprint scanner
Fracking                         fraccing; hydrofracking; hydrofracturing; hydraulic fracturing; fracking
GPS                              gps systems; global positioning; navigation devices
Hybrid vehicle electric car      hybrid vehicle; electric vehicle; electric motorcycle; vehicle charging; hybrid electric; plugin hybrids; electric buses; electrical
                                 vehicles; electric car; electric vehicles
Lane departure warning           lane departure; departure warning
Lithium battery                  ion battery; lithium ion battery; lithium ion batteries; lithium batteries; ion batteries; lithium polymer; lithium ion; lithium battery
Machine Learning AI              neural network; deep learning; language processing; machine learning; machine intelligence; natural language; artificial
                                 intelligence; ai technology; supervised learning; learning algorithms; unsupervised learning; reinforcement learning; ai machine
Mobile payment                   mobile transfer; mobile commerce; mobile payment; mobile wallet; mobile money
Oled display                     Oled
Online streaming                 streaming content; music streaming; interactive tv; live stream; digital video; video conferencing; online streaming; online video;
                                 mobile video; streaming services; streaming media; live video; video ondemand; live streaming; video ad; internet radio; video
                                 streaming; streaming video
Rfid tags                        frequency identification; keyless entry; rfid tags; rfid
Search Engine                    search engine; search engines
Smart devices                    mobile devices; tablet computers; wearable devices; tablet pcs; smartphone tablet; android phones; media devices; smart phones;
                                 smart devices; smart tvs; smart speaker; smart watch; smart car; smart phone; iphone ipad; portable media; smart tablets; connected
                                        devices; smartphones tablets; android smartphones; phones tablets; android devices; smart refrigerator; smartcar; smartphone; smart
                                        tv; smart band
 Social Networking                      user generated; user generated content; social platforms; networking sites; social channels; social media; social networking; social
                                        networks; social network
 Software defined radio                 defined radio
 Solar Power                            solar wafer; rooftop solar; solar modules; solar cells; crystalline silicon; silicon solar; solar panel; solar power; solar wafers; solar
                                        energy; solar applications; solar module; solar cell; solar pv; solar grade; solar panels; photovoltaic; solar thermal
 Stent graft                            stent graft
 Touch screen                           touch controller; touch panel; capacitive touch; touchscreen; touch screens; touch sensor
 Virtual Reality                        virtual reality; augmented reality; mixed reality; extended reality
 Wifi                                   wifi hotspots; wifi network; wifi; broadband connectivity; wireless networks
 Wireless charging                      wireless charging; inductive charging
Notes: This table shows, for each of our 29 technologies (in Column 1), the full set of 221 final keywords used to associate earnings calls, patents and job postings with the
technology.
                               Appendix Table 4 - Technology Excerpts from Earnings Calls

Company             EC month   Excerpt                                                                                Category

                               results that are many times higher in terms of processing performance per watt In
                               March we successfully demonstrated to customer and investors our fully|
Ambarella Inc        4/2018    AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE or embedded vehicle autonomy on Silicon Valley                      Development
                               Road EVA navigated various traffic scenarios presented by Silicon Valleys
                               challenging urban environment The fully autonomous
                               safely deploy our selfdriving electric vehicles in commercial ridesharing networks
                               Last month GM became the first company to use mass production methods to build|
General Motors Co    7/2017    AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES |growing our test fleet to We plan to deploy these                 Production
                               vehicles in the challenging driving environment of San Francisco as well as
                               Scottsdale Arizona
                               differentiated proofofmechanism of our potentially first or bestinclass agents These
                               discoveries include Our nextgeneration CTLA AGEN our differentiated CD agonist
Agenus Inc          10/2019    AGEN our firstinclass Tregdepleting| BISPECIFIC ANTIBODY |AGEN and of                  Development
                               course GS a bifunctional molecule now exclusively licensed to Gilead and being
                               developed by them In summary this year we generated
                               combined company road map which we rolled out in March of this year During this
                               period of uncertainty we saw increased competition from the| PUBLIC CLOUD
Cloudera Inc         4/2019    |vendors Second the announcement in March of Cloudera Data Platform our new            Competition
                               hybrid and multicloud offering created significant excitement within our customer
                               base CDP
                               lot of very exciting development And were working with a lot of them because we
                               have a platform that was really designed to fuse| COMPUTER VISION |cameras
NVIDIA Corp          7/2015                                                                                           Development
                               from all around the car As well as radars and LIDARS and sonars and be able to do
                               path planning and all of
                               orders in addition we added capacity to our manufacturing facility in europe in we
                               completed our first acquisition purchasing fineline an| ADDITIVE
Proto Labs Inc       1/2015    MANUFACTURING |or| D PRINTING |company based in raleigh north carolina                 Acquisition
                               the acquisition was completed last april and is highly complementary to proto labs
                               roughly of our customers use
                                collaboration with Acunova Therapeutics each provide these types of strategic
                                benefits Avicenna provides us with the unique opportunity to collaborate with
Cellectar
                      10/2017   experts in the antibody| DRUG CONJUGATE |or ADC field Not only does this                  Development
Biosciences Inc
                                provide the opportunity to work with a very promising small molecule payload but it
                                also allows
                                metal detectors where they always make you take your shoes off This is a passive
L-3
                                scanner as I told some of you It uses| MILLIMETER WAVE |It is nonintrusive and
Communications        10/2002                                                                                             Use
                                causes no harm or disease It will guarantee you won't have a weapon on you of any
Holdings Inc
                                kind or be
                                tell you is that the build in the backlog is really a function of the weather that we
                                experienced and it is always difficult| FRACKING |wells in the winter but this year
Oasis Petroleum Inc   1/2011                                                                                              Production
                                was particularly brutal So I think the build in the backlog was largely around the
                                weather And then
                                as they strive to enable improved locationbased services and mapping user
                                experience A significant opportunity for increasing our mobile content is UltraPrint
InvenSense Inc        7/2016    our ultrasonic| FINGERPRINT SENSOR |I am very pleased to report that we are on            Development
                                track with the development of this gamechanging technology and have successfully
                                passed several technology
                                with our store opening in Santana Row in San Jose in April The goal here is really
                                to engage and inform potential customers about| ELECTRIC VEHICLES |in general
Tesla Inc             4/2011                                                                                              Production
                                and the advantages of Tesla in particular and really to try to catch people before they
                                have actually made a buying decision
                                then be able to participate in the global electricity market which is measured in the
                                form of trillion We have direct control over the| SOLAR CELL |and| SOLAR
SunPower Corp         10/2006                                                                                             Production
                                PANEL |portions of the value chain the technology core of the value chain that
                                represents to of total installed costs In these
                                content distribution along with our expansion into| SOCIAL MEDIA |Vocus is
                                uniquely positioned to help organizations of all sizes reach and influence buyers
Vocus Inc             1/2011                                                                                              Use
                                across| SOCIAL NETWORKS |online and through the media While PR will remain
                                a core element of the Vocus product suite we believe there is a new and
                                speed and improve both the quality and consistency of business results for our
Donnelley Financial
                      4/2018    clients In capital markets through the introduction of| MACHINE LEARNING |and|            Use
Solutions Inc
                                ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE |we will improve the efficiency of XBRL tagging
                                               and align with the efforts at the SEC to move from documents to data This
                                               investment

                                               how We recently released our new Software Development Kit or SDK which is
                                               designed to enhance monetization of apps across| SMARTPHONES TABLETS |and
 Millennial Media
                               4/2013          other| CONNECTED DEVICES |SDK enhances our video advertising and rich                      Use
 LLC
                                               media capabilities while adding new functionality like interactive voice ads and
                                               integration with iOSs Passbook for coupon
Notes: This tables presents 15 earning calls excerpts (in column 3) with 25 words before and after technology keyword mentions, with the firm (in column 1), the
date of the earnings call (in column 3). In column 4, we manually categorize each excerpt into 4 categories: 1) Use, 2) Produce, 3) Development, and 4)
Acquisition.
                                   Appendix Table 5 - Human audit of job postings

 Panel A: Audit Results
 Audit                                      Use                 Produce                                          Total
 Describes company                          6%                    10%                                            16%
 Describes Task                            46%                    34%                                            80%
 Neither                                    NA                    NA                                              4%
 Panel B: Audit Results after clipping top 50 and bottom 50 words
 Audit                                      Use                 Produce                                          Total
 Describes company                          0%                     5%                                             6%
 Describes Task                            30%                    58%                                            88%
 Neither                                    NA                    NA                                              6%
 Panel C: Examples Excerpts
                                          "[Company's] systems offer a unique combination of technology
                                          linking RFID tags and sensors with displays which permit users to
 Describes company - Produce              track locate and observe movement of equipment and people in real
                                          time currently locates millions of patient's staff visitors and assets in
                                          healthcare facilities all over the world."
                                          "passion for learning about new technology including low power RF
                                          technologies voice command systems motion control and capacitive
 Describes task - Use
                                          touch ability to learn other non-electrical related topics mechanical and
                                          design considerations"
                                          "our super cool office space which doesn't feel like an office is
                                          designed with our employees in mind techy surroundings a great
                                          outdoor space with Wi-Fi hookups for your laptop plus Bluetooth
 Neither
                                          capabilities for music streaming we enjoy cultivating a supportive and
                                          all around positive culture that keeps our employees happy this will be
                                          a place you will want to come to everyday"
Notes: This tables presents results from a human audit of Burning Glass technology job postings. As a part of the human audit,
we classify each of randomly sampled 100 job postings into two types of categories 1) whether the technology keyword describes
the company in the job posting or the task content of the job posting, 2) whether the job describes use or production of the
technology. See text for details. In Panel A, we perform the audit on original text of job postings. In Panel B, we clip the text of
job postings by 50 words at the top and bottom, resample 100 postings, and then repeat the audit.
          Appendix Table 6 - Posting summary statistics for technical and non-technical bigrams
                                    Supervised       Non-technical      Technical        Non-technical      Non-technical
   Statistic                         bigrams            bigrams          bigrams          bigrams*          bigrams (ext)*
                                                       (top 221)      (Unsupervised)       (top 305)          (top 4000)
   # bigrams                            221               221               305               305               4000
   Avg. postings/bigram               59,013              142              49,677             157                474

   Bigrams w/ more than 100
                                      88.3%             10.0%              92.4%              9.2%              8.1%
   postings

 Notes: The table presents summary statistics (number of bigrams, average job postings per bigram, and bigrams with
 more than 100 job postings) for our list of supervised bigrams for 29 technologies (in column 2), top 221 non-technical
 bigrams (in column 3), unsupervised technical bigrams (in column 4), top 305 non-technical bigrams (in Columns 5)
 and top 4000 non-technical bigrams (in column 6). Technical bigrams are as described in section 2; we get to the list
 by intersecting bigrams in patents with bigrams in earnings calls. Non-technical bigrams are ones in earnings calls but
 not in patents. For both sets of bigrams, we restrict to the sample to bigrams for which share of firms increases in
 earnings calls (2002-2019).

 *Through the aforementioned process, we obtained many more non-technical (104,627) bigrams than supervised
 bigrams (221) and technical bigrams (305). We restrict the sample to top (by frequency in earnings calls) 221 (in
 column 3), 305 non-technical bigrams (in Column 5) and 4,000 non-technical bigrams (in Column 6).



                          Appendix Table 7 - Top technical and non-technical bigrams

               Top technical bigrams                                         Top non-technical bigrams


bigram                # earnings # job postings              bigram                 # earnings          # job postings

mobile devices        6597         1078049                   bofa merrill           34490              221

machine learning 2860              525286                    stifel nicolaus        28877              256

cloud computing 2781               485333                    division associate 12472                  4237

cloud services        2450         380980                    keefe bruyette         11682              16

quality metrics       2029         196497                    bruyette woods 11498                      14

Notes: The table presents the top five technical and non-technical bigrams. Technical bigrams are as described in section 2;
we get the list by intersecting bigrams in patents with bigrams in earnings calls. Non-technical bigrams are ones in earnings
calls but not in patents. For both sets of bigrams, we restrict to the sample to bigrams for which share of firms increases in
earnings calls (2002-2019).
                   Appendix Table 8 - Top exposed occupations to virtual reality
                                                                  Total      Exposed        Pct.
 Occupation
                                                                 Postings Postings        Exposed
 Computer Hardware Engineers                                      100329        1000               1
 Fine Artists, Including Painters, Sculptors, and Illustrators     67574          658           0.97
 Multimedia Artists and Animators                                  75492          607            0.8
 Computer and Information Research Scientists                     233763        1630             0.7
 Art Directors                                                     84990          422            0.5
 Sound Engineering Technicians                                     29187          140           0.48
 Interior Designers                                                92453          382           0.41
 Producers and Directors                                          152199          576           0.38
 Astronomers                                                       11905           45           0.38
 Computer Science Teachers, Postsecondary                          36470          134           0.37
 Social Science Research Assistants                                56496          207           0.37
 Biomedical Engineers                                              18654           65           0.35
 Film and Video Editors                                            16458           56           0.34
 Instructional Coordinators                                       187871          587           0.31
 Commercial and Industrial Designers                              205700          632           0.31
 Communications Teachers, Postsecondary                            20412           62            0.3
 Natural Sciences Managers                                        349157        1027            0.29
 Helpers-Electricians                                              20492           60           0.29
 Designers, All Other                                             226587          575           0.25
 Library Technicians                                               31440           70           0.22
 Atmospheric and Space Scientists                                  11806           26           0.22
 Software Developers, Applications                               8330098       18225            0.22
 Computer and Information Systems Managers                        228442          470           0.21
 Web Developers                                                  1819140        3625             0.2
 Models                                                            22230           44            0.2
 Operations Research Analysts                                     983408        1943             0.2
 Aerospace Engineers                                               69175          136            0.2
 Graphic Designers                                                409096          795           0.19
 Physicists                                                        26118           46           0.18
 Postsecondary Teachers, All Other                                817030        1419            0.17
Notes: This table lists the top exposed occupations (Column 1), their overall postings in Burning Glass
(Column 2), and the overall and percentage of jobs exposed to "virtual reality" (Column 3 and 4).
                                    Appendix Table 9 - Top Exposed Occupations by Technology

Technology                       Top Exposed Occupations
                                 Materials Engineers (1.11); Engineering Teachers, Postsecondary (0.58); Commercial and Industrial
3d printing
                                 Designers (0.57);
                                 Computer Hardware Engineers (0.87); Computer and Information Research Scientists (0.43); Health and
Autonomous Cars
                                 Safety Engineers, Except Mining Safety Engineers and Inspectors (0.41);
Bispecific monoclonal antibody   Biological Scientists, All Other (0.22); Biological Technicians (0.11); Chemists (0.08);
                                 Sales Engineers (13.15); Computer and Information Systems Managers (11.33); Information Security
Cloud computing
                                 Analysts (11.10);
                                 Electronics Engineers, Except Computer (0.70); Radio, Cellular, and Tower Equipment Installers and
Extremely high frequency
                                 Repairs (0.23); Physicists (0.14);
GPS                              Surveyors (3.06); Surveying and Mapping Technicians (2.70); Biological Technicians (1.97);
                                 Wind Turbine Service Technicians (3.11); Power Plant Operators (2.30); Control and Valve Installers and
Hybrid vehicle electric car
                                 Repairers, Except Mechanical Door (1.53);
                                 Computer and Information Research Scientists (40.67); Computer Science Teachers, Postsecondary (3.29);
Machine Learning AI
                                 Computer Hardware Engineers (2.83);
                                 Electronic Equipment Installers and Repairers, Motor Vehicles (31.38); Audio and Video Equipment
Online streaming
                                 Technicians (14.40); Film and Video Editors (8.03);
                                 Writers and Authors (4.05); Advertising and Promotions Managers (3.09); Market Research Analysts and
Search Engine
                                 Marketing Specialists (2.85);
                                 Automotive Glass Installers and Repairers (17.30); Electronic Equipment Installers and Repairers, Motor
Smart devices
                                 Vehicles (12.75); Merchandise Displayers and Window Trimmers (11.79);
                                 Reporters and Correspondents (29.17); Public Relations Specialists (21.44); Market Research Analysts and
Social Networking
                                 Marketing Specialists (20.77);
                                 Solar Photovoltaic Installers (45.34); Wind Turbine Service Technicians (5.87); Door-to-Door Sales
Solar Power
                                 Workers, News and Street Vendors, and Related Workers (4.08);
                                 Fine Artists, Including Painters, Sculptors, and Illustrators (0.57); Computer Hardware Engineers (0.55);
Virtual Reality
                                 Computer and Information Research Scientists (0.54);
                                 Electronic Home Entertainment Equipment Installers and Repairers (31.73); Electronics Engineers, Except
Wifi
                                 Computer (3.76); Computer Network Architects (3.38);
                                       Engineering Teachers, Postsecondary (0.08); Computer Hardware Engineers (0.07); Electronics Engineers,
 Wireless charging
                                       Except Computer (0.05);
                                       Computer Hardware Engineers (2.82); Computer and Information Research Scientists (2.82); Computer
 computer vision
                                       Science Teachers, Postsecondary (0.56);
 drug conjugates                       Chemical Technicians (0.69); Biological Scientists, All Other (0.65); Biochemists and Biophysicists (0.50);
                                       Demonstrators and Product Promoters (6.01); Fine Artists, Including Painters, Sculptors, and Illustrators
 electronic gaming
                                       (4.86); Gaming Service Workers, All Other (4.41);
                                       Physical Scientists, All Other (0.02); Computer Hardware Engineers (0.02); Electrical and Electronics
 fingerprint sensor
                                       Drafters (0.01);
                                       Petroleum Engineers (1.98); Geoscientists, Except Hydrologists and Geographers (0.19); Community and
 fracking
                                       Social Service Specialists, All Other (0.18);
                                       Tire Builders (35.31); Molders, Shapers, and Casters, Except Metal and Plastic (23.72); Molding,
 injection molding
                                       Coremaking, and Casting Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic (11.12);
                                       Printing Press Operators (0.07); Photographic Process Workers and Processing Machine Operators (0.05);
 inkjet printing
                                       Roustabouts, Oil and Gas (0.04);
                                       Heavy and Tractor-Trailer Truck Drivers (0.36); Mobile Heavy Equipment Mechanics, Except Engines
 lane departure warning
                                       (0.06); Traffic Technicians (0.04);
 lithium battery                       Materials Engineers (0.39); Life Scientists, All Other (0.25); Meter Readers, Utilities (0.21);
                                       Food Scientists and Technologists (0.74); Maintenance Workers, Machinery (0.23); Sales Representatives,
 mobile payment
                                       Wholesale and Manufacturing, Except Technical and Scientific Products (0.22);
                                       Chemical Equipment Operators and Tenders (0.12); Home Appliance Repairers (0.11); Computer Hardware
 oled display
                                       Engineers (0.05);
                                       Locksmiths and Safe Repairers (0.75); Electronics Engineers, Except Computer (0.52); Purchasing
 rfid tags
                                       Managers (0.44);
                                       Electronics Engineers, Except Computer (0.67); Computer Hardware Engineers (0.45); Electrical Engineers
 software defined radio
                                       (0.21);
                                       Health Diagnosing and Treating Practitioners, All Other (0.03); Sales Representatives, Wholesale and
 stent graft                           Manufacturing, Technical and Scientific Products (0.02); Cardiovascular Technologists and Technicians
                                       (0.02);
                                       English Language and Literature Teachers, Postsecondary (1.66); Audio and Video Equipment Technicians
 touch screen
                                       (1.04); Survey Researchers (0.52);
Notes: This table lists the top exposed occupations (in Column 2) for each of our 29 technologies (in column 1), and the share of online postings exposed to the
technology (in brackets alongside each occupation).
           Appendix Table 10 - Year of emergence by technology

                                               Year of Emergence
Technology                              EC (baseline)         Patents
3dprinting                                  2011               2013
autonomous cars                             2014               2012
bispecific antibody                         2012               1999
cloud computing                             2008               2011
computer vision                             2008               2006
drug conjugates                            2002*               2002
electronic gaming                          2002*               1995
millimeter wave                             2014               2012
fingerprint sensor                          2011               2005
Fracking                                    2007               2005
Gps                                        2002*               1999
hybrid vehicle/electric car                 2007               2006
lane departure warning                     2002*               2004
lithium battery                            2002*               1994
machine learning/ai                         2015               2005
mobile payment                              2007               2007
oled display                               2002*               2005
online streaming                           2002*               1997
Rfid                                       2002*               2004
search engine                              2002*               1997
smart devices                               2005               2010
social networking                           2006               2009
software defined radio                     2002*               2005
solar power                                2002*               1975
stent graft                                 2003               1995
touch screen                               2002*               2010
virtual reality                             2013               2012
Wifi                                       2002*               2007
wireless charging                           2012               2012
Notes: The table provides our set of technologies (in Column 1), their year of emergence
from earnings calls (Column 2), and their emergence year from patents (Column 3). The
year of emergence is calculated as the first year that the share of firms mentioning
technology in earnings calls reaches 10% of its maximum between 2002 and 2019. Years
of emergence marked with * denotes technologies which reach more than 10% of their
max share of firms in earnings calls in 2002. For these technologies, we impute the years
to be 2002. In Column 3, the year of emergence as the year in which the share of U.S.
patents for a technology reach 50% of their maximum value between 1976 and 2015.
                         Appendix Table 11 - Technology descriptions and contemporaneous events around emergence
Technology             Description                                                          Emergence   Contemporaneous Event
                                                                                            year
Smart devices          A smart device is an electronic device, generally connected to       2005        Apple announces first iPad. ­ Apple (2005)
                       other devices or networks via different wireless protocols such
                       as Bluetooth, Zigbee, NFC, Wi-Fi, LiFi, 5G, etc., that can
                       operate to some extent interactively and autonomously.
Cloud computing        Cloud computing is the on-demand availability of computer            2008        Microsoft and Google announced their cloud platforms. ­
                       system resources, especially data storage and computing power,                   Google and Microsoft blogs (2008)
                       without direct active management by the user.
Social Networking      The use of dedicated websites and applications to interact with      2006        Mark Zuckerberg leaves Harvard. ­ Harvard Crimson (2005)
                       other users, or to find people with similar interests to oneself.                Facebook receives $25 mill venture funding, and valued at half
                                                                                                        a billion. ­ Market Watch (2006)
Machine                Machine learning focuses on the development of computer              2015        Tesla's Elon Musk and venture capitalist Peter Thiel dedicated
Learning/AI            programs that can access data and use it to learn for themselves.                $1 billion to found Open AI, a non-profit for artificial
                                                                                                        intelligence research. ­ USA Today (2015)
Solar Power            Solar power is the conversion of energy from sunlight into           2002        Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger announces plans for solar power
                       electricity, either directly using photovoltaics (PV), indirectly                subsidies. ­ Sacramento Bee (2005)
                       using concentrated solar power, or a combination.
Autonomous Cars        A self-driving car, also known as an autonomous vehicle (AV),        2014        Google unveiled its first "fully functional" prototype for a self-
                       connected and autonomous vehicle (CAV), full self-driving car                    driving car Monday and plans to test it on Bay Area public
                       or driverless car, or robo-car or robotic car, (automated vehicles               roads in the new year. ­ Mercury News, The (2014)
                       and fully automated vehicles in the European Union) is a
                       vehicle that is capable of sensing its environment and moving
                       safely with little or no human input.
Virtual Reality        Virtual reality (VR) refers to a computer-generated simulation       2013        Oculus raises $16 million in venture funding for virtual reality
                       in which a person can interact within an artificial three-                       headset. ­ The Verge (2013)
                       dimensional environment using electronic devices, such as
                       special goggles with a screen or gloves fitted with sensors.
Search Engine          A search engine is a software system that is designed to carry       2002        Sausalito start-up Groxis released a new search tool that
                       out web searches (Internet searches), which means to search the                  categorizes search results in a more visually friendly way. -
                       World Wide Web in a systematic way for particular information                    Mercury News, The (2003)
                       specified in a textual web search query.
Hybrid                 Any land-based autonomotive which uses electricity as one of         2007        Toyota announces its plans for a plug-in hybrid car. ­ New
vehicle/electric car   the power sources.                                                               York Times (2008). The Obama Administration lends Tesla
                                                                                                        Motors $465 million to build an electric sedan and the battery
                                                                                                        packs needed to propel it. ­ Wired (2009)
Wireless charging      Inductive charging (also known as wireless charging or cordless      2012        General Motors invest $5 million in wireless charging start-up
                       charging) is a type of wireless power transfer. It uses                          Powermat. ­ Reuters (2012)
                      electromagnetic induction to provide electricity to portable
                      devices.
touch screen          The touchscreen enables the user to interact directly with what     2003   Santa Clara county uses touch machines for voting.
                      is displayed, rather than using a mouse, touchpad, or other such           San Jose Mercury News (2003)
                      devices (other than a stylus, which is optional for most modern
                      touchscreens).
drug conjugates       Antibody-drug conjugates or ADCs are a class of                     2002   Seattle Genetics signed a licensing deal granting MedImmune
                      biopharmaceutical drugs designed as a targeted therapy for                 rights to use its antibody-drug-linking technology in research
                      treating cancer.                                                           against a single biological marker of cancer. ­ Seattle Times,
                                                                                                 The (2005)
fracking              Hydraulic fracturing, also called fracking, fracing,                2007   Congress signs fracking as an exemption from the Safe
                      hydrofracking, fraccing, frac'ing, and hydrofracturing, is a well          Drinking Water Act. - Denver Post, The (CO) (2003)
                      stimulation technique involving the fracturing of bedrock
                      formations by a pressurized liquid.
software defined      Software-defined radio (SDR) is a radio communication system        2002   Boeing was awarded a $220 million subcontract to Northrop
radio                 where components that have been traditionally implemented in               Grumman's Radio Systems business in San Diego to expand
                      hardware (e.g. mixers, filters, amplifiers,                                development of the communications, navigation and
                      modulators/demodulators, detectors, etc.) are instead                      identification system specializing in software-defined radios
                      implemented by means of software on a personal computer or                 for the Army's Comanche helicopter. San Diego Union-
                      embedded system.                                                           Tribune, The (2003)
Wifi                  Wi-Fi is a family of wireless network protocols, based on the       2002   San Francisco officials invited responses from 17 companies -
                      IEEE 802.11 family of standards, which are commonly used for               including Google - that are interested in bringing affordable
                      local area networking of devices and Internet access.                      wireless Internet connections to the entire city. ­ Mercury
                                                                                                 News, The (2005)
3d printing           3D printing, or additive manufacturing, is the construction of a    2011   Federal government released plans to spend $45 million to
                      three-dimensional object from a CAD model or a digital 3D                  help fund a planned additive manufacturing institute. - USA
                      model.                                                                     Today (2012)
Millimeter Wave       Extremely high frequency (EHF) or Millimeter Wave is the            2014   Facebook develops millimeter-wave networks for Internet.org.
                      International Telecommunication Union (ITU) designation for                ­ The Verge (2016)
                      the band of radio frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum
                      from 30 to 300 gigahertz (GHz).
GPS                   The Global Positioning System (GPS), originally NAVSTAR             2002   The Clinton administration removes "Selective Availability"
                      GPS,[1] is a satellite-based radionavigation system owned by               of civilian GPS in order to make it more useful worldwide. ­
                      the United States government and operated by the United States             GPS.gov (2000)
                      Space Force.[2]
Lithium-ion Battery   A lithium-ion battery or Li-ion battery is a type of rechargeable   2002   Sion Power Corp. starts production of a new lithium-sulfur
                      battery.                                                                   battery that can last twice as long as the previous model
                                                                                                 commonly used in laptops, cell phones and digital cameras. -
                                                                                                 Arizona Daily Star, The (2004)
 OLED display          An organic light-emitting diode (OLED or organic LED), also           2002   Kodak announced the first consumer product to include a full-
                       known as organic electroluminescent (organic EL) diode, is a                 color, active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
                       light-emitting diode (LED) in which the emissive                             display on the Kodak EasyShare LS633 digital camera. -
                       electroluminescent layer is a film of organic compound that                  Mercury News, The (2003)
                       emits light in response to an electric current.
 Stent Graft           In medicine, a stent is a metal or plastic tube inserted into the     2003   A stent graft system designed to correct life-threatening
                       lumen of an anatomic vessel or duct to keep the passageway                   thoracic aortic aneurysms is fast track approved by the Food
                       open, and stenting is the placement of a stent.                              and Drug Administration. - Houston Chronicle (2003)
 RFID                  Radio-frequency identification (RFID) uses electromagnetic            2002   Wal-Mart Stores ordered its 100 top suppliers to begin using
                       fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to                  RFID tags on shipments beginning in January 2005. - Mercury
                       objects. An RFID tag consists of a tiny radio transponder; a                 News, The (2003)
                       radio receiver and transmitter.
 Electronic Gaming     An electronic game is a game that employs electronics to create       2002   Sony launches PlayStation 2 capable of playing video games
                       an interactive system with which a player can play.                          from DVDs. Gamespy.com (1999)
                                                                                                    Microsoft launches Xbox, first mainstream device with online
                                                                                                    capabilities. Xbox.com (2000)
 Computer Vision       Computer vision is an interdisciplinary scientific field that deals   2003   The state of Illinois processes 10 million driver's license
                       with how computers can gain high-level understanding from                    images using facial recognition. Chicago Sun-Times (2002)
                       digital images or videos.
 Lane Departure        In road-transport terminology, a lane departure warning system        2002   Iteris and DaimlerChrysler develop a first Lane Departure
 Warning               (LDWS) is a mechanism designed to warn the driver when the                   Warning System. The device is mounted on a truck's
                       vehicle begins to move out of its lane (unless a turn signal is on           windshield. It houses a tiny camera, computer and software
                       in that direction) on freeways and arterial roads.                           that tracks the difference between the road and visible lane
                                                                                                    markings. Seattle Times, The (2003)
 Bispecific            A bispecific monoclonal antibody (BsMAb, BsAb) is an                  2012   Novartis Pays Genmab $2M to research into Bispecific
 monoclonal            artificial protein that can simultaneously bind to two different             Antibody Technology - Genetic Engineering and
 antibody              types of antigen. BsMabs can be manufactured in several                      Biotechnology News (June 2012)
                       structural formats, and current applications have been explored
                       for cancer immunotherapy and drug delivery.
 Fingerprint sensor    A fingerprint sensor is an electronic device used to capture a        2011   Apple buys fingerprint sensor firm AuthenTec for $356
                       digital image of the fingerprint pattern.                                    million. - ZDNet (July 2012)
 Mobile payment        Mobile payment (also referred to as mobile money, mobile              2007   Bank of America, Citibank, Wachovia, Washington Mutual,
                       money transfer, and mobile wallet) generally refer to payment                Wells Fargo, and ING Direct announce mobile banking
                       services operated under financial regulation and performed from              services, including mobile payment services. - CNBC (June
                       or via a mobile device.                                                      2007)
 Online streaming      Streaming media is multimedia that is constantly received by          2002   Apple invested $12.5 million in Akamai, a content delivery
                       and presented to an end-user while being delivered by a                      company, with the aim to develop video streaming services for
                       provider.                                                                    QuickTime TV. Akamai.com (1999)
Notes: The table above lists our 29 technologies (in Column 1), descriptions for each technology taken from Wikipedia (Column 2), emergence year (Column 3), and a
suggested contemporaneous event around the year of emergence (Column 4).
                                    Appendix Table 12- Summary statistics

                                            Mean              SD           p25           p50            p75                 N
                                             (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)                (6)
 Panel A: Location
 Normalized Share                           0.533           3.801           0             0           0.301           266467
 University assets per capita             5670.065        12314.42       411.181      2234.962       5455.663           917
 University enrollment per capita          0.141            0.178         0.024          0.1          0.171            917
 Share of college educated                  0.198           0.065         0.148         0.182         0.237            917
 Share of post-graduate                    0.068            0.028         0.049         0.06          0.081            917
 Coefficient of Variation                   3.716           2.471         1.729         3.033         5.181            249
 Panel B: Industry
 Normalized Share                            1.4           18.267           0             0            0.253              88490
 Coefficient of Variation                   4.885          2.315          3.433         4.429          5.867               249
 Panel C: Occupation
 Normalized Share                           0.704          3.851            0        0                 0.075          238777
 Share College Educated                    54.774          13.125        47.462   56.785              63.325           249
 Share Post Graduate                       19.098          7.054         14.825    18.18              22.309           249
 Wage                                     63044.66        11143.04      57776.79 64014.05            71611.97           249
 Years of Schooling                        14.993           0.769        14.579   15.064              15.403           249
 Coefficient of Variation                   6.654            3.32         3.914    5.853               8.909           249
 Panel D: Firm
 Normalized Share                           0.591          14.258           0             0              0            38990627
 Coefficient of Variation                  34.515          25.759        16.342        29.253         44.908            249
Notes: This tables shows summary statistics for variables used in the analysis of the paper. Summary statistics (columns
2-6) are shown for the pooled sample of technologies after year since emergence. In our sample, location is one of 917
Core-based statistical areas (CBSA), industry is one of 311 4-digit North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS) codes, occupation is one of 836 six-digit Standard Occupation Classification Codes, and a firm is one of over
300K string clusters in Burning Glass Job Postings data. Normalized Share of technology jobs in all panels is calculated
                                             , ,
as                     , ,   =                     , where i is a location, industry, occupation, or firm (cell). Coefficient of
                                              ,
Variation in all panels is calculated over normalized share of technology job postings over cells for technology x year
observation. Location variables (in Panel A, row 2-5) are reported in the table for cross section of 917 CBSAs and
calculated as following: university assets per capita is calculated as the total assets reported by unis in a CBSA in the
Higher Education Research and Development Survey (HERD) and normalized by the population of the CBSA; enrollment
per capital is calculated as the total enrollment reported by universities in a CBSA in HERD and normalized by the
                                                                                                                  ;   ;
population of the CBSA. Skill level variables (in Panel C row 2-5) are calculated using                =       
                                                                                                                            , where
                                                                                                                      ;
 ;     is the share of college-educated people in an occupation in ACS 2015 and            ;   is the number of technology job
postings in technology .
                   Appendix Table 13 - Top pioneer location by technology

 Technology                  Top CBSA pioneer                           State
 3dprinting                  Boston-Cambridge-Newton                     MA-NH
 autonomous cars             San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 bispecific antibody         San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward               CA
 cloud computing             San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 computer vision             San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 drug conjugates             Boston-Cambridge-Newton                     MA-NH
 electronic gaming           San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 millimeter wave             New York-Newark-Jersey City                 NY-NJ-PA
 fingerprint sensor          San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 fracking                    Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land           TX
 gps                         San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 hybrid vehicle/electric
 car                         Detroit-Warren-Dearborn                     MI
 lane departure warning      Grand Rapids-Wyoming                        MI
 lithium battery             Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim              CA
 machine learning/ai         San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 mobile payment              San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward               CA
 oled display                Trenton                                     NJ
 online streaming            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 rfid                        Grand Rapids-Wyoming                        MI
 search engine               San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 smart devices               San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 social networking           San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 software defined radio      Boulder                                     CO
 solar power                 San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 stent graft                 San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward               CA
 touch screen                San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 virtual reality             San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara             CA
 wifi                        New York-Newark-Jersey City                 NY-NJ-PA
 wireless charging           Boston-Cambridge-Newton                     MA-NH
Notes: This table shows the top location hub (in Column 2) for each of our 29 technologies
(Column 1), and their state (Column 3). We define pioneer locations as those which collectively
accounted for 50% of the patent grants associated with a given technology applied for within ten
years before its emergence. Top Pioneer location is the one with most patents.
          Appendix Table 14 - Concentration during the life cycle - By skill levl

                                         Coefficient of Variation across Locations
                                       (1)                   (2)                 (3)
                                   Low Skill           Medium Skill          High Skill
 Years since                       -0.154***             -0.169***           -0.097***
 emergence                          (0.049)                (0.048)             (0.033)
 R2                                  0.841                  0.851               0.916
 N                                    231                    231                 231
Notes: This table reports the results from regressions of coefficient of variation during lifecycle of a
technology on year since inception of the technology, separately for low skill occupations (Column 1),
medium skill occupations (Column 2), and high skill occupations (Column 3). To calculate the coefficient
of variation by skill, we aggregate the job postings data over occupation, CBSA and year, and then
separately for high skill occupations (with share of college educated people > 60%), medium skill
occupations (with share of college educated people > 30% and <60%), and low skill occupations (with
share of college educated people < 30%). Finally, the coefficient of variation is calculated over
                        , , ,  across CBSAs by skill group, technology, and time. Standard errors are
clustered by technology.
                                               Appendix Table 15 - Pioneer Occupations and Industries by Technology

Technology                      Top Pioneer Occupation (share of jobs at t0)                         Top Pioneer Industry (share of jobs at t0)
3d printing                     Mechanical Engineers (0.140)                                         Computer and Peripheral Equipment Manufacturing (0.419)
Autonomous cars                 Computer Occupations All Other (0.186)                               Motor Vehicle Manufacturing (0.370)
Bispecific monoclonal
antibody                        Operations Research Analysts (0.375)                                 Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (0.946)
Cloud computing                 Software Developers Applications (0.228)                             Software Publishers (0.300)
Computer vision                 Software Developers Applications (0.295)                             Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.174)
Drug conjugates                 Natural Sciences Managers (0.135)                                    Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (0.910)
Electronic gaming               Software Developers Applications (0.202)                             Software Publishers (0.202)
Millimeter Wave                 Electronics Engineers Except Computer (0.169)                        Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.371)
Fingerprint sensor              Software Developers Applications (0.203)                             Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.215)
Fracking                        Geoscientists Except Hydrologists and Geographers (0.286)            Oil and Gas Extraction (0.881)
Gps                             Computer Occupations All Other (0.173)                               Communications Equipment Manufacturing (0.187)
Hybrid vehicle/electric car     Mechanical Engineers (0.151)                                         Motor Vehicle Manufacturing (0.681)
Lane departure warning          Mechanical Engineers (0.500)                                         Motor Vehicle Manufacturing (0.393)
Lithium battery                 Electrical Engineers (0.188)                                         Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing (0.115)
Machine learning ai             Software Developers Applications (0.251)                             Other Information Services (0.225)
Mobile payment                  Marketing Managers (0.154)                                           Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.227)
Oled display                    Engineers All Other (0.400)                                          Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing (0.320)
Online streaming                Sales Representatives (0.095)                                        Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.188)
Rfid tags                       Architectural and Engineering Managers (0.098)                       Computer and Peripheral Equipment Manufacturing (0.191)
Search engine                   Marketing Managers (0.124)                                           Other Information Services (0.264)
Smart devices                   Software Developers Applications (0.229)                             Software Publishers (0.243)
Social networking               Marketing Managers (0.128)                                           Other Information Services (0.299)
Software defined radio          Software Developers Applications (0.489)                             Communications Equipment Manufacturing (0.353)
Solar power                     Mechanical Engineers (0.099)                                         Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.243)
Stent graft                     Physicians and Surgeons All Other (0.375)                            Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing (0.628)
Touch screen                    Sales Representatives Wholesale (0.134)                              Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing (0.211)
Virtual reality                 Software Developers Applications (0.198)                             Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.214)
Wifi                            Retail Salespersons (0.255)                                          Communications Equipment Manufacturing (0.314)
Wireless charging               Computer Occupations All Other (0.222)                               Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing (0.412)
Notes: The table shows the top occupation pioneer (Column 2) and top industry pioneer (Column 3) for each of our 29 technologies (in Column 1). A pioneer is defined as the set of
occupations/industries/locations/firms that account for more than 50% of patents associated with the technology during the 10 years before year of emergence of the technology. The
top pioneer is the one with most patents.
                                       Appendix Table 16 - Robustness: Primary results
                                                     Panel A: Patent Emergence Year
                                                 (1)                   (2)                                 (3)                         (4)
                                          Region Broadening Pioneer Persistence                     Skill Broadening           Region Broadening
                                                                                                                                    by Skill
 Years since emergence                          -0.070***                                               -0.727***                  -0.121***
 (patents)                                        (0.020)                                                 (0.226)                    (0.040)
 Pioneer                                                                    1.369***
                                                                             (0.410)
 Pioneer * Years since                                                      -0.033**
 emergence (patents)                                                         (0.014)
 Years since emergence                                                                                                                -0.046*
 (patents) * {skill = low}                                                                                                            (0.026)
 R2                                               0.893                       0.077                        0.880                       0.750
 N                                                 255                       275,751                        255                         510

                                                                Panel B: Without 2007
                                                    (1)                       (2)                           (3)                          (4)
 Years since emergence                          -0.100***                                               -0.877***                     -0.089*
 (patents)                                        (0.036)                                                 (0.272)                     (0.046)
 Pioneer                                                                     2.475***
                                                                              (0.643)
 Pioneer * Years since                                                      -0.157***
 emergence                                                                    (0.048)
 Years since emergence                                                                                                              -0.184***
 * {skill = low}                                                                                                                      (0.044)
 R2                                               0.891                       0.079                        0.880                       0.780
 N                                                 236                       248,873                        236                         504

                                                        Panel C: Robust Standard Errors
                                                    (1)                    (2)                              (3)                         (4)
 Years since emergence                          -0.092***                                               -0.919***                   -0.110***
 (patents)                                        (0.023)                                                 (0.224)                     (0.027)
 Pioneer                                                                2.313***
                                                                         (0.202)
 Pioneer * Years since                                                 -0.146***
 Emergence                                                               (0.016)
 Years since emergence                                                                                                              -0.195***
 * {skill = low}                                                                                                                      (0.023)
 R2                                               0.888                       0.075                        0.873                       0.772
 N                                                 249                       266,467                        249                         538

Notes: This table reports results for robustness checks for broadening results in Table 5. The results are from a regression of Coefficient of Variation
                                                            , ,
calculated across                       , , =                   (where i is a location (Column 1), industry (Column 2), occupation (Column 3) or firm
                                                            ,
(Column 4)) for each technology and time on years since emergence for a technology. In Panel A, we calculate the year of emergence as the year in
which the share of US patents for a technology reaches 50% of their maximum value between 1976 and 2015; in Panel B, we exclude the year 2007; in
Panel C, we use robust standard errors instead of clustered in the baseline specification. These results exclude observations before the start year of a
technology. Standard errors are clustered in Panel A and B; they are robust in Panel C.
 Appendix Table 17 - Robustness: Skill broadening with sample reweighted to U.S. employment

                           (1)                           (2)                    (3)                        (4)
                     Share of college               Share of post
                                                                           Avg. wage               Avg. schooling
                     educated * 100                graduate * 100
Year since              -0.593**                       -0.180              -627.958**                  -0.035**
emergence                (0.272)                      (0.118)               (241.790)                   (0.015)
R2                        0.902                        0.915                  0.907                      0.905
N                          249                          249                    249                        249
Notes: This table reports the results from robustness of our skill broadening result. We regress approximate skill
                                               ;    ;
composition of technology jobs Skill =      
                                                        on the left-hand side, where    ;   is the skill measure of interest
                                                    ;
from ACS 2015 at the occupation level), on the years since inception of the technology on the right-hand side. In this
case, the technology jobs in an occupation are reweighted according to hiring in the U.S. economy for each two-digit
occupation. Hiring in a two-digit occupation is calculated using hiring in an industry in LEHD and then constructing a
crosswalk between industry employment and occupation employment. These results exclude observations before the start
year of a technology. Regressions are weighted by square root of technology job postings in a year. Standard errors are
clustered by technology.
 Appendix Figure 1 ­ Microsoft Computer Vision Patent




Notes: This figure illustrates a Microsoft patent applied for in 2004 and is exposed to the technology Computer Vision.
  Appendix Figure 2- Patent (in black-dashed) and Earnings Call (in red-solid) Time Series

                                             3dprinting                        autonomous cars                    bispecific antibody                        cloud computing                        computer vision                        drug conjugates
                                   1                               1.5    2                               1.5    .3                              .5     8                               8      1                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4                              1
                                                                         1.5                                                                     .4     6                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                        6                                                                             .8
                                                                   1                                      1      .2                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                                 .3                                                                                                                   .6
                                   .5                                     1                                                                             4                               4      .5                              2      .2
                                                                                                                                                 .2                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                   .5                                     .5     .1
                                                                          .5                                                                     .1     2                               2                                      1      .1                              .2
                                   0                               0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               0



                                        electronic gaming                      fingerprint sensor                           fracking                                  gps                    hybrid vehicle/electric car lane departure warning
                                  1.2                              2.5    .1                              .4     2                                      .6                              5                                      1.5   .15                              .4
                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                   1                               2                                      .3    1.5                              .5                                     4                                                                             .3
                                                                                                                                                        .4                                                                     1      .1
                                                                   1.5                                                                           .4                                     3      2
                                   .8                                    .05                              .2     1                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                   1                                                                             .3                                     2
    Share of Firms in EC (Pct.)




                                                                                                                                                        .2                                                                     .5    .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Share of patents (Cite Wt.)
                                   .6                                                                     .1     .5                                                                            1                                                                      .1
                                                                   .5                                                                            .2                                     1
                                   .4                              0      0                               0      0                               .1     0                               0      0                               0      0                               0



                                          lithium battery                 machine learning/ai                          millimeter wave                       mobile payment                            oled display                        online streaming
                                   .6                              1.2    8                               6      .5                              2      1                               .5     .8                              1.5   2.4                              6
                                                                   1      6                                                                      1.5                                    .4     .6                                    2.2
                                   .4                                                                     4                                                                                                                    1                                      4
                                                                   .8                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                          4                                                                      1      .5                                     .4                                     2
                                                                   .6                                                                                                                   .2
                                   .2                                                                     2                                                                                                                    .5                                     2
                                                                   .4     2                                                                      .5                                     .1     .2                                    1.8

                                   0                               .2     0                               0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               0     1.6                              0



                                                 rfid                            search engine                          smart devices                        social networking                software defined radio                          solar power
                                  1.5                              5     1.5                              2.5   10                               20     6                               5                                      .2     3                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                              .08
                                                                   4                                      2                                      15                                     4                                      .15
                                   1                                                                                                                    4                                     .06                                     2                               3
                                                                   3                                      1.5                                                                           3
                                                                          1                                      5                               10                                           .04                              .1
                                                                   2                                      1                                                                             2
                                   .5                                                                                                                   2                                                                             1                               2
                                                                   1                                      .5                                     5                                      1     .02                              .05

                                   0                               0      .5                              0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               0      0                               1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1980 1990 2000 2010 2020



                                             stent graft                         touch screen                            virtual reality                              wifi                          wireless charging
                                   .1                              .25    .6                                                                     3      3                               8     .15                              1
                                                                                                          4     1.5
                                                                   .2                                                                                                                   6                                      .8
                                                                          .4                              3                                      2                                             .1
                                                                   .15                                           1                                                                                                             .6
                                                                                                                                                        2
                                  .05                                                                     2                                                                             4
                                                                   .1                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                          .2                                     .5                              1                                            .05
                                                                   .05                                    1                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                                                                        1
                                   0                               0      0                               0      0                               0                                      0      0                               0

                                        1980 1990 2000 2010 2020               1980 1990 2000 2010 2020               1980 1990 2000 2010 2020               1980 1990 2000 2010 2020               1980 1990 2000 2010 2020



                                                                                                                                                 Year


Notes: The figure plots share of firms in earnings calls exposed to each technology (in red-solid), and the share of cite weighted patents associated with each of our 29 technologies in (black-dashed). The
sample of earnings calls (2002-19) and of patents (1985-2015). The overall correlation between the two time series is 80.26%.
         Appendix Figure 3 - Technology innovation vs local skill composition




                                                                                                              patents per 1000 people
patents per 1000 people




                                                                                                              patents per 1000 people
   patents per 1000 people




         Notes: The figure plots a binned scatter plot of patents associated with a technology per 1000 people in a CBSA for each of our 29 technologies against repeated values of skill/university
         presence in the CBSA. Patents associated with a technology are calculated 10 years before the year of emergence of the technology. The figure controls for technology fixed effects.
Appendix Figure 4 ­ Coefficient of Variation across industries by year since emergence



                                         3dprinting              autonomous cars              bispecific antibody                  cloud computing                 computer vision                drug conjugates
                               6                           5.5                                                           2.6                              6
                                                                                        12                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                         2.4
                               5                                                        11                                                                5
                                                                                                                         2.2                                                            11
                                                            5                           10
                               4                                                                                          2                               4                             10
                                                                                         9
                                                           4.5                                                           1.8
                               3                                                         8                                                                3                              9



                                    electronic gaming                   fracking                         gps         hybrid vehicle/electric car lane departure warning                           lithium battery
                               7                            8                           4.2                              5.5
                                                                                                                                                         14                             5.5
                                                                                         4                                5                              12
                               6                            7
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                        3.8                                                              10
                                                                                                                         4.5
                               5                            6                                                                                                                           4.5
                                                                                        3.6                                                               8
                                                                                                                          4
   Coefficient of Variation




                               4                            5                           3.4                                                               6                              4



                                    machine learning/ai              millimeter wave              mobile payment                     oled display                  online streaming                      rfid
                              2.8                          6.5                           8                               12                              3.5                             6

                              2.6                                                        7                               10
                                                            6                                                                                                                            5
                              2.4                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                         6
                                                           5.5                                                            8                                                              4
                              2.2                                                        5
                                                                                                                          6                              2.5
                               2                            5                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                         4



                                        search engine                smart devices            social networking            software defined radio                    solar power                   touch screen
                               6                            4                           3.5                              7.5                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                        3.8
                                                           3.5                           3
                               5                                                                                          7                               5                             3.6
                                                            3                           2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                        3.4
                                                                                                                         6.5
                               4                           2.5                           2                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                        3.2
                                                            2                           1.5                               6
                               3                                                                                                                          3                              3

                                                                                                                               0       5   10       15         0       5   10      15         0      5      10   15


                                        virtual reality                     wifi              wireless charging
                                                            6                            8
                              4.4
                                                            5
                              4.2
                                                            4
                               4                            3

                              3.8                           2                            6

                                    0     5     10    15         0      5     10   15         0      5     10   15



                                                                                                   Year since emergence

Notes: The figure plots coefficient of variation measured as coefficient of variation of normalized share of technology jobs for each of 29 technologies by year from 2007-
                                                                                                               , ,
2019 against the years since emergence of the technology, where                          , , =                     , where i is an industry.
                                                                                                                     ,
Appendix Figure 5 ­ Coefficient of Variation across occupations by year since emergence

                                       3dprinting                 autonomous cars          bispecific antibody                cloud computing                 computer vision               drug conjugates
                           6                             7                            12                           3.4                              7.5                            11

                                                                                                                   3.2                               7                             10
                           5                             6                            10
                                                                                                                    3                               6.5                            9
                                                         5
                           4                                                          8                            2.8                                                             8
                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                         4                                                                                                                         7
                           3                                                          6                            2.6                              5.5



                                    electronic gaming                 fracking                         gps         hybrid vehicle/electric car        lane departure warning                lithium battery
                                                         15                           8                                                             20                             7
                           7
                                                                                                                    8
                           6                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                    6
                           5                             10                           6                                                             15
                                                                                                                    4                                                              5
                           4                                                          5
Coefficient of Variation




                           3                             5                            4                             2                               10                             4



                                machine learning/ai               millimeter wave              mobile payment                   oled display                  online streaming                     rfid
                                                         14                                                        12                               10                             8
                           10                                                         8

                                                         12                                                        10                                8
                           8                                                          6                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                     6
                           6                             10                           4                             8                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                     4
                           4                             8                            2                             6                                                              2



                                     search engine                 smart devices               social networking         software defined radio                 solar power                  touch screen
                           4                             5                                                         11                               14                             7
                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                           3                             4                                                         10                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                      3
                           2                             3                                                          9                               10                             4

                                                         2                                                          8                                                              3
                           1                                                          2                                                              8

                                                                                                                          0      5    10       15         0      5    10      15        0      5      10   15



                                      virtual reality                    wifi                  wireless charging
                           7                             15                           14

                           6
                                                                                      12
                           5                             10
                                                                                      10
                           4

                           3                             5                            8

                                0       5     10    15        0      5      10   15        0       5     10   15



                                                                                                   Year since emergence

Notes: The figure plots coefficient of variation measured as coefficient of variation of normalized share of technology jobs for each of 29 technologies by year from 2007-2019 against the years since
                                                                                   , ,
emergence of the technology, where                        , , =                        , where i is an occupation.
                                                                                               ,
Appendix Figure 6 ­ Coefficient of Variation across firms by year since emergence




Notes: The figure plots coefficient of variation measured as coefficient of variation of normalized share of technology jobs for each of 29 technologies by year from 2007-2019 against the years since
                                                                                   , ,
emergence of the technology, where                        , , =                        , where i is a firm.
                                                                                 ,
Appendix Figure 7 ­ Overall Patterns of Burning Glass Job Postings

                                                                             a. BG total job postings (in million)




                                             b. Share of total postings by skill                                  c. Share of tech postings by skill
                   .5          .4
      share total job postings
          .2       .1
                   0 .3




                                    2007 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
                                                          low          med
                                                          high


Notes: In this figure, we show aggregate patterns of Burning Glass (BG) online job postings. Figure a shows the total number of job postings (in millions) by year in BG.
Figure b and c share of total job postings by skill and share of total technology job postings (aggregated over 29 selected technologies) by skill, respectively. To calculate skill level for job
postings, we aggregate the data over occupation, and then use share of college-educated workforce from the ACS (2015) to assign them to high skill occupations (with share of college-
educated people > 60%), medium skill occupations (with share of college-educated people > 30% and < 60%), and low skill occupations (with share of college-educated people < 30%).
Appendix Figure 8 ­ Coefficient of Variation across firms by year since emergence




Notes: This figure plots results from a jackknife estimate of regressions of coefficient of variation of normalized share of technology jobs calculated across locations, occupations, industries and firms. For
our jackknife estimates, we exclude three technologies at a time and recalculate the degradation in coefficient of variation, this provides us with 7,308 permutation estimates. In this figure, we plot we plot
the 10th and 90th percentile of these jackknife estimates
