                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CONVERGING TO CONVERGE? A COMMENT

                                       Daron Acemoglu
                                       Carlos A. Molina

                                      Working Paper 28992
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28992


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




This paper is an expanded version of the commentary presented at the 2021 NBER
Macroeconomics Annual conference, which will be published in that volume. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Bradley Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daron Acemoglu and Carlos A. Molina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Converging to Converge? A Comment
Daron Acemoglu and Carlos A. Molina
NBER Working Paper No. 28992
July 2021
JEL No. O47,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Kremer, Willis, and You (2021) revisit cross-country convergence patterns over the last six
decades. They provide evidence that the lack of convergence that applied early in the sample has
now been replaced by modest convergence. They also argue this relationship is driven by
convergence in various determinants of economic growth across countries and a flattening of the
relationship between these determinants and growth. Although the patterns documented by the
authors are intriguing, our reanalysis finds that these results are driven by the lack of country
fixed effects controlling for unobserved determinants of GDP per capita across countries. We
show theoretically and empirically that failure to include country fixed effects will create a bias in
convergence coeffcients towards zero and this bias can be time-varying, even when the
underlying country-level parameters are stable. These results are relevant not just for the current
paper, but for the convergence literature more generally. Our reanalysis finds no evidence of
major changes in patterns of convergence and, more importantly, no flattening of the relationship
between institutional variables and economic growth. Focusing on democracy, we show that this
variable's impact continues to be precisely estimated and if anything a little larger than at the
beginning of the sample.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

Carlos A. Molina
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139
camolina@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Kremer et al. (2021) revisit how the global distribution of prosperity and growth have evolved
over the last six decades and the role of various factors in shaping these distributions. Build-
ing on the convergence framework of Barro (1991) and Barro and Sala-i Martin (1992), they
investigate how a country's GDP per capita today depends on its GDP per capita in the past
(unconditional convergence) and whether this relationship is different when conditioning on
various determinants or "correlates" of growth (conditional convergence). While the earlier lit-
erature concluded that there was unconditional divergence and conditional convergence, Kremer
et al. report a trend towards unconditional convergence (meaning that growth in rich countries
is no longer faster, and in fact may be slower than, in poor countries). They also find that this
trend towards convergence has been accompanied by rapid convergence among the correlates of
income--in particular human capital, policies, institutions and culture. Finally, they report re-
sults suggesting that the relationship between growth and these correlates is now flatter, which
they interpret as these factors becoming less important for economic growth, perhaps because
remaining differences between institutions and policies are more minor or are confined to areas
that matter less. Although the authors are careful in not pushing a very strong interpretation
of this last finding, some may read these findings as suggesting that improving institutions and
policies may have become less important in the modern era.
    There is no doubt that these are first-order questions for economic growth and development,
and the authors' voice and novel analysis are welcome additions to this debate. Their paper
documents intriguing and thought-provoking facts. However, our assessment is that their find-
ings suffer from some of the shortcomings that are inherent in the convergence framework. We
take this opportunity both to comment on Kremer et al. and the broader convergence literature
pioneered by Barro and Sala-i-Martin.
    We argue that unconditional convergence regressions, especially in the form formulated by
the authors, do not allow a straightforward causal interpretation. Lack of convergence may be
because countries differ in their institutions and policies. It may be because of technological
divergence due to other reasons. Or it may be because of statistical problems, in particular
when the framework at hand does not properly account for permanent differences rooted in
other factors. These shortcomings do not just make it difficult to interpret what estimates
of unconditional convergence/divergence mean, but also imply that changes in convergence
patterns may be a statistical artifact of the same problems as well.
    To elucidate these issues, we start with a framework that is more amenable to thinking and
estimating causal effects--specifically, by allowing heterogeneity across countries, for example,
as captured by country fixed effects. Using this framework, we first establish that convergence
estimates do not have a straightforward economic interpretation. For example, even if every
country had a negative converges coefficient (indicating convergence), the authors' estimates


                                               1
could be strongly positive. This bias is not only first-order but it is potentially time-varying
and can create the impression that convergence patterns are changing, when, in reality, it is
the statistical properties responsible for the bias that are evolving over time.
    We then reanalyze the same data as the authors and report several important findings.1
First, in the data, there is indeed a major discord between estimated convergence coefficients
(without fixed effects) and economically-meaningful parameters summarizing how growth de-
pends on current level of income. For example, we estimate that more than 88% of all countries
show evidence of convergence, while the authors' regressions for the whole sample show no con-
vergence. Second, the biases responsible for this discord are indeed time-varying and account
for the changes in convergence patterns the authors report. Third, this framework also enables
us to estimate the effects of key institutional factors and policies on growth. Carrying out these
estimates for one specific institutional characteristic--whether a country is a democracy--we
find very different results from those reported by Kremer et al.. Specifically, we confirm the
results in Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo, and Robinson (2019), showing that democracy has a sta-
tistically robust and economically large positive effect on GDP per capita. Moreover, contrary
to the findings of Kremer et al., there is no evidence of the relationship between democracy
and growth flattening over time. This suggests there should be no presumption that institu-
tional factors in general have become less important for explaining and spearheading economic
growth.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we start with a brief review
of a minimalist framework that can shed light on the causal relationship between different factors
and GDP per capita (or growth). We contrast this framework, which crucially includes country
fixed effects to control for unobserved or unmodeled country-level determinants of GDP per
capita, with the authors' model which omits these fixed effects. In Section 3, we theoretically
and empirically explore the implications of our framework, establishing that the failure to
include country fixed effects will lead to a (potentially time-varying) downward bias in estimates
of convergence. We document that this bias explains both the lack of convergence estimated in
the earlier literature (and by the authors in the full sample) and the pattern towards greater
convergence over time. In Section 4, we examine whether the relationship between economic
growth and its potential determinants (and especially democracy) has become weaker over time,
and we find no evidence that it has. In Section 5, we respond to the adjustments that the authors
have made following our conference comments, while Section 6 concludes. The Appendix, which
is available online, includes the proof of our theoretical result and some additional empirical
findings.
   1
    Namely, we follow Kremer et al.'s first draft, on which our comments were based, in using GDP per capita
data from the World Development Indicators database. Their final draft switches to GDP numbers from the
Penn World Tables. We use the former dataset in the text and repeat all of the same exercises with the Penn
World Tables in the Appendix to verify that the choice of dataset does not matter for any of the points we
emphasize.


                                                     2
2       A Minimalist Framework
Consider the following relationship linking a country's economic growth to various characteris-
tics, including its current level of GDP per capita:

                                 yct = c xct + c yct-1 + t + c + ct ,                                       (1)

where yct is the level of log GDP per capita of country c at time t and xct is some institu-
tional/policy feature potentially impacting economic growth. In addition, c stands for country
fixed effects, which capture various dimensions of country heterogeneity that influence economic
growth. These may include other institutional features or various unobserved and/or unmod-
eled factors. Finally, ct is an error term and t denotes time effects. This relationship allows
for heterogeneities, including in how institutional/policy features impact growth (c ) and the
extent of persistence (c ), but is assumed to be linear for simplicity.
    In what follows, we assume that equation (1) is the true model/data generating process
(DGP), and also assume that xct is orthogonal to ct (conditional on xct and c ).
    Equation (1) is similar to the conditional convergence framework of Barro (1991) and Barro
and Sala-i Martin (1992), because the relationship between yct and yct-1 is conditional on
xct and c . However, these papers do not typically include country fixed effects capturing
unobserved permanent differences across countries, which will prove to be important.2
    Now consider a typical unconditional convergence equation:

                                         yct = yct-1 + t + ct .                                             (2)

This equation is a special case of (1), with three differences. First and most importantly, the
c term is not present, implying that the model does not allow for (unobserved) heterogeneity
across countries that could be correlated with initial GDP per capita. Second, there is no xct ,
which could capture some of the observed differences across countries. Third, this equation
does not allow for any cross-country heterogeneity in the relationship between GDP per capita
and its growth (captured by c in (1)). Kremer et al. use this equation to estimate  and study
unconditional convergence, though they look at the 10-year change, 10 yct = yct+10 - yct , on
the left-hand side, rather than the annual change as in (2). We next show that the omission
of appropriate country heterogeneity in equation (2) makes their estimates of  difficult to
interpret.
    2
    Other papers that have explored this type of linear model with country fixed effects include Knight, Loayza,
and Villanueva (1993); Loayza (1994); Islam (1995); Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort (1996) as well as Acemoglu
et al. (2019).




                                                       3
3       Implications of Country Heterogeneity
Let us now suppose that the DGP is given by our equation (1). What happens when  is
estimated from equation (2)? We answer this question first in theory, and then in the context
of the authors' analysis of convergence.


3.1     Theory
In order to separate the implications of country heterogeneity from those of country covariates
which Kremer et al. later incorporate, we first set c = 0 for all c in equation (1). This ensures
that the only difference between the underlying causal model, (1), and the authors' statistical
model, (2), is the absence of country fixed effects.

Proposition 1 Suppose the DGP is (1) with c = 0 for all c. Let ^ be the OLS estimator of
 in equation (2). Then:
                    C                                                                                   C
    1. plim ^ =     c=1 c c . Where c 's can be negative or greater than one, and                       c=1   c is
       typically not equal to one.
                        0 k                        C
    2. Let c = c -      Cc
                            ,   where 0 = 1 -      c=1 c ,   c  [0, 1] for all c, and k  R. Then:

                                                            C
                                              plim^=            c c + 0 k.
                                                          c=1


    3. Suppose that -2 < c < 0 for all c (which ensures that the process for each country is
       stationary), and let Tc be the effective number of observations for country c. Then, as
       minc {Tc }  , k , c , c and    ^ all limit to zero (while the limit of 0 is one).

    The proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix.
    Proposition 1 contains several important lessons. First, part 1 of the proposition establishes
that the estimate    ^ does not correspond to a meaningful (local) average, or LATE, of the
underlying parameters--the c 's. Some of the c 's in the proposition can be negative, and they
need not sum to one. Therefore, one could have cases where        ^ may be estimated to be zero or
positive, even when the underlying (true) c 's are all negative. Part 2 expresses this same result
in a different way. By writing the probability limit of   ^ as the local average of the underlying
c 's plus a bias term, it shows that this estimator is inconsistent and biased.3 We can also see
that this bias is related to the covariance of c 's with initial conditions (and of course, there is
a natural reason for c to be highly correlated with initial conditions, especially when countries
    3
     Islam (1995) and Caselli et al. (1996) have also noted that estimates of growth regression will be biased when
country heterogeneity is not properly controlled for. We are, however, unaware of any other characterization of
this bias as in Proposition 1.

                                                        4
are close to their steady states). In addition, the bias in question is downward, pushing the
coefficient estimate towards zero.4 Third, part 3 shows that as sample size grows,    ^ will tend
to zero--regardless of the true values of the c 's. This sharp result clarifies the intuition for
the bias as well: asymptotically, all countries converge to their steady state, and without the
c 's, the only way the model can capture this is by imposing   ^ = 0. This bias, which becomes
extreme asymptotically, is present for any time length. Finally, because the c 's or the c 's are
functions of data moments, the estimate   ^ (without country fixed effects) will change over time
even when the underlying c 's are stable.
    We also note that the results in Proposition 1 are relevant beyond Kremer et al.'s paper.
These biases and challenges of interpreting the estimates of ^ apply to most of the work in the
convergence literature.
    What do the biases identified in Proposition 1 imply for Kremer et al.'s empirical analysis?
We answer this question in the next subsection.


3.2        Empirical Implications
To illustrate the issue of the bias identified in Proposition 1, we first estimate (1)--the true
DGP under our hypothesis. The estimates of c 's rely on time-series variation in a country's
growth rate.5 The average number of periods for a country in our sample is 46.
    Figure 1 plots the empirical probability density (Panel A) and the cumulative density (Panel
B) of the underlying c 's. We also indicate the estimate    ^ from equation using a dashed line.
A significant bias towards zero in  ^, as predicted by Proposition 1, is visible from these results.
For example, our estimates of the c 's are negative all the way up to the 88th percentile, but     ^
is positive.6
    Panels C and D of the figure explore the sources of this significant bias in   ^ by plotting the
distributions of the weights (c ) from Proposition 1. Had    ^ been a meaningful average of the
underlying c 's, we would expect all of these weights to be nonnegative. However, in practice,
37% of them are negative, their sum is also negative (= -0.024), and there are two massive
outliers (Costa Rica and Panama).7 This picture confirms that, under the presumption that (1)
   4
       If Cov (ct , yt-1 ) = 0, then:
                                                            Cov (c , yct-1 )
                                                  plim^=                     +         c c
                                                             V ar(yct-1 )
                                                                                  cC

                               ¯t-1 )2
                   tTc (yct-1 -y                            cC    tTc  yc,t-1
with c =                                   2   and y
                                                   ¯t-1 =                     .
                iC    tTi (yit-1 -y
                                  ¯t-1 )                         cC   Tc
   5
     Like Kremer et al.'s original sample, our data come from the World Development Indicators database. As
noted in footnote 1, the final version of their paper uses data from the Penn World Tables. The two datasets
give very similar results. We keep the original data in our analysis in the text and report analogous results with
the Penn World Tables in the Appendix.
   6
     As in all of the other empirical models we report in this paper, the country fixed effects, the c 's, are
highly significant when we estimate these country-specific convergence parameters. In Panel A, for example,
the F-statistic for their joint significance is 276,182.
   7
     With the Penn World Tables data, Costa Rica and Panama are no longer outliers, but now Belarus is a

                                                                   5
is the true model/DGP, estimates of   ^ do not correspond to economically meaningful objects:
even when the vast majority of countries are converging, ^ may create the impression that there
is no convergence.
    We now turn to part 2 of Proposition 1 and explore where the bias of ^ comes in the sample
studied by the authors. The next equation summarizes the results by presenting the empirical
counterparts of the decomposition given in part 2 of Proposition 1:

                                                    C
                                        ^       =         c ^c + 0       k
                                      0.00004       c=1        0.93445 0.00120
                                                    -0.00112


    The advantage of this equation is that it provides a decomposition of  ^ into an average of the
underlying parameters (the first term) and the bias (the second term). Recall, in particular, that
c  [0, 1] and C     c=0 c = 1. In our sample, we find that
                                                              C
                                                              c=1 c ^c = -0.00112, suggesting that
at least on average, most country-specific coefficients of convergence tend to be negative (in line
with 88% of them being negative as we saw above). However, the coefficient of unconditional
convergence    ^ is positive (= 0.00004), because the second term is very large--comprised of a
huge weight 0 = 0.93445 and a positive bias k = 0.00120.
    We now turn to the question of what accounts for over-time changes in       ^. In Figure 2, we
report the same decomposition from part 2 of Proposition 1, but now separately by decade.
Consistent with Kremer et al., we find that estimates of      ^ from (2) are decreasing over time,
as shown by the green bars. Strikingly, however, this pattern is entirely driven by changes in
the bias term (shown by the blue bar). The underlying distribution of the c 's (shown by the
orange bar) has remained quite stable over time. Therefore, all of the dynamics in the authors'
estimate of   ^ seem to come from the bias term rather than from a faster rate of economic
convergence.
    We also explored the determinants of convergence patterns for the key covariates used by
Kremer et al.8 Table 1 reports the coefficient estimate       ^ from equation (2) as well as key
statistics about the distribution of estimates of the underlying c 's estimated from (1). In
all cases, estimates of   ^ are significantly above the mean or the median of the distribution of
the estimates of the c 's (and except for Polity 2, they are also above the 75th percentile).
These results again underscore that estimates that ignore country heterogeneity are going to
be significantly biased towards zero.
massive outlier. The rest of the results are very similar. See Figure A-1 in the Appendix.
    8
      These are (source in parenthesis): Polity 2 (Polity IV Project), Rule of law (Worldwide Governance Indica-
tors), Property rights (Heritage Freedom), Government expenditure (World Development Indicators) and Years
of schooling (Barro-Lee).




                                                           6
4     Estimating the Effects of Institutions and Policies
In the second part of their paper, Kremer et al. add the covariates mentioned in the previous
section to the right hand side of (2) and assume that they have the same impact across countries,
while still not including country fixed effects. As they again consider 10-year changes on the
left-hand side, their model is now

                                10 yct = t xct + yct + t + ct ,                               (3)

where 10 yct = yct+10 - yct .
    Estimating this equation on the same sample, they conclude that conditional convergence
patterns have been stable over the sample and the change in unconditional convergence implied
by their estimates of   ^ are due to the correlation between growth and institutions (or policies
or other country characteristics) having become weaker over time. They also report that their
estimates of  from this equation,    ^, are getting smaller over time, which they interpret as the
relationship between these factors and economic growth becoming weaker.
    Although in the revision of their paper the authors recognize that these estimates are not
causal and should be interpreted with caution, the same issues highlighted in the previous
section are still relevant and, as we will see, are responsible for the majority of their results.
In the rest of this section, we develop this point by focusing on one dimension of institutions
that has been explored in detail in the literature and found to be robustly related to growth:
democracy (see Acemoglu et al., 2019). Before doing this, however, in the next subsection,
we highlight that even ignoring these problems, the data do not unambiguously point out to a
decline in t .


4.1    The Importance of Horizons
As noted above, Kremer et al. use the 10-year change on the left-hand side of (3) and then
compare the estimates for 1985 and 2005. In Panel A of Figure 3, we reestimate their model, still
with 10-year changes, but separately by year. We focus on their main measure of democracy,
Polity 2 score. Indeed the coefficient estimates from this model are greater for 1985 and 2005,
but the pattern we see is not one of decline, but a cyclical one. This suggests that whatever is
driving the authors' results may be more complex than a simple secular flattening.
    Panel B of the same figure reestimate the authors' model, but using annual changes on
the left-hand side. Now, although the estimates do change over time, there is no evidence
of a decline. We conjecture, instead, that the patterns shown in Panel A are driven by the
interaction of the changing bias terms, highlighted in the previous section, and the 10-year
horizon on the left-hand side, which cumulates these changes. We explore whether the effects
of institutions are indeed diminishing over time more systematically in the next subsection.

                                                7
4.2     Have the Causal Effects of Institutions Declined Over Time?
We now study this question, focusing on the effects of democracy. We follow Acemoglu et al.
(2019) in focusing on a dichotomous measure of democracy (to minimize measurement error)
and extend (1) to include several lags of GDP per capita on the right-hand side, and as in their
paper, simplify the model by assuming constant effects of democracy and the lags, but, in line
with the focus here, we allow the effect of democracy to be time-varying. This gives:
                                                    p
                               ln yct = t Dct +           j ln yct-j + c + t + ct ,                               (4)
                                                   j =1

where Dct denotes the dichotomous measure of democracy (dictatorship vs. democracy). All
the other variables are as in (1), and crucially, as in that equation, we have country fixed effects,
represented by the c 's.
    First, suppose that t =  . Then, under sequential exogeneity, the within-estimator of this
equation recovers an interpretable estimate of an economically-meaningful object,  .9 We also
report alternative estimators (including IV estimate using as instrument waves of democratiza-
tion), which are consistent under related but slightly different assumptions.10
    We first replicate the results of Acemoglu et al. (2019), estimating a time-invariant  in
equation (4). The results are reported in Panel A of Table 2. All regressions include four lags
of log GDP. As in Acemoglu et al. (2019), and common with all of the other results we will
report, the democracy variable is estimated to have a precise and significant positive impact on
GDP per capita, with a coefficient of 0.787 (standard error = 0.226) in the OLS specification
in column 1. This estimate implies that a permanent transition to democracy leads to an
approximately 20% increase in GDP per capita after about 25 years.11 As in the original
results in Acemoglu et al. (2019), the other columns, including the IV procedure exploiting
regional waves of democratization, show similar estimates.
    Have these effects changed over time? To answer this question in the simplest possible way,
we parameterize t in equation (4) as a linear function of time, which is equivalent to including
an interaction between the democracy score and time, Dc t, as an additional regressor. Results
from this exercise are reported in Panel B. In all cases, this interaction has a positive coefficient,
and shows no evidence of a decline over time. For example, with OLS in column 1 the coefficient
estimate is 0.383 (standard error=0.246), while with IV in column 4, it is 0.716 (standard error
= 0.368), which is significant at 10%. We therefore conclude that, once one focuses on a model
that allows for unobserved country heterogeneity which proves to be important in all of these
   9
     Sequential exogeneity requires that E [ct | yct-1 , . . . , yct0 , Dct , . . . , Dct0 , c , t ] =    0 for all
yct-1 , . . . , yct0 , Dct , . . . , Dct0 , c and t and for all c and t  t0 .
  10
     See Acemoglu et al. (2019) for a discussion of these assumptions.
  11
     The F-statistic for the significance of country fixed effects in the specification is 1417, again indicating that
these fixed effects are highly significant.



                                                           8
specifications, there is no evidence of the causal effect of democracy to have declined over time.12


4.3     Squaring the Circle
The model in equation (4) also gives us an opportunity to unify the two parts of our analysis so
far--relating to changes in convergence patterns and changes in the effects of institutions. We
now estimate this equation separately by decade and report the implied convergence estimates
^ (assumed to be the same across countries for this exercise). We focus on four specifications,
which are all reported in Figure 4. The first is Kremer et al.'s specification of unconditional
convergence, which does not include country fixed effects (shown by the black bars the left
axis). The second is a specification that adds country fixed effects to this baseline (shown by
the orange bars on the right axis). The third and fourth add our dichotomous measure of
democracy as a control, with constant and heterogeneous effects across countries, respectively
(shown by the blue and green bars on the right axis).
    The black bars confirm the pattern emphasized by the authors: in the 1970s, 80s and 90s,
the estimate of   ^ is positive and then declines to be negative in the 2000s and 2010s. However,
the remaining bars show that this pattern is driven entirely by the absence of country fixed
effects. As soon as these are included, the orange bars are uniformly negative and do not show
a clear trend either way. The same pattern is visible with the blue and green bars. Another
noteworthy feature, highlighting the downward bias in the converges coefficient without fixed
effects identified in Proposition 1, is that the coefficient estimates shown by the black bars are
about 1/50th of the others, and hence the need for having two vertical axes to be able to depict
these estimates.13
    We conclude once again that the time-trends in the estimates of       ^ in equation (2) do not
appear to be related to a change in the causal relationship between economic growth and its
country-level determinants.


5      Authors' Response to our Comments
In response to our conference discussion, the published version of Kremer et al. includes various
adjustments (in addition to the change of dataset we noted above). We welcome several of
these adjustments. They estimate an augmented version of their model in the Appendix, which
allows for fixed effects and confirm our results that there is no major change in convergence
  12
     All of the results reported so far are very similar using data from the Penn World Tables, see Appendix
A.2.
  13
     The only difference with the Penn World Tables comes in this analysis, where the analogues of the black
bars in this figure show even less precision and are not uniformly positive before the 2000s. However, the other
aspects of this figure and the overall conclusion from this alternative dataset are identical. See Figure A-4 in
the Appendix.



                                                       9
patterns in this case. However, the authors argue against including country fixed effects. They
allow these fixed effects to vary across decades and then plot these decadal fixed effect estimates
against each other. They state that there is little correlation between decadal fixed effects and
conclude that this lack of correlation "call[s] into question the benefit of a model including fixed
effects."
    We reproduce this exercise in Figure 5. Our results are very different from theirs. We find
that the fixed effect estimates are highly persistent and the correlation between fixed effects
in different decades is always above 95%. This is true regardless of whether we compare fixed
effects for a decade starting with year t vs t +10 or t +20, and regardless of the exact specification
of the dependent variable (Panel A is for models with first differences of GDP per capita on the
left-hand side, while Panel B is for models with 10-year changes).14 These patterns, combined
with the very high F-statistics for the significance of the country fixed effects in all of our
models, indicate that these fixed effects belong in the models and their omission is responsible
for estimates that are difficult to interpret in terms of underlying economic effects.


6      Conclusion
Kremer et al. is a timely paper revisiting the evolution of convergence cross-country patterns
over the last six decades. The authors provide evidence that the lack of convergence that
applied early in the sample has now been replaced by modest convergence. They also argue
this relationship is driven by convergence in various determinants of economic growth across
countries and a flattening of the relationship between these determinants and growth. Although
the patterns documented by the authors are intriguing, our reanalysis finds that these results
are driven by the lack of country fixed effects controlling for unobserved determinants of GDP
per capita across countries. We establish theoretically that failure to include for such potential
determinants will create a bias in convergence coefficients towards zero and, equally importantly,
the resulting estimates may not have straightforward economic interpretations (for example,
they will not correspond to any type of local average of the effects at the country level). The
root cause of this bias is simple: when there are permanent differences across countries and
each country is close to its steady state, a model that does not include fixed effects can only
fit the data by having a convergence coefficient very very close to zero. This point is of more
general relevance, since it applies not just to Kremer et al.'s study, but also to the majority of
the convergence literature.
    Empirically, we show that estimated convergence coefficients (from models that do not
include fixed effects) are indeed biased towards zero. Moreover, this bias is time-varying, even
though the underlying country-level parameters appear to be constant and stable.
  14
    These exercises should still be interpreted with caution. As is well known, estimates of fixed effects are
inconsistent for finite T (Wooldridge, 2010).


                                                     10
    The authors' finding that the relationship between economic growth and its country-level
determinants (such as institutions) is flattening is as notable. If true, it might suggest that
improving institutions and policies may have become less important for explaining and spear-
heading growth. It might also have important policy implications. However, our reanalysis
finds no evidence of a flattening in the relationship between institutional variables and eco-
nomic growth. Focusing on democracy, we show that this variable's impact continues to be
precisely estimated and, if anything, a little larger than the beginning of the sample.


References
Acemoglu, D., Naidu, S., Restrepo, P., & Robinson, J. A. (2019). Democracy does cause
      growth. Journal of Political Economy , 127 (1), 47­100.
Arellano, M., & Bond, S. (1991). Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
      evidence and an application to employment equations. The Review of Economic Studies ,
      58 (2), 277­297.
Barro, R. J. (1991). Economic growth in a cross section of countries. The Quarterly Journal
      of Economics , 106 (2), 407­443.
Barro, R. J., & Sala-i Martin, X. (1992). Convergence. Journal of Political Economy , 100 (2),
      223­251.
Caselli, F., Esquivel, G., & Lefort, F. (1996). Reopening the convergence debate: a new look
      at cross-country growth empirics. Journal of Economic Growth , 1 (3), 363­389.
Hahn, J., Hausman, J. A., & Kuersteiner, G. M. (2001). Bias corrected instrumental variables
      estimation for dynamic panel models with fixed effects. Available at SSRN 276592 .
Islam, N. (1995). Growth empirics: a panel data approach. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
      nomics , 110 (4), 1127­1170.
Knight, M., Loayza, N., & Villanueva, D. (1993). Testing the neoclassical theory of economic
      growth: a panel data approach. IMF Staff Papers , 40 (3), 512­541.
Kremer, M., Willis, J., & You, Y. (2021). Converging to convergence. NBER Macro Annual
      2021 .
Loayza, N. (1994). A test of the international convergence hypothesis using panel data. World
      Bank Publications, Policy Research Working Paper , 1333 .
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press,
      Cambridge.




                                              11
Figures and Tables

                                Figure 1: Empirical distribution of the underlying c 's and c 's

           Panel A: Probability density of the c 's                                                                                       Panel B: Cumulative density of the c 's
                                                                                                                                1.0



                                                                                                                                0.8

           15




                                                                                                          Cummulative density
                                                                                    Pooled coefficient
                                                                                                                                0.6


           10
                                                                                                                                0.4
 Density




                                                                                                                                                                                         Pooled coefficient
            5                                                                                                                   0.2



                                                                                                                                0.0
            0
                                                                                                                                         -0.6              -0.4           -0.2                       0.0
                -0.8                 -0.6           -0.4      -0.2                0.0
                                                        c                                                                                                         c




           Panel C: Probability density of the c 's                                                                                       Panel D: Cumulative density of the c 's
                                                                                                                                1.0



                                                                                                                                0.8

           250
                                                                                                          Cummulative density




                                                                                                                                0.6
           200



           150                                                                                                                  0.4
 Density




           100
                                                                                                                                0.2

            50
                            Panama                                   Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                0.0
                0
                                                                                                                                      -0.002       0.000          0.002          0.004                        0.006
                    -0.10                   -0.05           0.00                                0.05
                                                       c                                                                                                          c

Notes: The figure presents estimates of the distribution of the country-specific coefficients of convergence (the c 's), and the
weights (the c 's, defined in Proposition 1). The empirical probability density and the cumulative density are reported on the
left and the right-hand side panels respectively. In Panel A, the dashed line indicates the estimate ^ from equation (2) (when
no country heterogeneity is allowed).




                                                                                                         12
                      Figure 2: Decomposition of ^ across decades


              0.010




              0.005




              0.000




             -0.005
                      1960-1969   1970-1979   1980-1989    1990-1999   2000-2009    2010-2019

Notes: The figure reports the estimate    ^ from equation (2) (when no country heterogeneity is allowed) by
decade shown by the blue bar. This estimate is decomposed in two terms (see Proposition 1): the underlying
distribution of the c 's shown by the orange bar and the bias shown by the green bars.




                                                    13
Figure 3: Estimates of the relationship of Polity 2 and economic growth over time

                                             Panel A: Dependent variable is 10-year changes
                                                    10 yct = t xct + t yct + t + ct

                             0.03



                             0.02



                             0.01
                    Polity




                             0.00



                             -0.01



                             -0.02
                                     1960           1970        1980            1990          2000     2010



                                             Panel B: Dependent variable is first difference
                                                     yct = t xct + t yct + t + ct

                             0.010




                             0.005
                    Polity




                             0.000




                             -0.005
                                      1960         1970      1980        1990          2000     2010   2020

        Notes: The figure reports estimates of the relationship between the Polity 2 score and economic growth and
        95% confidence intervals over time, Namely, we plot the coefficient t in the equation indicated in the panel
        labels. Panel A uses as dependent variable the 10-year change in log of GDP per capita, while Panel B uses
        annual changes (first differences). Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                    14
        Figure 4: Estimates of  across different specification and decades




                                                                                                                         Specifications with country fixed effects
                                             0.005
                                                                                                                  0.2
             Kremer et al.'s specification




                                                                                                                  0.1

                                             0.000                                                                0.0

                                                                                                                  -0.1

                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                        -0.005
                                                                                                                  -0.3

                                                                                                                  -0.4
                                        -0.010
                                                     1970-1979   1980-1989   1990-1999   2000-2009   2010-2019

                                                                         Specification:
                                                            yct=+yct-1+t+ct               yct=c+yct-1+t+ct
                                                            yct=c+yct-1+t+Dct+ct          yct=c+yct-1+t+cDct+ct


Notes: The figure report estimates of the coefficient of convergence () as well as 95% confidence intervals
across four different specifications. The first is Kremer et al.'s specification of unconditional convergence, which
does not include country fixed effects (shown by the black bars). The second is a specification that adds country
fixed effects to this baseline (shown by the orange bars). The third adds our dichotomous measure of democracy
as a control, focusing on the OLS specification (shown by blue bars). Our final specification allows the effects
of democracy to be varying across countries green bars). Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                             15
                                                       Figure 5: Correlation of country fixed effects over decades


                                                              Panel A: Main dependent is first difference, yct = yct-1 + t + c,d + ct

                                     0.5                                                                                                                 0.5
  Country fixed effect, decade t+1




                                                                                                                      Country fixed effect, decade t+2
                                     0.0                                                                                                                 0.0




                                     -0.5
                                                                                                                                                         -0.5
                                               -0.5                         0.0                          0.5                                                       -0.5                    0.0                          0.5
                                                                  Country fixed effect, decade t                                                                                 Country fixed effect, decade t




                                                      Panel B: Main dependent variable is 10-year changes, yc,t+10 - yc,t = yct + t + c,d + ct
                                     4.0                                                                                                                 4.0
  Country fixed effect, decade t+1




                                                                                                                      Country fixed effect, decade t+2




                                     2.0                                                                                                                 2.0




                                     0.0                                                                                                                 0.0




                                     -2.0                                                                                                                -2.0




                                     -4.0                                                                                                                -4.0
                                            -4.0           -2.0                0.0                 2.0          4.0                                             -4.0      -2.0                0.0                 2.0         4.0
                                                                  Country fixed effect, decade t                                                                                 Country fixed effect, decade t


Notes: We estimate the regression specified in the panel label which allows the country fixed effects to vary across decades and
then plot these decadal fixed effect estimates against each other. Panels A and B use as dependent variable the first difference (the
10-year change) in log of GDP per capita, while Panels C and D use 10-year changes. The panels to the left (right) compare shows
the correlation between the estimated country fixed effect for a decade starting at year t with a decade starting at year t+10 (t+20).




                                                                                                               16
                   Table 1: Convergence patterns for the key covariates


                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)         (5)
                                  Pooled                            Country-level coefficients
                                 coefficient     Mean         25th quantile 50th quantile 75th quantile

Log GDP per capita                   0.000       -0.063          -0.074             -0.040              -0.017
Polity 2                            -0.029       -0.107          -0.165             -0.087               0.000
Rule of law                         -0.008       -0.346          -0.487             -0.295              -0.169
Property rights                     -0.032       -0.239          -0.360             -0.228              -0.133
Government expenditure              -0.055       -0.215          -0.313             -0.168              -0.069
Credit                               0.004       -0.221          -0.404             -0.114              -0.013
Years of schooling                  -0.020       -0.506          -0.653             -0.440              -0.321
 Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficient of unconditional convergence (, see equation (2)) in column
 1. The remaining columns report moments (including the mean and the 25th, 50th and 75th quantiles) of
 the distribution of the underlying country-specific estimates of convergence (c 's, see equation (1)). We show
 results for the key variables used by Kremer et al. including (source in parenthesis): Polity 2 (Polity IV Project),
 Rule of law (Worldwide Governance Indicators), Property rights (Heritage Freedom), Government expenditure
 (World Development Indicators) and Years of schooling (Barro-Lee).




                                                         17
Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of democracy on (log) GDP per capita


                                   (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)
                                  Dependent variable is Log GDP per capita

                                                   Estimator...
                                  Within     Arellano-Bond HHK                   IV

      A. Effect of Democracy on Log GDP

      Democracy                    0.787           0.875           1.165       0.966
                                  (0.226)         (0.374)         (0.370)     (0.562)
      Observations                 6,336           6,161           6336        6,312

      B. Effect of Democracy on Log GDP and its change over time

      Democracy                    0.678           0.872           0.886       1.346
                                  (0.214)         (0.374)         (0.394)     (0.616)
      Democracy × Trend            0.383           0.270           0.442       0.716
                                  (0.246)         (0.362)         (0.357)     (0.368)
      Observations                 6,336           6,161           6,336       6,312
      Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on log GDP
      per capita following Acemoglu et al. (2019). Democracy is measured as a di-
      chotomous variable to minimize measurement error. Panel A replicates the
      results in Acemoglu et al. (2019), and Panel B extends the regression by al-
      lowing an interaction between the measure of democracy and a linear function
      of time. Column 1, 2, 3 and 4 present results from the within estimator, the
      Arellano and Bond's (1991) GMM estimator, the HHK (Hahn, Hausman, &
      Kuersteiner, 2001) estimator, and an IV (exploiting regional waves of democ-
      ratization) respectively. All regressions include four lags of log GDP per capita.
      Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                             18
A     Appendix for Acemoglu and Molina (Not For Publi-
      cation)
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Let c = {1, 2, ..., C } designate a country and C be the total number of countries. Suppose that
the main outcome of interest, yct , follows the AR(1) process

                                        yct = c + c yct-1 + ct ,

so that the joint data generating process for all countries follows equation (1). Let Tc = {t|yc,t 
R  yc,t-1  R}. Let us first consider the OLS estimate of country-specific persistent parameter
^c for country c (with country-specific intercepts). This can be written as:

                                         tTc (yc     - y c )(yc,t-1 - y c,- )
                                ^c =                                   2
                                                                              ,                                   (5)
                                                  tTc (yc,t-1 - y c,- )

                      yc,t                          yc,t-1
where y c = tTT   c
                   c
                        and y c,- = tTT   c
                                            c
                                                   . Because the DGP is given by (1), we have
plim ^c = c .
   Now consider the OLS estimate of ,         ^, in the cross-country equation of unconditional
convergence without country-specific intercepts (country fixed effects) as in equation (2):

                                       cC       tTc (yc,t    - y )(yc,t-1 - y - )
                             ^=                                            2
                                                                                  ,                               (6)
                                            cC          tTc (yc,t-1 - y - )

                         yc,t                                yc,t-1
where y = cC tTT     c
                           and y - = cC tTT    c
                                                     .
                 cC c                       cC c
  We first prove part 2 of the proposition, thus establishing that

                                                    C
                                            ^=           c ^c + 0 k.                                              (7)
                                                   c=1


   To do so, we expand equation (6), and write the right-hand side, in terms of the ^c 's from
equation (5). The numerator of this expression can be written as

               (yc,t - y )(yc,t-1 - y - ) =              yc,t (yc,t-1 - y - )
      cC tTc                                    cC tTc

                                            =            yc,t (yc,t-1 - y c,- ) +            y c (y c,- - y - )
                                                cC tTc                              cC tTc

                                            =            yc,t (yc,t-1 - y c,- ) +        Tc y c (y c,- - y - ),
                                                cC tTc                              cC


where the first equality uses the fact that              tTc (yc,t-1   - y - ) = 0, while the second equality

                                                         A1
rearranges terms. The final equality follows from the fact that y c , y c,- , and y - do not vary
with t. Analogously, we can rewrite the denominator as

                        (yc,t-1 - y - )2 =             (yc,t-1 - y c,- )2 +        Tc (y c,t-1 - y - )2 .
               cC tTc                         cC tTc                          cC



   Now, letting c =        tTc (yct-1   - y c- )2 , equation (6) can be written as

                                        cC  c ^c +       cC Tc y c (y c,- - y - )
                              ^=                                                2
                                          cTc c +       cC Tc (y c,t-1 - y t-1 )
                                    C
                                =         c ^c + 0 k,
                                    c=1


whereon
                                                 c
                      c =                                                 c = {1, ..., C }
                                cC c      +     cC   Tc (y c,- - y - )2
                                  C
                      0 = 1 -           c                                                                    (8)
                                  c=1

                               cC Tc y c (y c,- - y - )
                      k=                             2
                                                        .
                                 cC Tc (y c,- - y - )


   Since plim ^c = c , we can substitute c for ^c in the limit, which gives us the desired result.
Note also that c  0 and thus c  [0, 1].
   To prove part 1 of the proposition, assume  ^c = 0 c, and then substitute

                                                              0 k
                                                c = c -                                                      (9)
                                                              C^c

in equation (7) and simplify terms. It is straightforward to see that c need not be between 0
and 1, and C  c=1 c is not in general equal to one. Our empirical results in Section 3.2 provide
one instance in which c is not between 0 and 1 for a significant fraction of countries in the
sample, and their sum is very different from 1.
    Finally, we establish part 3 by proving that, for any c, limTc  c  R. Let us drop
the country subscript c, since we will work with the equation for a single country: yt-1 =
 + yt-2 + t-1 , or
                                    yt-1 =  + yt-2 + t-1 ,

where  =  + 1. Substituting successively, the solution to this equation takes the form

                          yt-1 = a + b t-1 + 1  t-2 + 2  t-3 + ... + t-1 ,                                  (10)



                                                         A2
                            
where b = y0 - a and a = 1-  
                              (a represents the steady state and b is the distance of the initial
value to the steady state). Then

                                =         (yt-1 - y t-1 )2
                                     tT
                                                         T           2
                                           2      1
                                =         yt -1 -             yt-1
                                     tT
                                                  T     t=1

                                 = a2 T + Op (1) - [a2 T + Op (1)]
                                 = Op (1),



where the second equality follows by rearranging terms. The third equality follows from sub-
stituting for equation (10) and using the hypothesis that -2 < c < 0, or equivalently | | < 1,
                                                                                      2
                                                              2        1      T
which implies that yt-1 converges, and thus both tT yt         -1 and T       t=1 yt-1  are Op (T ).
The fourth equality simply notes that their difference is Op (1), which also implies that the limit
of  is finite.
    The final step is to characterize plimc . The result above implies that if T = minc {Tc }  ,
then c is finite for any c. Additionally, both y c,- and y - converge to limit values (since
each country converges to its steady state, again my hypothesis). However, because of the
c terms, these values are country-specific. Consequently, we have that limT  c = 0 c 
{1, 2, ..., C } and 0 = 1. Using an analogous argument, we also have limT  y c = 0 and thus
limT  k = 0. Finally, combining these results with equations (9) and (6), we can conclude
that limT  c = 0 c  C and limT             ^ = 0.




                                                  A3
A.2                     Replication of Figures and Tables using Penn World Tables

                             Figure A-1: Empirical distribution of the underlying c 's and c 's

            Panel A: Probability density of the c 's                                                                                           Panel B: Cumulative density of the c 's
                                                                                                                                  1.0



                                                                                                                                  0.8

            15




                                                                                                            Cummulative density
                                                                            Pooled coefficient


                                                                                                                                  0.6


            10
                                                                                                                                  0.4
  Density




                                                                                                                                                                               Pooled coefficient
             5                                                                                                                    0.2



                                                                                                                                  0.0
             0
                                                                                                                                        -0.4                   -0.2                           0.0             0.2
                 -0.8           -0.6          -0.4          -0.2          0.0                      0.2
                                                     c                                                                                                                  c




            Panel C: Probability density of the c 's                                                                                           Panel D: Cumulative density of the c 's
                                                                                                                                  1.0



                                                                                                                                  0.8

            250
                                                                                                            Cummulative density




                                                                                                                                  0.6
            200



            150                                                                                                                   0.4
  Density




            100
                                                                                                                                  0.2

             50
                                                                                                 Belarus
                                                                                                                                  0.0
                 0
                                                                                                                                    -0.030            -0.020          -0.010                        0.000   0.010
                     -0.10             0.00          0.10          0.20                          0.30
                                                      c                                                                                                                  c

 Notes: The figure presents estimates of the distribution of the country-specific coefficients of convergence (the c 's), and the
 weights (the c 's, defined in Proposition 1). The empirical probability density and the cumulative density are reported on the
 left and the right-hand side panels respectively. In Panel A, the dashed line indicates the estimate ^ from equation (2) (when
 no country heterogeneity is allowed).




                                                                                                           A4
                      Figure A-2: Decomposition of ^ across decades


              0.010




              0.005




              0.000




             -0.005

                       1960-1969   1970-1979   1980-1989   1990-1999   2000-2009    2010-2019

Notes: The figure reports the estimate    ^ from equation (2) (when no country heterogeneity is allowed) by
decade shown by the blue bar. This estimate is decomposed in two terms (see Proposition 1): the underlying
distribution of the c 's shown by the orange bar and the bias shown by the green bars.




                                                   A5
Figure A-3: Estimates of the relationship of Polity 2 and economic growth over
                                     time

                                           Panel A: Dependent variable is 10-year changes
                                                  10 yct = t xct + t yct + t + ct

                           0.03



                           0.02



                           0.01
                  Polity




                           0.00



                           -0.01



                           -0.02
                                   1960           1970        1980            1990          2000     2010



                                           Panel B: Dependent variable is first difference
                                                   yct = t xct + t yct + t + ct

                           0.010




                           0.005
                  Polity




                           0.000




                           -0.005
                                    1960         1970      1980        1990          2000     2010   2020

      Notes: The figure reports estimates of the relationship between the Polity 2 score and economic growth and
      95% confidence intervals over time, Namely, we plot the coefficient t in the equation indicated in the panel
      labels. Panel A uses as dependent variable the 10-year change in log of GDP per capita, while Panel B uses
      annual changes (first differences). Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                  A6
       Figure A-4: Estimates of  across different specification and decades



                                             0.010




                                                                                                                         Specifications with country fixed effects
                                                                                                                  0.2
             Kremer et al.'s specification




                                             0.005
                                                                                                                  0.1

                                                                                                                  0.0
                                             0.000
                                                                                                                  -0.1

                                        -0.005                                                                    -0.2

                                                                                                                  -0.3

                                        -0.010                                                                    -0.4
                                                     1970-1979   1980-1989   1990-1999   2000-2009   2010-2019

                                                                         Specification:
                                                            yct=+yct-1+t+ct               yct=c+yct-1+t+ct
                                                            yct=c+yct-1+t+Dct+ct          yct=c+yct-1+t+cDct+ct


Notes: The figure report estimates of the coefficient of convergence () as well as 95% confidence intervals
across four different specifications. The first is Kremer et al.'s specification of unconditional convergence, which
does not include country fixed effects (shown by the black bars). The second is a specification that adds country
fixed effects to this baseline (shown by the orange bars). The third adds our dichotomous measure of democracy
as a control, focusing on the OLS specification (shown by blue bars). Our final specification allows the effects
of democracy to be varying across countries green bars). Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                             A7
                                                    Figure A-5: Correlation of country fixed effects over decades


                                                           Panel A: Main dependent is first difference, yct = yct-1 + t + c,d + ct
                                     0.5                                                                                                          0.5
  Country fixed effect, decade t+1




                                                                                                               Country fixed effect, decade t+2
                                     0.0                                                                                                          0.0




                                     -0.5                                                                                                         -0.5
                                             -0.5                             0.0                        0.5                                              -0.5                       0.0                       0.5
                                                                 Country fixed effect, decade t                                                                         Country fixed effect, decade t




                                                    Panel B: Main dependent variable is 10-year changes, yc,t+10 - yc,t = yct + t + c,d + ct
                                     4.0                                                                                                          4.0
  Country fixed effect, decade t+1




                                                                                                               Country fixed effect, decade t+2




                                     2.0                                                                                                          2.0




                                     0.0                                                                                                          0.0




                                     -2.0                                                                                                         -2.0




                                     -4.0                                                                                                         -4.0
                                            -4.0          -2.0                0.0                 2.0    4.0                                             -4.0    -2.0                0.0                 2.0   4.0
                                                                 Country fixed effect, decade t                                                                         Country fixed effect, decade t


Notes: We estimate the regression specified in the panel label which allows the country fixed effects to vary across decades
and then plot these decadal fixed effect estimates against each other. Panels A and B use as dependent variable the first
difference (the 10-year change) in log of GDP per capita, while Panels C and D use 10-year changes. The panels to the
left (right) compare shows the correlation between the estimated country fixed effect for a decade starting at year t with
a decade starting at year t+10 (t+20).




                                                                                                        A8
                 Table A-1: Convergence patterns for the key covariates


                                    (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)         (5)
                                  Pooled                          Country-level coefficients
                                 coefficient     Mean       25th quantile 50th quantile 75th quantile

Log GDP per capita                   0.000       -0.050         -0.067              -0.044              -0.023
Polity 2                            -0.029       -0.107         -0.165              -0.087               0.000
Rule of law                         -0.008       -0.346         -0.487              -0.295              -0.169
Property rights                     -0.032       -0.238         -0.360              -0.228              -0.133
Government expenditure              -0.055       -0.215         -0.313              -0.168              -0.069
Credit                               0.004       -0.221         -0.403              -0.114              -0.013
Years of schooling                  -0.020       -0.506         -0.653              -0.440              -0.321
 Notes: The table reports estimates of coefficient of unconditional convergence (, see equation (2)) in column
 1. The remaining columns report moments (including the mean and the 25th, 50th and 75th quantiles) of
 the distribution of the underlying country-specific estimates of convergence (c 's, see equation (1)). We show
 results for the key variables used by Kremer et al. including (source in parenthesis): Polity 2 (Polity IV Project),
 Rule of law (Worldwide Governance Indicators), Property rights (Heritage Freedom), Government expenditure
 (World Development Indicators) and Years of schooling (Barro-Lee).




                                                      A9
Table A-2: Estimates of the Effect of democracy on (log) GDP per capita


                                   (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)
                                  Dependent variable is Log GDP per capita

                                                   Estimator...
                                  Within     Arellano-Bond HHK                 IV

       A. Effect of Democracy on Log GDP

       Democracy                   0.009           0.014          0.005      0.005
                                  (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.007)    (0.010)
       Observations                5,961           5,796          5,961      5,937

       B. Effect of Democracy on Log GDP and its change over time

       Democracy                   0.009           0.014          0.004      0.006
                                  (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.011)
       Democracy × Trend           0.000           0.004          0.001      0.002
                                  (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.004)    (0.005)
       Observations                5,961           5,796          5,961      5,937
       Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of democracy on log GDP
       per capita following Acemoglu et al. (2019). Democracy is measured as a di-
       chotomous variable to minimize measurement error. Panel A replicates the
       results in Acemoglu et al. (2019), and Panel B extends the regression by al-
       lowing an interaction between the measure of democracy and a linear function
       of time. Column 1, 2, 3 and 4 present results from the within estimator, the
       Arellano and Bond's (1991) GMM estimator, the HHK (Hahn et al., 2001) es-
       timator, and an IV (exploiting regional waves of democratization) respectively.
       All regressions include four lags of log GDP per capita. Standard errors are
       clustered at the country level.




                                            A10
