                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PHYSICIAN-INDUCED DEMAND:
           EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S DRUG PRICE ZERO-MARKUP POLICY

                                       Hanming Fang
                                        Xiaoyan Lei
                                         Julie Shi
                                         Xuejie Yi

                                     Working Paper 28998
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28998


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Mark G. Duggan, Jin Feng, Michael N. Grossman, Timothy Layton, Ming Li, Anh
Nguyen, Haoran Peng, Jia Xiang, Junjian Yi, Winnie Yip, Ye Yuan, Zhigang Tao and
participants at the Public Economics Summer School at Tsinghua University (2019) and iHEA
World Congress (2017, Boston), and seminars at Fudan University, National University of
Singapore, University of Hong Kong, ShanghaiTech University, and Sun Yat-Sen University for
helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Hanming Fang, Xiaoyan Lei, Julie Shi, and Xuejie Yi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Physician-Induced Demand: Evidence from China's Drug Price Zero-Markup Policy
Hanming Fang, Xiaoyan Lei, Julie Shi, and Xuejie Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 28998
July 2021
JEL No. I10,I11,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

We use a natural experiment in China's health care reform, in which the government mandated
zero markups for drugs sold in public hospitals, to study physician-induced demand for medical
care. We develop a theoretical model that robustly predicts that the drug price zero markup policy
(ZMP) will lead to a reduction in the demand for drugs but an increase in the demand for non-
drug services, only when the demands for drugs and non-drug services are at least partially
physician induced. Our model also yields testable predictions of the impact of the ZMP regarding
the equilibrium number of treated patients. Exploiting the staggered rollout of the ZMP and a
unique claims data set, we find that, at the admission level, the reform decreases drug expenses
by 63.4 log points (47.0 percent), but the reduction in drug expenses is almost fully substituted by
the increases in expenses for non-drug services. Quantitatively similar results are also obtained at
the physician and at the hospital levels. We also show that the ZMP reduces the number of
patients in the treated hospitals, as predicted by the model, and that the reform has little impact on
the quality of health care proxied by the readmission rate.

Hanming Fang                                      Julie Shi
Department of Economics                           School of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center                         Peking University
for Political Science and Economics               Beijing 100871, CHINA
133 South 36th Street                             jshi@pku.edu.cn
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            Xuejie Yi
and NBER                                          Department of Economics
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu                        Stanford University
                                                  Stanford, CA 94305
Xiaoyan Lei                                       xuejieyi@stanford.edu
CCER
National School of Development
Peking University
Beijing 100871, CHINA
xylei@nsd.pku.edu.cn
1        Introduction
     Health care expenditures are growing rapidly in all countries around the world (World Health Organiza-
tion 2018). A large empirical literature provides explanations for and policy recommendations to curb the
rising health care expenditure. The literature can be divided into two strands. The first strand focuses on
demand-side explanations, including the moral hazard in the demand for medical care resulting from third-
party (i.e., insurance) payments. This strand includes the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Newhouse
et al. 1993) and the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Finkelstein et al. 2012).1 The second strand
focuses on supply-side behavior. For example, Finkelstein et al. (2016) use patient migrations to show that
about half of the variation in medical expenditures across the regions in the United States was driven by
physician behavior. An important literature in the second strand aims to document empirically how health
care providers respond to financial incentives. The literature examines how changes in reimbursement rules,
or medical prices more generally, affect physicians' (or providers') diagnostic, prescription, and treatment
choices (see, e.g., Gruber and Owings 1996; Yip 1998; Dafny 2005; Clemens and Gottlieb 2014; Alexander
2020, among others).2 Although the contexts of the studies differ in the sources of price changes or the mar-
gin of the physicians' behavioral response, the literature has found that, somewhat paradoxically, physicians
tend to prescribe more services in response to either an increase or a decrease in the related reimbursement
rates. The typical explanation is that when the price of a service is lowered, physicians will prescribe more
of the service in order to make up for the lower unit price to maintain an income target; when the price
of a service is raised, physicians will have an incentive to prescribe more of that service to increase his/her
income. However, as is well known, empirical tests for models of physician-induced demand are remarkably
challenging because it is difficult to separate the demand and the supply sides; overuse of medical procedures
or drugs could also reflect consumer demand and/or physicians' belief about consumer demand (see Currie
et al. 2014).
     In this paper, we exploit a drug pricing reform in China, called zero-markup policy (ZMP), which had
a staggered rollout starting in 2009, to provide evidence of physician induced demand. Prior to the ZMP,
hospitals in China were allowed to mark up drug prices by up to 15 percent of the wholesale prices, and
the profits from drug sales were commonly viewed as one of hospitals' key profit generators. The ZMP
mandates that hospitals can only charge drug prices at their procurement cost with zero markup (i.e., no
profit is allowed from drug sales). We first develop a theoretical model to analyze how the ZMP may affect
physicians' choices of drugs and non-drug services when treating patients. The model robustly predicts that
the ZMP will lead to a reduction in the demand for drugs but an increase in the demand for non-drug
services, only when the demands for drugs and non-drug services are at least partially physician induced.
Our model also yields additional testable predictions of the impacts of the ZMP on the equilibrium number
of treated patients.
     The ZMP was first rolled out in basic medical facilities, including township or community health centers;
    1 Hall   and Jones (2007) explain the rising health spending as the rational response to the growth of income per person.
    2A   detailed but selective review of the related literature is provided below.



                                                                   1
a few years later, it was implemented in higher-tier hospitals located in the county seats. We exploit the
staggered rollout of the ZMP and a unique comprehensive claims data set to empirically test the predictions
of the model. Using a difference-in-differences (DID) empirical strategy, we find that the drug expenses of
township health centers (the treatment group) dropped by 63 log points (47 percent) compared with those
of county hospitals (the control group); at the same time, we find that expenses for non-drug services were
28 log points (32 percent) higher in the township health centers than in the county hospitals. Interestingly,
we find that although the expenses increased for all categories of non-drug services in the township health
centers (the treatment group), the relative magnitude of the increases depends on how discretionary the
non-drug services are: the increase is the largest (around 30 log points or 35 percent) for spending on tests
and examinations, bed fees, and nursing services where physicians are likely to have more discretion on the
amount to be ordered, while the increases are smaller (about 7 log points or 7 percent) for less discretionary
medical materials. Overall, we find that the reduction in drug expenses is almost fully compensated by the
increases in expenses for non-drug services, and thus the patients' total medical spending does not change
significantly. We also find that the ZMP reduces the number of patients in the treated hospitals relative to
that in the control hospitals. The empirical evidence is consistent with the model's prediction only when the
demands for drugs and non-drug services are at least partially physician induced.
   Our paper contributes to the literature on physician-induced demand in several ways. Relative to the
existing literature, we analyze a unique empirical setting of the effect of the ZMP to test for physician-
induced demand. The literature tends to find that, in general physicians prescribe more in response to a
decrease in the price to maintain an income target. However, this chain of reasoning has some caveats.
An increase in prescriptions following a decrease in price is also consistent with patient-driven demand, as
long as the patient's out-of-pocket expense is positively linked to the price; thus, in general it is impossible
to distinguish patient-driven demand from physician-induced demand. However, more prescriptions raise
physicians' income only if each prescription results in a positive profit, a condition that is precisely violated
in our case under the ZMP. Indeed, our theoretical model yields robust predictions of the impact of the ZMP
on physicians' choices between drugs and non-drug services, and highlight the stark contrasts of the impact
on ZMP with or without physician-induced demand: if drug demand is completely patient driven, it will
never be lower following the ZMP; however, the demand for drugs may be lower only if it is at least partially
physician induced. Moreover, we also examine the impact of the ZMP on the demand for non-drug services,
and test additional predictions from the model.


Related Literature. First and foremost, our paper contributes to the literature on how providers may
adjust their behaviors in response to financial incentives following price or income shocks, which is known
as the " physician-induced demand " literature. Since the seminal contribution by Arrow (1963), it has been
theoretically and empirically recognized that a central feature of the health care market is the agency
relationship between physicians and their patients, where physicians may exploit this agency relationship by
providing excessive care to maintain their incomes. McGuire (2000) provides a comprehensive review of the
literature on physician agency. Yip (1998) uses the Medicare fee reduction for coronary artery bypass grafting


                                                       2
(CABG) to test for physician-induced demand, and finds that physicians whose incomes were reduced the
most by the Medicare fee cuts performed higher volumes of CABGs. The estimates suggest that thoracic
surgeons recoup about 70 percent of their revenue loss by increasing the volume and intensity of CABGs.
Gruber and Owings (1996) use the cross-state variations in the decline in fertility in the United States in
the 1970s as a plausibly exogenous change in the financial environment facing obstetrician/gynecologists
to test for physician-induced demand for more profitable cesarean deliveries. They find that a 10 percent
decline in the fertility rate is associated with a 0.97 percentage point increase in the cesarean delivery rate.
Dafny (2005) studies hospital responses to changes in diagnosis-specific prices by exploiting a 1988 policy
reform that generated large price changes for 43 percent of Medicare admissions. She finds that hospitals,
particularly for-profit hospitals, responded primarily by upcoding patients to diagnosis codes with the largest
price increases. Similarly, Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) study the impact of Medicare's area-specific shocks
on payment rates for physician services in 1997. They find that areas with higher payment shocks experience
significant increases in health care supply; specifically, a 2 percent increase in payment rates led to a 5
percent increase in care provision per patient. The effects were twice as strong in elective procedures, such
as cataract surgery, as in less discretionary services, like dialysis. Fang and Gong (2017) study potential
Medicare overbilling based on the hours worked implied by the service codes physicians submit to Medicare,
and find suggestive evidence that the coding patterns of the flagged physicians seem to be responsive to
financial incentives: within code clusters that have different levels of service intensity, the physicians tend
to submit more higher-intensity service codes, compared with the unflagged physicians. Geruso and Layton
(2020) exploit large and geographically heterogeneous increases in Medicare Advantage (MA) enrollment
and variations in the financial incentives for physicians within county markets to identify upcoding. They
find that a 10 percentage point increase in MA penetration leads to a 0.64 percentage point increase in
the reported average risk score in a county. Alexander (2020) studies the effect of a pilot payment reform
program in which hospitals paid doctors bonuses for reducing the total costs of treatment for each Medicare
admission. She identifies the effects of the bonus program by comparing the behavior of a given doctor who
works at multiple hospitals, some of which participate in the program and others that do not. She finds that
doctors respond to the bonuses by changing the composition of admitted patients and by sorting healthier
patients to participating hospitals.
   Our paper contributes to the above literature by analyzing the ZMP, which is a unique policy experiment.
The ZMP essentially renders a previously "profitable" (for physicians and hospitals) segment of the heath care
sector completely unprofitable. This results in clean theoretical predictions of physicians' health care choices
with and without financial incentives. We highlight these sharp theoretical predictions through the detailed
analysis of a theoretical model. In this regard, our analysis complements the literature on physician-induced
demand.
   Our paper is also related to a small literature on the role of financial incentives in physicians' drug pre-
scription behavior. In the United States, pharmacies instead of hospitals dispense drugs; thus, hospitals and
physicians can only benefit from prescribing drugs indirectly if they receive payments from pharmaceutical
companies (see, e.g., Grennan et al. 2020). The literature on the effects of physicians' financial incentives


                                                       3
on drug prescription behavior mostly appears in contexts outside the United States. For example, Iizuka
(2012) shows that in Japan, where physicians can legally make profits by prescribing and dispensing drugs,
physicians' financial incentives can explain why cheaper generics are infrequently adopted. Similarly, Liu et
al. (2009) study how physicians' financial incentives affect their prescription decision on the choice of generic
versus brand-name drugs in Taiwan, where physicians prescribe and dispense drugs. There are also several
studies on China. Currie et al. (2014) conduct an audit study of physicians' decisions to prescribe antibiotics
by varying physicians' financial incentives, beliefs about what patients want, and desires to reciprocate for
a small gift. Their findings suggest that antibiotics abuse in China is largely driven by physicians' financial
incentives. Lu (2014) conducts a field audit experiment in which patients' ability to pay and intention to
purchase drugs from the doctors' hospitals were randomly assigned. Their findings also suggest the role
of physicians' financial incentives in their prescription behavior. Wu (2019) studies the impact of a reform
called the "drug percentage incentive scheme," which caps the percentage of revenue that a hospital can
receive from drug sales at 45 percent for all tertiary hospitals, on physician behavior. She finds that under
this policy the physicians increased non-drug expenditures and decreased drug expenditures, keeping the
total expenditures almost unchanged.
    Our paper extends our understanding of the health care system in China, and we believe that the
results are also relevant for other developing countries where controlling health expenditures is likely to be
an important policy objective. Various health care reforms were implemented in China in recent decades;
however, detailed evaluations of the effects of the reforms, particularly the ZMP, are scarce.3 Two closely
related papers are Yi et al. (2015) and Chen et al. (2017). Using survey data on 43 township health
centers, Yi et al. (2015) exploit the variations in township health centers' reliance on revenue from drug
sales, and investigate whether the centers that relied more on revenue from drug sales under the ZMP
had greater reductions in revenue share from drug sales and greater increases in the supply of non-drug
services, compared with centers that relied less on revenue from drug sales. Chen et al. (2017) empirically
examine Shandong province's initial implementation of China's 2009 Essential Medications List policy. Using
a panel of 1,466 patients with hypertension and/or diabetes, they find that the policy reduced drug markups
by providers, but the lost drug revenue was compensated by the increased office visits, keeping the total
medical expenditure unchanged. We contribute to this literature by presenting a theoretical framework of
physician-induced demand, and deriving and testing the theoretical predictions of the effects of the ZMP.
We also employ a cleaner difference-in-differences identification strategy on a rich claims-level data set.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide the institutional background
related to the ZMP in China; in Section 3 we present a theoretical model that illustrates how physician-
induced demand can be inferred from the changes in physicians' choice of drugs and non-drug services in
response to the effects of the ZMP; in Section 4 we describe the data and present the summary statistics;
in Section 5 we present our empirical results on the impacts of the ZMP regarding drug, non-drug, and
total expenditures, as well as the quantities of drugs and patients' health outcomes; finally, in Section 6 we
   3 See   Wagstaff et al. 2009; Yip et al. 2012; Yip et al. 2019; and Burns and Liu 2017, among others, for an extensive review
of China's health care reforms.



                                                                4
conclude.



2      Institutional Background
     Public hospitals in China deliver more than 90% of the country's inpatient and outpatient services (Yip
et al., 2012). The prices of the medical services in the public hospitals are regulated by the government.
Physicians are employed by the public hospitals to provide diagnostic services, conduct tests, and dispense
drugs to patients. It is commonly known that the price schedule was distorted, in particular, labor-related
services were heavily under-priced;4 in contrast, hospitals were allowed to charge up to a 15 percent markup
over the drug procurement prices when selling drugs to patients. As the physicians are employed by hospitals,
their income (including bonuses) is highly dependent on hospitals' revenues. Although hospitals are public
facilities, they received very limited government funding. This led to severe over-prescription of drugs in
health care sector in China.5
     Although pharmacies are common in China, public hospitals account for around 80% of drug sales in
China. Prescription drugs are usually purchased in hospitals instead of from pharmacies for two reasons.
First, physicians encourage patients to fill prescriptions at the hospitals in order to increase hospital revenue.
Second, some pharmacies are not included in the insurance network from which prescriptions purchased are
eligible for reimbursement. For our analysis, we focus on inpatient visits, for which the medications are
always directly filled in the hospitals.
     China started to introduce universal national health insurance to its citizens, called the New Rural
Cooperative Medical Scheme (NRCMS) for rural residents and the Urban Resident Basic Medical Insurance
(URBMI) for urban residents in 2003 and 2007, respectively, in addition to the original Urban Employee
Medical Insurance (UEMI). To a large extent, the high drug expenses incurred in Chinese hospitals became
the financial burden of the national insurance system. To curb the unsustainable drug expenses and to
improve access to affordable, safe, and effective drugs, the Chinese government introduced an important
drug reform in 2009. The reform has three components: the most important component is called the zero-
markup policy (ZMP), and it is accompanied by two supplement policies, the Essential Medicines List (EML)
and centralized drug procurement. We now describe each component in more detail.


Zero-Markup Policy (ZMP). The most important component of the drug reform initiated in 2009 is the
ZMP, which prohibits hospitals from charging any markup on drug price, i.e., all drugs must be sold at the
procurement price with zero markup. In contrast, prior to the reform, hospitals were allowed to charge up
to 15 percent markup over the procurement price when selling drugs, which introduced perverse incentives
    4 For   example, the diagnostic fee in public hospitals was only 5 to 12 RMB, or about $0.8 to $1.8, according to the exchange
rate of 6.8 RMB for 1 US dollar in 2010.
    5 For   example, Li et al. (2012) find that antibiotics were prescribed about twice as frequently in China as that recommended
by the World Health Organization. See also Wagstaff et al. (2009) and Yip et al. (2012) for descriptions of these problems.




                                                                  5
for hospitals both in the number of drug prescriptions and in the negotiation of procurement prices.6 The
ZMP has a significant effect on hospitals' revenues because, prior to the ZMP, a large fraction of hospitals'
revenue came from the profit from selling drugs.7


National Essential Medicine List (EML). The 2009 drug reform also issued the national EML, which
is a list of 307 types of medicines that were initially selected by the central government based on financial cost,
safety, clinical efficacy, and availability. In addition, provincial governments can extend the list according to
the medical needs of the local population. The drugs on the EML can be updated once every three years.
Hospitals and physicians must prioritize the use of the drugs on the EML. By contrast, prior to the reform,
hospitals and physicians could freely determine which drugs to prescribe to their patients. The government
provides guidelines on the share of the essential drugs in the total drugs used for different levels of hospitals:
the share is 100 percent for township hospitals in rural areas and community hospitals in urban regions, 40
percent for county hospitals, and 25-30 percent for comprehensive hospitals in cities. These EML restrictions
were not binding for the hospitals in our sample.


Provincial Centralized Procurement of Drugs. In the 2009 drug reform, the provincial centralized
procurement changed the way drugs are procured. Before the reform, wholesale drug prices were negotiated
between hospitals and pharmaceutical firms; thus, the wholesale price for the same drug could vary across
different hospitals. The 2009 drug reform requires each province to establish a central platform where all the
essential medicines are purchased at prices determined by the bidding system in the platform, thus equalizing
the wholesale prices across hospitals for the same drug (in terms of brand/producer, packages, and dosage
units).8 Provincial centralized procurement authorizes the winning bidders to sell essential drugs to the
hospitals. But it is up to the hospitals' discretion on which brand to purchase as there are usually multiple
winning producers for the same drug. Therefore, the price dispersion within each molecule still exists after
the reform.


Time Line of the Drug Reform. The Chinese central government issued the drug reform policy in
August 2009. The provincial governments then established their detailed plans for local implementation of
the drug reform. It was decided that the ZMP would be rolled out in a staggered fashion. First, it would
apply to the basic medical facilities, namely, the village clinics, township health centers in rural areas, and
community health centers in urban areas. In addition, one-third of the counties would pilot the reform from
November 2009, and the remaining counties would enact the ZMP from April 2010. Second, the ZMP would
gradually extend to upper-level hospitals. From 2012, it would apply to the county hospitals; and beginning
   6 It   was noted that the markup allowance before the ZMP led the hospitals to prefer higher priced formulary equivalents
because they offered larger profit opportunities.
   7 According   to the National Health Ministry of China (2011), the profit from drug sales accounted for 51 percent of community
hospitals' total revenue in 2009.
   8 The    platform set bidding prices no higher than the wholesale price in the past three years. More information could be
found at http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2010/content_1765276.htm.



                                                                 6
in 2016, all public hospitals were required to implement the ZMP, including the most comprehensive general
hospitals. As public hospitals are the major provider of health care services in China, the ZMP has influenced
almost the entire Chinese population.


Study Region. In this paper we use data from a county in a western Chinese province. The sample
county had a population size of 422,000 in 2010, which was slightly larger than a median size county (with
population of 380,000 according to the 2010 Chinese Population Census). The county's per capita income in
2009 for rural residents was 7,324 RMB, slightly higher than the national average of 5,919 RMB (National
Bureau of Statistics of China, 2010). Overall our sample county is comparable to a median county in China
in terms of population demographics and other social and economic characteristics.
    The sample county implemented the ZMP in a staggered rollout: from October 1, 2010, all of the basic
medical facilities implemented the ZMP; however, the county hospitals were not required to do so until
October 2013. That is, in the period between October 1, 2010 and September 30, 2013, the county hospitals
could still charge up to 15% markup from their drug sale while the basic medical facilities were subject to
the ZMP.
    Both the basic medical facilities and the county hospitals in our sample county began to purchase from the
central procurement platform since the implementation of ZMP in the township centers. Our model would
take the potential change in wholesale price into consideration. Besides ZMP, the basic medical hospitals
were also required to prescribe 100 percent of the drugs from the EML, while county hospitals were not
restricted to only use the drugs on the EML. As will be discussed later, the EML prescription regulation
did not bind the county hospitals' prescription choice at all and only had a small impact on the increasing
share of EML in township hospitals. Thus, our results are mainly affected by the ZMP rather than the EML
prescription rule.


3     Model
    In this section, we present a model of physician behavior to illustrate how the ZMP can be an ideal policy
experiment to test for physician-induced demand.
    A physician observes a patient whose vector of characteristics Xi is summarized by index   (0, 1),
where a higher value of  indicates a more severely ill patient. The physician makes quantity choices on
two items that may improve the patient's health, drugs and non-drug medical services. In what follows, we
denote the quantity of drugs by d, and the quantity of non-drug services by s. Suppose that the health of
the patient is given by H (d, s; ) and we assume that H (·, ·; ) has the following properties:

Assumption 1 For all   (0, 1), H (·, ·; ) is concave and satisfies

                               lim H1 (d, s; )   =   +; lim H2 (d, s; ) = +;
                              d0                           s0
                             lim H1 (d, s; ) < 0;         lim H2 (d, s; ) < 0.
                            d+                            s+

Assumption 2 (Drugs and non-drug services are substitutes) For all   (0, 1), H12 < 0.

                                                      7
    Assumption 1 consists of two parts. The concavity assumption ensures that the first-order conditions
for the maximization problem below are sufficient; the "Inada-type" conditions at 0 and + ensure that
the optimal solution will be interior. Assumption 2 says that drugs and non-drug services are substitutes.
This assumption may seem strong, as in some cases drugs and non-drug services may be complements. For
example, the service itself may require some drugs to be successful. However, this assumption is without loss
of generality: if some minimum level of drug use, say d, and some service, say s, are essential for a patient's
recovery, we can interpret d and s as levels of drugs and non-drug services that exceed (d, s) .
    Let rd
         h
           and rs
                h
                  denote the retail prices of drugs and non-drug services charged by the hospital. Let c
denote the wholesale cost of drugs paid by the hospital. Chinese hospitals were allowed to charge a high
markup over the wholesale cost c before the ZMP, that is,

                                                                  h
                                                                 rd > c.

Suppose that, as a normalization, non-drug services are costly for the physician in terms of effort cost, e (s),
but otherwise they do not have a monetary cost.9
                                                                                           p
    The patient's out-of-pocket prices for drugs and non-drug services are, respectively, rd and rs
                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                    . Below we
will consider several cases of the relationship between patients' out-of-pocket price and hospital prices.
    We assume that the physician's maximization problem is given by
                                                   Physician Net Income
                                     Patient Surplus                                     Effort Cost of Service
                                               p          p
                                                                                                                        (1)
                                                                     h           h 
                V ()  max [H (d, s; ) -       rd d   -   rs s]   +   rd - c d + rs s -          e (s) ,
                          {d,s}



where   0 represents the weight of the physician's net income in the choice of (d, s) for the patient.

Remark 1 There are multiple interpretations of   0 in Problem (1). First, although the physicians
in Chinese hospitals are salaried workers, they may receive a bonus that is tied to the net revenues they
generate for the hospital (Yip and Hsiao, 2008). Second, even if the physicians are not directly paid a bonus,
the hospital may have an income target that needs to be met by all the employed physicians since the local
government only provides a limited subsidy toward the hospitals' regular operation needs. If the hospital's
income target is a constraint on the physicians' choices of drugs and non-drug services for the patients, a
positive  may reflect the Lagrangian multiplier of the hospital's income target constraint.

Definition 1 We say that the demands for drugs and non-drug services are completely patient driven
when  = 0.

Definition 2 We say that the demands for drugs and non-drug services are partially physician induced
when  > 0.
  9 For   example, to prescribe a test, the physician may need to spend more time with the patient to wait for and check the
results. We can also think of such effort cost as the opportunity cost, since providing some patients with non-drug services
would crowd out other patients from getting similar services.




                                                                   8
    For a given   0, the first-order conditions for the optimal d and s are given by

                                                                       p
                                                    H1 (d, s; )     = rd     h
                                                                         -  rd -c ,                                              (2)
                                           H2 (d, s; ) - e (s)         p
                                                                    = rs    h
                                                                         - rs .                                                  (3)

Definition 3 A zero-markup policy (ZMP) for drug prices is a policy that requires the hospital to set
 h = c.
rd

    We are interested in analyzing how the ZMP affects the quantity choices of d and s in Problem (1).
For now, fix the procurement wholesale price c. The ZMP reduces the hospital's drug prices from rd
                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                   >c
before the policy change to rd
                             h = c after the policy change. However, the ZMP may also change the patient's

                     p       p
out-of-pocket price rd , if rd is tied to the hospital price via the co-insurance rate, for example. We will
                                 p
consider different cases of how rd and rd
                                        h
                                          are related. There are two interesting cases to consider:

                                                            p                 p
Case 1 (Constant Co-Pay) The patient's out-of-pocket price rd is a constant: rd = rd  0.

                                                                 p
Case 2 (Constant Coinsurance) The patient's out-of-pocket price rd is proportional to the drug price
                          h    p    h
charged by the hospital, rd : rd = rd , where   (0, 1] is the co-insurance rate.

    Note that Case 1 covers the case if the patient has zero co-pay, which will be the case when rd = 0; Case
2 covers the case where the patient is uninsured, which will be the case when  = 1.10
    How the physician's quantity choices for drugs and non-drug services respond to the ZMP is a comparative
statics question for the maximization problem (1). We can express the first-order conditions (2)-(3) for
maximization problem (1) before and after the ZMP as:

                                                         H1 (d, s; )     =  d () ,                                               (4)
                                                H2 (d, s; ) - e (s)      =  s ()                                                 (5)

where  d () and  s () are parameters that multiply d and s, respectively in maximization problem (refP).
Specifically, using subscript 0 and 1 to denote the pre-ZMP and the post-ZMP, respectively, the first-order
conditions before and after the ZMP can be written as:

                                                              p
                                                 d0 ()     = rd     h
                                                                -  rd -c                                                        (6a)
                                                              p
                                                 d1 ()     = rd                                                                (6b)
                                                 s0 ()                 p
                                                           =  s1 () = rs    h
                                                                         - rs                                                   (6c)

       p
where rd is the patient's out-of-pocket price after the ZMP, whose value will depend on whether it is Case
(1) or Case (2). Since the ZMP does not change the prices of non-drug services, the comparative statics is
with respect to  d only.
  10 In   China, patients need to pay out of pocket for their inpatient expenditures until a deductible is reached, after which there
is a constant coinsurance rate. Therefore, the actual situation might lie between Case 1 and Case 2.



                                                                   9
   Applying the Implicit Function Theorem to the first order conditions as  d changes before and after the
ZMP, we have

                                      d              H22 - e
                                             =                    2 < 0,                                            (7)
                                       d       H11 (H22 - e ) - H12
                                      s                  H12
                                             = -                    2 > 0.                                          (8)
                                       d         H11 (H22 - e ) - H12
Proposition 1 If the demands for drugs and non-drug services are completely patient driven, i.e., if  = 0,
then ZMP will

   · in Case (1), have no effect on the demand for drugs and non-drug services;

   · in Case (2), increase the demand for drugs and decrease the demand for non-drug services.

Proof. Let  = 0. First, consider Case (1). The parameters of the maximization problem before and after
the ZMP do not change:

                                              d0 (0)   =  d1 (0) = rd ,
                                                                    p
                                              s0 (0)   =  s1 (0) = rs .

Thus, the ZMP has no effect: d0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) = d1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) and s0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) = s1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) .
                                                                                         

   Next, consider Case (2). The parameters of the maximization problem before and after the ZMP are

                                                                h
                                                   d0 (0)    = rd
                                                   d1 (0)    = c.

Since rd
       h
         > c, we have rd
                       h
                         > c. Thus, the ZMP leads to a decrease in  d :  d < 0. Applying  d < 0 to
(7) and (8), we obtain that in Case (2), d1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) > d0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) and s1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) < s0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) .
                                                                                                     



Proposition 2 If the demands for drugs and non-drug services are partially physician induced, i.e., if  > 0,
then the ZMP will

   · in Case (1), decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services;

   · in Case (2), decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services if and only
      if  > .

Proof. Now let  > 0. In Case (1), we have

                                                                h
                                            d0 ()      = rd -  rd -c
                                            d1 ()      = rd ,

thus, the ZMP leads to an increase in  d :  d   d1 () -  d0 () =  rd
                                                                   h
                                                                     - c > 0. Applying  d > 0 to
(7) and (8), we obtain that in Case (1), d1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) < d0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) and s1 ( d1 (0) ;  ) > s0 ( d0 (0) ;  ) .
                                                                                                     




                                                            10
   In Case (2), we have

                                                    h     h
                                        d0 ()    = rd -  rd -c
                                        d1 ()    = c.

Hence
                                       h     h                         h
                              d = c - rd -  rd -c            = ( -  ) rd -c .

Since rd
       h
         > c, we have  d > 0 if and only if  > . The claim follows by applying this result to (7) and (8).



   Propositions 1 and 2 clearly indicate that a positive  is a necessary condition for the demand for drugs to
decrease and the demand for non-drug services to increase, following the ZMP. Therefore, empirical evidence
that the demand for drugs decreases and the demand for non-drug services increases following the ZMP
suggests that the demands are partially physician induced, according to Definition 2. Proposition 2 indicates
that in Case (2),  must be larger than the patient's coinsurance rate  for the ZMP to reduce the demand for
drugs and increase the demand for non-drug services. If and only if the physician cares more about his/her
own net income than about the patient's surplus, that is, if and only if  >  , the ZMP could decrease the
quantity demanded for drugs and increase the quantity demanded for non-drug services.
   For patients who do not have insurance, that is, those with  = 1, it must be that  > 1; that is, the
physician must put a higher weight on the implications for his/her net income of the choices of d and s than
that on patient surplus. Furthermore, to the extent that patients have health insurance that reduces  to
be less than 1, for any physician payoff function, it is more likely for the condition  >  to be satisfied and,
according to Proposition 2, for the ZMP to induce lower demand for drugs and higher demand for non-drug
services.


3.1     Endogenous Wholesale Price
   Propositions 1 and 2 are robust to the possibility that wholesale price c may change due to the estab-
lishment of the procurement platform after the ZMP. In this subsection, we suppose that the new wholesale
price after the introduction of the ZMP is c
                                           ^.
   It is possible that the wholesale price c
                                           ^ after the ZMP will be higher than c, due to potential kickback
schemes between the procurer and the drug company, for example. However, there are scenarios under which
the new wholesale price c
                        ^ could be lower than c. For example, drug procurement was moved to the provincial
level; this could potentially increase the bargaining position of the government procurement and result in a
lower wholesale price.
   We have the following result:

Proposition 3 If the wholesale drug price responds to the ZMP, then

  1. When  = 0, the ZMP will


                                                      11
        (a) in Case (1), have no effect on the demand for drugs and non-drug services;

        (b) in Case (2), increase the demand for drugs and decrease the demand for non-drug services if
                  h
             c
             ^ > rd .

   2. When  > 0, the ZMP will

        (a) in Case (1), decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services.

        (b) in Case (2), decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services if
                              h       h
             and only if / > rd -c
                                 ^ / rd - c . Moreover, the higher c
                                                                   ^ is, the larger the reduction in the
             demand for drugs and the rise in the demand for non-drug services.

Proof. Claim 1(a) follows from applying (7) and (8), noting that in Case (1),  d0 (0) =  d1 (0) = rd ; thus
 d = 0. Similarly, Claim 1(b) follows from the fact that  d1 (0) =  c              h
                                                                    ^ >  d0 (0) = rd and thus  d > 0 if
     h
c
^ > rd .
   Claim 2(a) follows from the fact that  d1 () = rd >  d0 () = rd -  rd
                                                                       h
                                                                         - c . For Claim 2(b), note that

                                                    h     h
                                         d0 ()   = rd -  rd -c
                                         d1 ()   = c
                                                   ^.

Thus,
                                   h     h                       h
                              ^ - rd
                         d =  c      -  rd -c          = ( -  ) rd - c +  (^
                                                                           c - c) .

Simple algebra shows that  d > 0 if and only if

                                                   rh - c
                                                        ^
                                                  > d
                                                    h
                                                          .
                                                   rd - c

In addition, note that  d is increasing in c
                                           ^. Hence, following (7) and (8), the higher c
                                                                                       ^ is, the larger is the
reduction in the demand for drugs and the rise in the demand for non-drug services. Claim 2(b) follows.


3.2        Discussion
   In this subsection, we discuss some additional potential implications of the ZMP. We will first consider
the implications for the set of treated patients. Considering maximization problem (1), the set of treated
patients can be described as:
                                       ( ())  { : V (;  ())  0}

where  ()  ( d () ,  s ()), as described by Eq. (6). The envelope condition yields the following result:

                                          V (;  ())
                                                    = -d < 0.                                              (9)
                                              d
Thus, if the ZMP results in a positive change in  d , we would expect that the set of treated patients will
shrink, at least weakly. Combining Eq. (9) with our previous analysis, we have the following prediction:



                                                     12
Proposition 4 Suppose the wholesale drug price responds to the ZMP. Then the ZMP will affect the set of
treated patients as follows:

  1. When  = 0, the ZMP will

      (a) in Case (1), have no effect on the set of treated patients ;
                                                                    h
       (b) in Case (2), expand the set of treated patients  if c
                                                               ^ > rd .

  2. when  > 0, the ZMP will:

      (a) in Case (1), shrink the set of treated patients ;
                                                                                h       h
       (b) in Case (2), shrink the set of treated patients  if and only if / > rd -c
                                                                                   ^ / rd -c .

Proof. The results follow from Eq. (9) and the characterized values of  d for different cases as described
in the proof of Proposition 3.

   So far, we have assumed that the weight  in the physician's maximization problem (1) stays constant,
and our interpretation of  is that it is a measure of the physician's financial incentives. To the extent that
the ZMP may affect the physician's (or the hospital's) ability to raise revenues,  may be affected by the
ZMP. We now consider this possibility. The physician's maximization problem after the ZMP is now:
                                                    Physician Net Income 
                                 Patient Surplus                                               Effort Cost of Service
                                      p
            ^ ()  max [H (d, s; ) - r
            V                       ^d       p
                                        d - rs s] + ^            ^d
                                                                 r h
                                                                       -c
                                                                        ^      d+    h 
                                                                                    rs s   -          e (s) ,            (10)
                                                     
                     {d,s}
                                                           0 due to ZMP

where ^ denotes the new weight on the net income. We make the following assumption to reflect the fact
that the ZMP intensifies the revenue needs of the physician (or the hospital):

Assumption 3 ^ > .

   The first-order conditions for the optimal solutions to maximization problem (10) are similar to those for
Problem (1), and they can be written as

                                                   H1 (d, s; )    =  d (^
                                                                        ) ,                                              (11)
                                          H2 (d, s; ) - e (s)     =  s (^
                                                                        )                                                (12)

where  d (^
          ) and  s (^
                    ) are parameters that multiply d and s, respectively, in Problem (10); specifically,
they are given by:
                                                              p
                                             d1    =  d (^
                                                         ) = rd                                                         (13a)
                                             s1          ) =
                                                   =  s (^         p
                                                                  rs   -      h
                                                                           ^ rs
                                                                                .                                       (13b)

   Comparing (13) and (6), we see that the possible changes in  after the ZMP will now lead to a negative
change in  s :

                                       s      =  s1 -  s0 =  s (^
                                                                ) -  s ()
                                              =    ( -      h
                                                       ^ ) rs <0                                                         (14)

                                                          13
where the inequality follows from Assumption 3. As a result, the total impacts of the ZMP on the demands
for drugs and non-drug services are given by:

                            d         d
                d     =        ×  d +    ×  s
                             d         s
                                     <0                                 >0

                                  H22 - e                      H12
                      =                       2 ×  d + - H (H            2  ×  s ,                   (15)
                            H11 (H22 - e ) - H12          11 22 - e ) - H12
                            s             s
                s     =         ×  d +        ×  s
                             d             s
                                       >0                                    <0

                                        H12                         H11
                      =     -                     2  ×  d +                   2 ×  s .               (16)
                                H11 (H22 - e ) - H12        H11 (H22 - e ) - H12
Proposition 5 Suppose that the ZMP changes the wholesale drug price from c to c
                                                                              ^ and the weight on net
revenues from  to ^ > . Then,

  1. in Case (1), it will decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services.

  2. in Case (2), it will decrease the demand for drugs, and increase the demand for non-drug services if
           h       h
      / > rd -c
              ^ / rd - c . Moreover, the higher c
                                                ^ is, the larger is the reduction in the demand for
      drugs and the larger is the rise in the demand for non-drug services.

Proof. Claim 1 follows from the fact that, in Case (1),

                                                               h
                                      ) -  d0 () = rd - rd -  rd
                             d =  d1 (^                          -c               > 0,

and  s < 0, as seen from (14).
   For Claim 2, the same calculations in the proof of Proposition 3 yield that  d > 0 if and only if
     h
/ > rd -c    h
        ^ / rd - c . Applying this, together with the fact that  s < 0 (as seen from (14)), to (15)
and (16), we obtain the first statement in Claim 2. The second statement in Claim 2 follows from the fact
that  d is increasing in c
                         ^.

   Finally, we discuss the impact of the ZMP on the patients' health outcomes:

                                      H (d ( d () ; ) , s ( d () ; ) ; ) ,

or the patients' welfare:

                                                         p 
                   H (d ( d () ; ) , s ( d () ; ) ; ) - rd                 p 
                                                           d ( d () ; ) - rs s ( d () ; )

where d ( d () ; ) and s ( d () ; ) are the drug and non-drug service quantities received by patients with
characteristics  if the physician faces parameter  d (), which is affected by the ZMP. Since d ( d () ; )
and s ( d () ; ) are chosen to maximize the objective function of the physicians, in general the impact of
the ZMP on the patients' health and welfare outcomes is ambiguous.


                                                      14
4     Data and Descriptive Statistics

4.1    Data Sets
    Our main data set is the medical claims data for the population covered by the NRCMS in the sample
county, from January 1, 2009 to September 30, 2013. The NRCMS is the major source of heavily subsidized
public health insurance for rural residents in China. It was introduced in 2003, and by 2009 it covered
more than 95 percent of the rural population. Thus, our data set includes almost all the rural residents
in the county. All the basic medical facilities (including the village clinics and township health centers) in
the county started implementing the ZMP and EML on October 1, 2010, but the county hospitals were not
required to implement the ZMP and EML until October 2013.
    Although the data set contains claims for visits to all medical facilities, we only use the data for visits
to township health centers and county hospitals. The reason is that we focus on inpatient visits only in this
paper, and the village clinics do not provide inpatient services. We also exclude visits to the two largest
county hospitals and the Center for Disease Control (CDC), as patients in these hospitals were in general
different from the patients in township centers. These sample restrictions leave us with patients who visited
the 18 township centers (the treatment group) and 13 county hospitals (the control group); and we have
7 and 12 quarters of data, respectively, before and after the implementation of the ZMP in the township
centers. With the sample restrictions, we end up with 82,356 admissions and 51,061 unique patients.
    The claims data contains rich information on each inpatient visit, including the patient's ID, service
date, length of stay, diagnosis, and detailed expenditures on drugs and non-drug medical services, if any.
For each inpatient claim, we also observe the attending physician's name and their affiliated hospital, and
the details of the prescriptions for drugs and non-drug services (including tests and physical examinations).
As we mentioned, we focus on inpatient visits in this paper, thus the rich information provides a particular
advantage in investigating the physicians' behavioral changes across drug prescriptions and non-drug services.
    We also use two supplemental data sets. The first is the enrollment information of the NRCMS, in which
we observe the enrollment status of each individual each year, as well as the demographic information on
each enrollee, including age, gender, marital status, and education. The second is the reimbursement policy
of the NRCMS, which could vary annually.


4.2    Descriptive Statistics
    In Table 1, we present the demographic characteristics of patients with inpatient visits, which we use in our
analysis. We present the demographic distributions for the full sample, and separately for the subsamples of
the township centers and county hospitals. For each sample, we also present the claim level patient statistics
separately for the periods before and after the ZMP was implemented in the township centers on October 1,
2010. In Column (1), we see that among our full sample of 82, 356 inpatient visits, more than 80 percent are
aged 40 years or older, 41.5 percent are male, about 72.0 percent are married, and around 30.2 percent and
41.0 percent are illiterate and attend at most primary school, respectively. In Columns (2) and (3) where we



                                                       15
break the full sample into those with inpatient visits before and after October 1, 2010, we see that overall
the demographic distributions are quite stable, except for the age distribution. In Columns (4), we see that
patients in the township centers tend to be very similar to the full sample. Comparing Columns (4) and (7),
we see that patients in county hospitals tend to be younger than those in the township centers, and there
are higher shares of males and more educated patients. Comparing Columns (5) and (6), we see that in
the township centers the patients tend to be older after the reform, similar to what happened in the county
hospitals. This could be a result of the large-scale flows of younger individuals to work as migrant workers in
this period.11 Importantly, the differences between county and township hospital samples tend to be quite
stable over time. In our claims-level analysis below, we will control for patients' characteristics, including
demographic characteristics.
                                                    [Table 1 About Here]
    In Table 2, we describe the basic inpatient statistics, including total medical expenditures, drug expendi-
tures, non-drug expenditures, inpatient stay duration (days), 30-day readmission rate, as well as insurance
deductible and reimbursement rate.12 The total expenditures include all payments received by the health
facilities, including the insurance payments and the patients' out-of-pocket expenses. The total expenditures
are further divided into two mutually exclusive categories, drug expenditures and non-drug expenditures,
the latter of which include the diagnostic fee, bed fee, and fees for physical examinations and tests.
    In Panels A and B of Table 2, we show the statistics for patients at the township health centers and
county hospitals, respectively. In Columns (1) and (2), we show the mean and standard deviation of the
relevant variables for the whole sample from January 1, 2009 to September 30, 2013. In Columns (3)-(6),
respectively, we present the statistics for the periods before and after the ZMP was implemented in the
township centers on October 1, 2010. Column (7) presents the differences between the post-ZMP and the
pre-ZMP periods. In the full sample, the average total expenditures in the township centers were 1, 080
RMB, slightly more than one-third of the level in county hospitals, which was 3, 133 RMB. Similarly, the
average inpatient duration was 6.9 days in the township centers versus 12.3 days in the county hospitals.
The patterns were similar for periods before and after the ZMP reform, although the magnitudes of the
differences vary. These facts imply that patients who are admitted to county hospitals are more likely to
have more severe health conditions requiring higher expenditure. We take this difference into consideration
in our empirical analysis below by controlling for detailed patient characteristics, including their diagnosis
codes. We will also show that the differences between patients in township health centers and patients in
county hospitals were stable over time prior to the implementation of the ZMP at the township centers.
Table 2 also shows that the average reimbursement rate was higher in township health centers than that
in county hospitals, but the reimbursement rate in county hospitals improved more compared with that in
  11 See   a related report on this phenomenon by the National Bureau of Statistics of China at http://www.stats.gov.cn/ztjc/
ztfx/fxbg/201103/t20110310_16148.html.
  12 The   inpatient reimbursement is only qualified for expenditures exceeding a certain threshold, which is known as the "in-
surance deductible." In China, both the insurance deductible and the reimbursement rate might change annually according to
local government policies.




                                                               16
township health centers. Table 2 also shows that average expenditure on drugs decreased dramatically in
the township health centers, from 582 RMB before the ZMP reform to 419 RMB after the reform, which is
in stark contrast with the increase from 1, 058 RMB to 1, 169 RMB in the county hospitals during the same
period. The non-drug expenses in the township centers increased by around 50 percent, from 456.5 RMB
before the ZMP to 687.3 RMB after the ZMP in the township centers; however, the non-drug expenses only
increased by around 21 percent in the county hospitals, from 1, 752.8 RMB to 2, 122.7 RMB over the same
period.
                                                    [Table 2 About Here]
    Figure 1 plots the mean log drug expenditures per visit (Panel (a)), mean log non-drug expenditures per
visit (Panel (b)), and the mean log total expenditures per visit (Panel (c)), by quarter, separately for the
township centers and county hospitals. The vertical solid line represents October 1, 2010 when the ZMP was
implemented in the township centers. The averages were higher in the county hospitals than in the township
centers, which is consistent with Table 2, but the differences between the two types of facilities were quite
stable before the reform. Interestingly, the average drug and non-drug expenditures started to diverge right
after the ZMP reform in the township centers: Panel (a) shows that drug expenditures decreased in the
township centers, while they remained relatively stable in the county hospitals; Panel (b) shows that the
non-drug expenditures increased more in the township centers.13 As is shown in Panel (c), the patterns
of total spending are similar in both types of facilities. Of course, the raw average before/after differences
presented in Table 2 and Figure 1 are only suggestive, as they do not yet control for important differences
across the patients of the two types of health facilities.
                                                   [Figure 1 About Here]



5     Empirical Results
    Propositions 2 and 3 in Section 3 show that following the ZMP, drug expenditures would decrease and
non-drug expenditures would increase after the reform only if medical demands were partially physician
induced. In this section, we empirically test these predictions. We first directly explore how drug, non-drug,
and total expenditures are affected by the ZMP. Sections 5.1 and 5.2 present the admission-level results
and physician- and hospital-level results, respectively. In Section 5.3, we decompose the change in drug
expenditures by price and quantity. In Section 5.4 we examine the impact of the ZMP on patient health
outcomes.


5.1       Admission-Level Results
Empirical Specification and Main Results. We employ a difference-in-differences (DID) estimation
strategy to analyze the quantitative impact of the ZMP on drug, non-drug, and total expenditures. The
 13 Many   factors could potentially drive the variations in medical expenditures over time, such as increases in household income
and/or the reimbursement rates of the NRCMS.




                                                               17
treatment and control groups are patients of the township centers and county hospitals, respectively. The
basic estimation equation is

                            yiht =  +  Townih × Postt +  Xit +  Zht +  t +  h + iht ,                                   (17)

where:

   · yiht is the outcome variables of interest for patient i, who had admissions in hospital h in time t
      (measured by quarter).14 The outcome variables include drug expenditures, non-drug expenditures,
      and total spending, all in logs.

   · The variable Townih is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if admission i was at a township center.

   · The variable Postt is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the admission was on or after October
      1, 2010, the starting date of the ZMP in the township centers.

   · The vector Xit consists of the patient demographic characteristics, including age, gender, education,
      marital status, and his/her diagnosis codes. In the data, a patient's diagnosis is coded by the Interna-
      tional Classification of Diseases (10th revision, ICD10). The ICD10 system includes more than 20,000
      diagnosis codes, which are automatically classified into 20 Major Diagnosis Categories (MDCs). We
      include dummies for the 20 MDCs in Xit .

   · The variable Zht contains information on the reimbursement policy for hospital h at time t, including
      the insurance deductible and the coinsurance rate, which could change annually at a given hospital.
      We summarize the generosity measure of the insurance by calculating the expected out-of-pocket ex-
      penditure of a typical enrollee based on the population's average inpatient expenditures in the previous
      year according to the current year's policy in hospital h at time t (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004).

   ·  t captures the quarter fixed effects, and  h captures the hospital fixed effects.

   · iht is an i.i.d. shock.

The key coefficient of interest is  , which captures the causal effect of the ZMP on outcome yiht in the
township centers where the ZMP was implemented relative to that in the county hospitals where the ZMP
was not yet implemented.
   Table 3 reports the estimation results from the admission-level analysis using Eq. (17), where we report
the main coefficient of interest  . Robust standard errors clustered at hospital level are in parentheses. In
Column (2), we show that drug expenditures were reduced by 63.4 log points (about 47.0 percent) after
the ZMP was implemented in the township centers relative to that in the county hospitals where the ZMP
was not yet implemented. The estimate is almost identical in Column (1) where we did not control for
patient demographics and diagnosis codes, suggesting that the impact of the ZMP is almost orthogonal to
 14 We   also ran the same regressions controlling for month fixed effects, instead of quarter fixed effects. The results are
quantitatively and qualitatively almost identical. See Appendix Table A4.



                                                             18
the patient characteristics. In Columns (3) and (4), we show that compared with the county hospitals,
non-drug expenditures in the township centers increased by 27.88 log points (about 32.3 percent) after the
implementation of the ZMP. All the coefficient estimates are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
Finally, in Columns (5) and (6), we show that the ZMP reduced total expenditures by about 11.5 log points
(about 12.2 percent) in the township centers relative to those in the county hospitals; however, the effect
is not statistically significant. This suggests that following the ZMP, the increase in non-drug expenditures
compensated almost all the reduction in drug expenditures.
                                                    [Table 3 About Here]
    To summarize, the results reported in Table 3 suggest that under the ZMP, patients' drug expenditures
decreased but their non-drug expenditures increased, leaving the total expenditures almost unchanged. These
findings are consistent with the theoretical predictions of Propositions 2 and 3 when  > 0, that is, when
the medical demand is partially physician induced. A question might be that if non-drug expenditures were
profitable for the physicians/hospitals, why did they wait until the ZMP went into effect to increase the
prescription of non-drug expenses? In our theoretical model, we capture this by assuming that physicians
will incur effort cost e(s) for prescribing non-drug services s. This is reasonable, because non-drug services,
whether they are diagnostic service or testing, would require time input from the physician. For example,
to prescribe a test, the physician may need to spend more time with the patient to wait for and check the
results. In contrast, prescribing drugs does not require such time input. Thus, in the absence of the ZMP,
physicians' incentives to over-prescribe non-drug services were moderated by the effort costs.
    It is useful to examine the heterogeneous impacts of the ZMP on drug expenditures for the 20 MDC cat-
egories. We run the regressions according to Eq. (17) separately for each MDC category. The  coefficient
estimates from these regressions are shown in Figure 2 by MDC category. It can be seen that drug expendi-
tures decreased following the ZMP in all the categories, although some of the estimates are not statistically
significant. The magnitudes of the reductions vary. Drug expenditures decreased the most for mental illness,
and they decreased the least for ear- and eye-related diseases.15
                                                    [Figure 2 About Here]
    In Table 4, we examine the impact of the ZMP on non-drug expenditures by subcategories, specifically,
infusion, bed, nursing care, tests and examinations, and medical materials. We run the regressions according
to Eq. (17) using expenditures on each of the non-drug categories as the outcome variable, separately. The 
coefficients in Table 4 show that the ZMP increased non-drug expenditures the most for more discretionary
services, such as tests and examinations, bed stay, and nursing care, with increases ranging from 22 to 35
log points (25 to 42 percent). Expenditures on less discretionary services, e.g., medical materials, increased
the least (about 3.5 log points) and the estimated effect is statistically insignificant.
                                                    [Table 4 About Here]
  15 The   results are intuitive. Treatment for mental diseases relies heavily on medications, so the ZMP policy would influence
the revenue the most; in contrast, treatment for ear or eye diseases always applies equipment and tests and uses relatively fewer
medications, so the policy would have less impact on drug expenditures in the treatment of these diseases.




                                                               19
Event Study and Parallel Pre-Trend Assumption. For the DID empirical specification to provide an
estimate of the causal impact of the ZMP, we need to ensure that the control and treatment groups exhibit
parallel pre-trends on the outcome variables of interest. To test the parallel pre-trend assumption, as well
as to explore the possible time-varying effects of the ZMP, we estimate the following regression specification
by creating a set of quarter dummies and interacting them with whether the health facility is a township
center:
                                      11
                        yiht =  +            Townih × 1{t = } +  Xit +  Zht +  t +  h + iht ,                            (18)
                                    =-7

where 1{t = } is a group of dummy variables indicating in which quarter  admission i occurred, so  
captures the difference between township centers and county hospitals in quarter . The rest of the variables
are defined in the same way as those in Eq. (17).
    Figure 2 displays the full set of estimated   coefficients, for   {-7, -6, ..., -1, 0, ..., 11} where we
normalize  -1 = 0 for  = -1, the quarter before the implementation of the ZMP in the township centers
on October 1, 2010. Panel (a) presents the coefficients for drug expenditures, Panel (b) for non-drug
expenditures, and Panel (c) for total expenditures. The 95 and 99 percent confidence intervals of the
  are displayed as whiskers. Panel (a) of Figure 3 indicates that before the ZMP, the time patterns in drug
expenditures were statistically similar between the township centers and the county hospitals; however, after
the ZMP reform was implemented in the township centers, there was a significant and widening reduction in
drug expenditures in the township centers relative to the county hospitals. Similarly, Panel (b) shows that
for non-drug expenses, the differences between the township centers and county hospitals were statistically
insignificant before the ZMP reform, but they widened after the reform. Panel (c) shows that the time
patterns in the differences in total expenditures remained insignificant before and after the reform. Figure
3 suggests that the parallel pre-trend assumption for the DID analysis is valid.
                                                   [Figure 3 About Here]


5.2       Physician- and Hospital-Level Results
    Our analysis so far has been at the admission level. Now we conduct a similar analysis at physician level
to directly detect the change in physician behavior. Specifically, the estimating equation is as follows:

                                   yjt =  +  Townj × Postt +  Zjt +  t +  j + jt ,                                       (19)

where now yjt is the log of the average outcomes of patients treated by physician j in quarter t; and Townj
equals 1 if physician j works at a township hospital.16 Zjt controls for the average reimbursement amount
across the patients who are treated by physician j in quarter t. In addition, we control for the physician
fixed effects  j (which is more general than hospital fixed effects), and the quarter fixed effects  t . The

  16 In   our data, we observe the physicians' names and their affiliated hospitals on the prescription data set. In China, a
physician is rarely affiliated with multiple hospitals. Therefore, we identify a unique physician as a physician name-hospital
pair.




                                                              20
coefficient  captures the impact of the ZMP on the behavior of physicians in the township centers relative
to physicians in the county hospitals. We cluster the robust standard errors at the hospital level.
   To ensure that our results are not driven by newly entering or the exiting physicians, we create a balanced
panel of physicians who were present in our analysis data before and after the ZMP. We have a total of 535
unique physicians and 4, 060 physician-quarter observations in our sample.
                                               [Table 5 About Here]
   We report the physician-level estimation results using Eq. (19) in Panel A of Table 5. In Column (1),
the outcome variable is the log of average drug expenditures per admission prescribed by the physician,
and it shows that following the implementation of the ZMP in township centers, physicians in township
centers reduced their average drug expenditures per admission by 63.4 log points (47.0 percent), and it is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. In Column (2), the dependent variable is the log of average non-
drug expenditures per admission prescribed by the physician, and it shows that following the implementation
of the ZMP in township centers, physicians in township centers increased their average non-drug expenditures
per admission by 23.0 log points (25.9 percent), and it is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. In
Column (3), the outcome variable is the log of average total expenditures per admission prescribed by the
physician, and it shows that following the implementation of the ZMP in township centers, physicians in
township centers reduced their total expenditures per admission by 13.5 log points (12.6 percent), and it
is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. The physician-level results on the effect of the ZMP on
drug and non-drug expenditures reported in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 are similar in magnitude to
the admission-level results reported in Table 3. The physician-level results on the impact of the ZMP on
average total expenditure per admission are statistically significant at the 5 percent level; this is in contrast
to the admission-level results in Table 3, which show a similar negative effect of about -11.4 log points (10.8
percent), but it is statistically insignificant.
   Finally, in Column (4) of Table 5, we report the impact of the ZMP on the log quarterly number of
inpatient admissions of the physician. It shows that following the implementation of the ZMP in township
centers, physicians in township centers decreased their number of admissions by 35.9 log points (30.2 percent)
relative to those of the county hospitals, and it is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. This result
confirms the predictions in Part (2) of Proposition 4, which states that if the medical demand is partially
physician induced, then the set of treated patients will shrink after the ZMP. To the best of our knowledge,
this is a novel test of the theory of physician-induced demand.
   We can also summarize the data at the hospital-quarter level; that is, we calculate the average of drug,
non-drug, and total expenditures per admission, together with the total number of admissions, by quarter
for each hospital. We then run the regressions at the hospital-quarter level using a specification similar to
Eq. (20) with the physician fixed effects  j replaced by the hospital fixed effects.
   The hospital-level results are reported in Panel B of Table 5. The results show that at the hospital level,
following the implementation of the ZMP in the township centers, drug expenditures per admission decreased
by 54.9 log points (about 42.2 percent) as shown in Column (1), but non-drug expenditures increased by
35.3 log points (about 42.3 percent) as shown in Column (2), and total expenditures decreased by 5.81 log


                                                        21
points (about 0.6 percent) as shown in Column (3) in the township centers relative to the county hospitals.
The estimated effects for drug and non-drug expenditures are statistically significant at the 1 percent level,
but the estimated effect for total expenditures is not statistically significant. Column (4) shows that the
implementation of the ZMP in the township centers reduced the average total quarterly admissions in the
township centers by 48.7 log points (38.5 percent) relative to those in the county hospitals, and the estimate
is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The hospital-level results are consistent, both qualitatively
and quantitatively, with the physician-level results (Panel A) and the admission-level results reported in
Table 3.
   We now employ an event study framework to explore the variation in the effects over time, by adding a
set of quarter dummies interacting with the facility dummy:
                                  11
                      yjt =  +           Townj × 1{t = } +  Zjt +  t +  s +  j + iht ,                       (20)
                                 =-7

where j represents a specific physician or hospital, and 1{t = } is a group of dummy variables that take
the value 1 if the outcome variable of interest occurred in quarter   {-7, ..., 11}; thus,   captures the
difference between the township centers and the county hospitals in quarter .  t and  s represent the year
fixed effects and season fixed effects respectively. The other variables are defined the same way as those in
Eq. (19).
   Figure 4 plots the coefficient estimates   ,   {-7, ..., 11}, for drug expenditures (Panel (a)), non-drug
expenditures (Panel (b)), total expenditures (Panel (c)), and the number of inpatient admissions (Panel (d)),
at the physician level. The physician-level results are consistent with the admission-level results, as shown in
Figure 2. The overall pattern supports the parallel pre-trend assumption, and we find that drug expenditures
decreased, non-drug expenditures increased, and total expenditures decreased somewhat. Finally, Panel (d)
of Figure 4 shows that the time patterns in the total number of inpatient admissions for physicians before
the ZMP are similar between the township centers and the county hospitals, but after the ZMP, the number
of admissions for physicians in the township centers experienced a reduction relative to that for physicians
in the county hospitals.
                                             [Figure 4 About Here]


Taking Stocks. So far, the results in Tables 3 and 5 show that, following the implementation of the
ZMP in the township centers, drug expenditures in the township centers decreased by 60 log points at the
admission level, 63 log points at the physician level, and 55 log points at the hospital level, per admission.
The price differences between the county hospitals and township centers were about 15 percent (translating
into 100  ln(1 - 0.15)  -16 log points) conditional on the same drug; the reason is that the wholesale
prices for the same drug were the same for the township centers and the county hospitals under the central
procurement platform, but the county hospitals were still permitted to charge a 15 percent markup over the
drug wholesale price in the study period. Thus, we can conclude that the estimated effects of the ZMP on
drug expenditures in the township centers translate into an effect on the quantity of drugs demanded by
about 44 log points (admission level), 47 log point (physician level), and 39 log points (hospital level), per

                                                       22
admission. Similarly, since the prices for non-drug services were not changed by the reform, the estimated
effects of the ZMP on the non-drug expenditure suggest that the quantity of non-drug services increased by
27 log points at the admission level, 23 log points at the physician level and 35 log points at the hospital
level.


5.3      Decomposing the Drug Expenditure Effect of the ZMP
    Our main finding in Section 5.1 is that the ZMP reduced drug expenditures by about 60 log points
(around 45 percent) per admission in the treated township centers relative to those in the untreated county
hospitals. In this subsection, we decompose the drug expenditure effect of the ZMP into the quantity effect
and the retail price effect, and further examine whether the physicians in the treated township health centers
prescribed fewer types of drug (extensive margin) and fewer drugs for each type (intensive margin).
    To conduct this decomposition, we need to create a panel of drugs. In the prescription data set, we observe
each drug by its chemical name (chemical compound), package format, prescribed unit, and expenditure.
For example, suppose that a drug was 250ml (package) 10 percent glucose (chemical name) injection, two
units were prescribed, and the bill for this prescription was 12.5 RMB. The retail price of the drug was not
directly listed in the data set; instead, it is deduced from the expenditure and quantity. Before the ZMP
was implemented, the retail price was equal to the wholesale price plus the markup, which was in general 15
percent of the wholesale price. Hence, the wholesale price can be backed out if we divide the deduced retail
price by 1.15 in the pre-ZMP period. In the post-ZMP period, the retail price equals to the wholesale price
in the township health centers.
    Drugs with the same chemical name are considered to be the same type of drugs, and we standardize the
drug quantity by multiplying the prescription unit and the package. We also calculate the standardized price
as the total prescription expenditure divided by the standardized total prescription quantity. The quality
or efficiency of drugs that were categorized as the same type could still vary, as they may be provided by
different pharmaceutical firms with different levels of chemical strength or daily dosage requirement. To deal
with this issue, we therefore further group the drugs of the same chemical name into up to 4 bins based on
their wholesale price. In summary, we classify each drug jointly by its chemical name and price bins. This
classification is not perfect, but it makes the best use of the information in the data, and the drugs in the
same bin are now more comparable.
    We then disentangle the changes in drug expenditures into changes in prices and quantities after the
ZMP. In this analysis, the identification comes from the prescribed drugs that appear both in the township
centers and the county hospitals before and after the ZMP. Therefore, we run the regressions based on the
balanced sample, including only drugs that were provided both before and after the reform. Our balanced
panel of drugs accounts for around 76.7 percent of the total prescriptions. As mentioned in Section 2, the
township centers were required to prescribe 100 percent from the EML, and county hospitals were required
to prescribe at least 40 percent from the EML after ZMP. Such prescription regulation was not binding for
county hospitals since the EML shares were 72.3 percent and 72.6 percent, respectively, before and after the



                                                      23
ZMP. And the regulation slightly increases the EML share for township hospitals from 89.4 percent to 94.2
percent. In our balanced sample, the EML accounted for 96.88% before the ZMP and 98.35% after the ZMP.
The consistently high share of EML prescription indicates that the EML prescription regulation should have
a negligible impact on our empirical results.
   We run the following regressions:

                        ydiht =  +  Towndih × Postt +  Xit +  ds +  t +  h + diht ,                         (21)

where each observation is at the drug-visit level, and the dependent variable ydiht is either log of prescription
quantity, or standardized drug price, or the expenditure of each type of drug for each visit. Similar to Eq.
(17), insurance policy, individual demographics, and diagnosis are controlled in the regression. To deal with
potential confounding factors that may affect the price and quantity, we need to control for hospital fixed
effects  h and quarter fixed effects  t . We also control for drug-season level fixed effects  ds to allow the
effects varying across seasons within the same drug.
                                             [Table 6 About Here]
   The first three columns in Table 6 display the results. It shows that, among the balanced panel of
drugs, the quantity of drugs prescribed per visit decreased by about 17.8 log points (16.3 percent), the price
decreased by about 17.1 log points (15.7 percent, as expected), and the total expenditures decreased by
35 log points (29.4 percent). That is, half of the reduction in drug expenditure is contributed by quantity
reduction, and the other half is contributed by price reduction.

Remark 2 Recall that, as reported in Table 3, the reduction in all drug expenditure following the implemen-
tation of the ZMP in the township centers is 47.0 percent. Column (3) of Table 6 indicates that about three
quarters of the drug expenditure reductions were from this balanced drug panel. This is consistent with the
fact, which we previously mentioned, that the balanced panel of drugs accounts for around 76.7 percent of the
total prescriptions.

   We also report the results from some additional outcomes of interest. In Column (4) of Table 6, we
use the total number of different types of prescribed drugs in an inpatient visit as the outcome variable
to explore the extensive margin impact, using the same regression specification of Eq. (17). The result in
Column (4) indicates that the ZMP does not seem to significantly change the prescription behavior in the
extensive margin.
   Proposition 5 predicts that in post-ZMP period, township centers may decrease the prescription for
drugs with high-price level. We examine the prediction in the last two columns of Table (6). To check the
heterogeneous impacts across drugs, we first define "Expensive" as drugs whose average wholesale price is
above the median wholesale price of drugs with the same chemical name during our sample period. Then we
calculate the share of "Expensive" drug expenditure out of the total drug expenditure, as well as the share
of "Expensive" drug prescription quantity out of the total drug prescription quantity per visit. Then we set
the share of "Expensive" drug expenditure and the share of "Expensive" drug prescription quantity as the
outcome variables, and apply the framework of Eq. (17). The last two columns of Table (6) show that both

                                                       24
the expenditure share and the quantity share of "Expensive" drugs decreased slightly after the ZMP reform
in the township centers, although the results are not statistically significant. Therefore, the empirical results
at least weakly support Case (2) in Proposition 5.


5.4    How Does the ZMP Affect Patient Outcomes?
   So far, we have established that the ZMP reform reduced the price and quantity of drugs and increased the
provision of non-drug services. An important question is, how did this compositional change in expenditures
of drugs and non-drug services affect the quality of care and other related outcomes for the patients? We
only have limited outcome measures in the claims data unfortunately; so we use the readmission, a dummy
variable that takes the value 1 if the patient was readmitted to any medical facility, regardless of whether
the readmission occurred inside or outside our study county, for the same diagnosis within two weeks or
a month of discharge respectively, to proxy for the quality of care. Since we have data on the universe of
all medical claims, we tracked each patient's inpatient records across all medical facilities to construct this
measure. The average two-week readmission rate in our sample is 1.6 percent, and the monthly readmission
rate is 2.6 percent. Table 7 reports the regression results using the same specifications as in Eq.(17) at the
admissions level by setting the readmission dummy as the outcome variable. It shows that the reform did
not significantly change the readmission pattern. Thus it is likely that patients' health outcomes were not
affected by the changes in the drug and non-drug service composition following the ZMP.
                                             [Table 7 About Here]
   As shown in Column (4) of Table 5, the overall utilization has been decreasing since the number of
admissions decreased. The last two columns in Table 7 provides another measure of utilization using the
length of stay per inpatient visit. The average length of stay is 8.18 days, and the reform did not change it
significantly either.


5.5    Robustness Checks
   Although the empirical results are consistent with the model predictions, there is still a possibility that
the findings were induced by the switch of patients between the different levels of facilities. Specifically,
patients with more severe illnesses may have switched to county hospitals to receive care after the reform.
If that is the case, patients in county hospitals would have worse health status than before, and those
in township centers would be healthier. As patients with different disease types should involve different
treatments, the resulting change in service provision might be induced by the change in patients' sorting. To
address this concern, we compare the diagnoses of patients treated in the township centers and those treated
in the county hospitals before and after the ZMP reform. The results are presented in Appendix Table A1.
It shows that the majority of the diagnosis distributions were stable after the reform.
   We also calculate the patients' risk scores, and explore the pattern of the risk score distributions before
and after the ZMP reform. The risk score is a measure predicting the risk of future medical expenditures
for an individual based on his/her characteristics, such as age, gender, and diseases. We follow the same


                                                       25
specifications as in Eq.(17) at the admission level by setting the patients' risk score as the outcome variable.
As shown in Appendix Table A2, patients' risk score did not vary significantly across the township centers
and the county hospitals before and after the ZMP reform, suggesting that the extent of patient switching
is limited. This result is robust as we add more demographic characteristics in the regression.
    In Appendix Table A3, we show that our main results are also robust to different estimation strategies
and sample selections. In our main analysis, we showed the raw patterns as well as regression results with
different controls on fixed effects, and the results were all consistent. Three additional robustness checks are
reported in Appendix Table A3. First, we include the two largest hospitals as well as the county's disease
control center in the sample. Second, we exclude the inpatient records that took place within six months of
the ZMP reform in the township centers (i.e., between April 1, 2010 and September 30, 2010) to alleviate
the concerns that patients'/physicians'/hospitals' expectations of the reform may have played a role in our
findings. Third, we exclude the four private hospitals from the sample. Our results are robust to all of these
sample restrictions. In Appendix Table A4, we also show that our results are robust to controls for month
fixed effects and quarter fixed effects.



6     Conclusion
    We use a natural experiment in China's health care reform, in which the government mandated zero
markups for drugs sold in public hospitals, to study physician-induced demand for medical care. While
there is large empirical literature on physician-induced demand, we argue through the lens of a theoretical
model that the ZMP provides a unique setting to detect the presence of physician-induced demand. The
model robustly predicts that the ZMP will lead to a reduction in the demand for drugs but an increase
in the demand for non-drug services, only when the demands for drugs and non-drug services are at least
partially physician induced. Our model also yields testable predictions of the impact of the ZMP regarding
the equilibrium number of treated patients.
    Exploiting the staggered rollout of the ZMP and a unique claims data set, we find that at the admission
level, the reform decreases drug expenses by 63.4 log points (47.0 percent), but the reduction in drug expenses
is almost fully substituted by the increases in expenses for non-drug services. Quantitatively similar results
are also obtained at the physician and at the hospital levels. We also show that the ZMP reduces the number
of patients in the treated hospitals, as predicted by the model, and that the reform has little impact on the
quality of health care proxied by the readmission rate.
    There are some limitations of our research. First, our results are based on data collected from township
centers and county hospitals. Drugs purchased from other facilities, such as pharmacies, were not included
in our analysis. However, this should not be a major concern, as the analysis focused only on inpatient
hospital stays. It is uncommon for patients to purchase medications from pharmacies and use them during
their hospital stays. Second, our sample only included the rural population in a single county. There is likely
great heterogeneity between the rural and urban populations and across geographic areas. Therefore our
empirical finding regarding physician-induced demand is only suggestive for other settings.


                                                      26
References
Alexander, Diane, "How do Doctors Respond to Incentives? Unintended Consequences of Paying Doctors
  to Reduce Costs," Journal of Political Economy, November 2020, 128.

Arrow, Kenneth J, "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care," American Economic Review,
  1963, 53, 941­973.

Burns, Lawton Robert and Gordon G Liu, China's Healthcare System and Reform, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2017.

Chen, Brian K, Y Tony Yang, and Karen Eggleston, "Patient Copayments, Provider Incentives, and
  Income Effects: Theory and Evidence from the Essential Medications List under China's 2009 Healthcare
  Reform," World Medical & Health Policy, 2017, 9 (1), 24­44.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D Gottlieb, "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect Medical Treatment
  and Patient Health?," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1320­49.

Currie, Janet, Wanchuan Lin, and Juanjuan Meng, "Using Audit Studies to Test for Physician
  Induced Demand: The Case of Antibiotic Abuse in China," Journal of Development Economics, 2014,
  110, 39­51.

Dafny, Leemore S, "How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?," American Economic Review, 2005,
  95 (5), 1525­1547.

Fang, Hanming and Qing Gong, "Detecting Potential Overbilling in Medicare Reimbursement via Hours
  Worked," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (2), 562­591.

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba, "Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder Evidence
  from the UK Annuity Market," Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1), 183­208.

  , Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams, "Sources of Geographic Variation in Health Care: Evi-
  dence from Patient Migration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1681­1726.

  , Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P Newhouse,
  Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon Health Study Group, "The Oregon Health Insurance
  Experiment: Evidence from the First Year," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1057­1106.

Geruso, Michael and Timothy Layton, "Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk Adjust-
  ment," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (3).

Grennan, Matthew, Kyle Myers, Ashley Swanson, and Aaron Chatterji, "No Free Lunch? Wel-
  fare Analysis of Firms Selling through Expert Intermediaries," Working Paper, 2020, Available at SSRN:
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3216172.



                                                   27
Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings, "Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section Delivery,"
  Rand Journal of Economics, 1996, 27 (1), 99.

Hall, Robert and Charles I. Jones, "The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 39­72.

Iizuka, Toshiaki, "Physician Agency and Adoption of Generic Pharmaceuticals," American Economic Re-
  view, 2012, 102 (6), 2826­58.

Li, Yongbin, Jing Xu, Fang Wang, Bin Wang, Liqun Liu, Wanli Hou, Hong Fan, Yeqing Tong,
  Juan Zhang, and Zuxun Lu, "Overprescribing in China, Driven by Financial Incentives, Results in
  Very High Use of Antibiotics, Injections, and Corticosteroids," Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (5), 1075­1082.

Liu, Ya-Ming, Yea-Huei Kao Yang, and Chee-Ruey Hsieh, "Financial Incentives and Physicians'
  Prescription Decisions on the Choice between Brand-name and Generic Drugs: Evidence from Taiwan,"
  Journal of Health Economics, 2009, 28 (2), 341­349.

Lu, Fangwen, "Insurance Coverage and Agency Problems in Doctor Prescriptions: Evidence from a Field
  Experiment in China," Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 106, 156­167.

McGuire, Thomas G, "Physician Agency," in " Handbook of Health Economics," Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2000,
  pp. 461­536.

National Bureau of Statistics of China, China Statistical Yearbook 2010, Javvin Technologies Incorpo-
  rated, 2010.

National Health Ministry of China, China Public Health Statistical Yearbook 2012, Peking Union Med-
  ical College Publishing House, Beijing, 2011.

Newhouse, Joseph P, Insurance Experiment Group Rand Corporation, Insurance Experi-
  ment Group Staff et al., Free for All? Lessons from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment, Harvard
  University Press, 1993.

Wagstaff, Adam, Winnie Yip, Magnus Lindelow, and William C Hsiao, "China's Health System
  and Its Reform: A Review of Recent Studies," Health Economics, 2009, 18 (S2), S7­S23.

World Health Organization, "Public Spending on Health: A Closer Look at Global Trends," Technical
  Report 2018.

Wu, Bingxiao, "Physician Agency in China: Evidence from a Drug-Percentage Incentive Scheme," Journal
  of Development Economics, 2019, 140, 72­89.

Yi, Hongmei, Grant Miller, Linxiu Zhang, Shaoping Li, and Scott Rozelle, "Intended and Unin-
  tended Consequences of China's Zero Markup Drug Policy," Health Affairs, 2015, 34 (8), 1391­1398.



                                                    28
Yip, Winnie and William C Hsiao, "The Chinese Health System at a Crossroads," Health affairs, 2008,
  27 (2), 460­468.

Yip, Winnie C, "Physician Response to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume of Coronary
  Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in the Medicare and Private Sectors," Journal of Health Economics,
  1998, 17 (6), 675­699.

Yip, Winnie Chi-Man, William C Hsiao, Wen Chen, Shanlian Hu, Jin Ma, and Alan Maynard,
  "Early Appraisal of China's Huge and Complex Health-care Reforms," The Lancet, 2012, 379 (9818), 833­
  842.

Yip, Winnie, Hongqiao Fu, Angela T Chen, Tiemin Zhai, Weiyan Jian, Roman Xu, Jay Pan,
  Min Hu, Zhongliang Zhou, Qiulin Chen et al., "10 Years of Health-care Reform in China: Progress
  and Gaps in Universal Health Coverage," The Lancet, 2019, 394 (10204), 1192­1204.




                                                   29
                     Figure 1: Quarterly Patterns of Expenditures in Township Centers and County Hospitals

                                                                                             hh
                             (a) Log Drug Expenditures                                                                         (b) Log Non-Drug Expenditures




                                                                                                            7.5
          7




                        town                                                                                                   town
                        county                                                                                                 county




                                                                                                                    7
               6.5




                                                                                                  Log Non-drug Exp.
  Log Drug Exp.




                                                                                                         6.5
 6




                                                                                                            6
          5.5




                                                                                                            5.5
                         10




                                      m
                                     11




                                                              12




                                                                             13




                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                13
                                   or




                                                                                                                                                 or
                        20




                                  20




                                                             20




                                                                            20




                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                               20
                                  ef




                                                                                                                                                ef
                                 R




                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                      (c) Log Total Expenditures
                                                   8




                                                                   town
                                                                   county
                                                       7.5
                                           Log Total Exp.
                                                   7
                                                   6.5




                                                                     10




                                                                                        rm
                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                          12




                                                                                                                                          13
                                                                   20




                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                     o
                                                                                  ef
                                                                                  R




Notes : This figure plots the time trend of the medical spending for township health centers and the county hospitals separately.
In Panel (a), we calculate the average drug expenditure (in log) per visit for each hospital by quarter, then we average across
the township health centers and county hospitals separately. We define the non-drug expenditure as the total expenditure
minus the drug expenditure. In Panel (b), we calculate the average non-drug expenditure (in log) per visit for each hospital
by quarter, then we average across the township health centers and county hospitals separately. In Panel (c), we calculate the
average total medical expenditure (in log) per visit for each hospital by quarter, then we average across the township health
centers and county hospitals separately.




                                                                                             30
                                Figure 2: Coefficients on Drug Expenditures by 20 Disease Categories
                      2
                      1
                Log Drug Exp.
                      0
                      -1                    -2
                                pl s
                                         s

                               et d

                                M ic

                                 N l
                                        ve

                                         e

                                u r
                               pi y
                           D tory

                                         e
                           lo kin

                                          l
                             eg ry
                            on cy

                              la ital
                                        ed

                      H orb y
                            lth idity

                                        us
                                        ta




                           ito leta
                            irc a
                           eo iou

                                      m




                           es or




                            m ur
                           M oo




                                     Ey




                                     tiv
                                     ol




                          Pr rina
                                     E




                          C an
                                   en

                                    er




                                    at
                                    ifi
                                    S




                       U gen
                                   as




                        R lat




                         al Inj
                                  ab




                                  es
                                  Bl




                                  ra
                                  ct




                     G ske




                                 ss




                                 st
                                 n
                                u
                               fe




                               ig
               In




                          nc




                        ea
                          C




                        en
                        cu
                       N




                      rn
                    us




                   te
                  M




                 Ex




                                                   Coefficient of Town*Post          95% CI




Notes : We categorize the sample into 20 disease categories, and estimate a diff-in-diff type of analysis in Eq. (17) for each disease
category separately. This figure plots the coefficients of the interaction term  for each disease category. In the regression, we
control for the patients' demographic characteristics, and medical insurance reimbursement generosity. The standard errors are
clustered at the hospital level.




                                                                    31
   Figure 3: Quarterly Differences in Drug, Non-Drug, and Total Expenditures between Township Centers
                                                                                  and County Hospitals

                                 (a) Drug Expenditure                                                                                 (b) Non-Drug Expenditure




                                                                                                              .6
        1




                                                                                                              .4
        .5




                                                                                                     Log Non-drug Exp.
  Log Drug Exp.




                                                                                                                .2
   -.5      0




                                                                                                         0    -.2
        -1




                                                                                                              -.4
        -1.5




                  -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q                                       -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q
                                            Quarters to the reform                                                                                 Quarters to the reform

                                          99% CI                        95% CI                                                                   99% CI           95% CI


                                                                                   (c) Total Expenditure
                                                          .2
                                                          0
                                                   Log Total Exp.
                                                        -.2
                                                          -.4
                                                          -.6




                                                                    -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q
                                                                                              Quarters to the reform

                                                                                            99% CI                           95% CI



Notes : This figure plots the   coefficients of Eq. (18). In Panel (a), we regress the log of the average drug expenditure on
the dynamic time indicator such that the effects of the reform would vary across quarters. Panel (b) shows the coefficients
when we set the log of average non-drug expenditure as the dependent variable. Panel (c) shows the coefficient plot when the
dependent variable is the log of the average total medical expenditure. In the regression, we control for the patients' disease
type, demographic characteristics, and medical insurance reimbursement generosity. The standard errors are clustered at the
hospital level.




                                                                                               32
                    Figure 4: Physician-Level Results: Difference between Township Centers and County Hospitals
         1




                                                                                                 1
         .5




                                                                                        Log Non-Drug Exp.
                                                                                                      .5
 Log Drug Exp.
  -.5      0




                                                                                         0
         -1
         -1.5




                                                                                                 -.5
                    -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q                          -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q
                                              Quarters to the reform                                                                    Quarters to the reform

                                            99% CI           95% CI                                                                   99% CI           95% CI



                                   (a) Drug Expenditure                                                                  (b) Non-Drug Expenditure
         .5




                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    .5
                0




                                                                                           Log Total Visits
   Log Total Exp.




                                                                                            -.5       0
 -.5




                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                    -1.5
         -1




                    -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q                          -7q -6q -5q -4q -3q -2q -1q 0 1q 2q 3q 4q 5q 6q 7q 8q 9q 10q 11q
                                              Quarters to the reform                                                                    Quarters to the reform

                                            99% CI           95% CI                                                                    99% CI           95% CI



                                   (c) Total Expenditure                                                                  (d) Total Number of Visits

Notes : This figure plots the event study coefficients based on Eq. (20). We calculate the average drug expenditure, non-drug
expenditure, total medical expenditure, and total number of visits by quarter for each physician. In Panel (a), we regress the
average drug expenditure in logs on the dynamic time indicator such that the effects of the reform would vary across quarters.
Panel (b) shows the coefficients when we set the average non-drug expenditure in logs as the dependent variable. Panel (c)
shows the coefficient plot of the average total medical expenditure in logs. In Panel (d), we calculate the total number of
visits treated by the physician per quarter and then plot the coefficients of the corresponding event study. In the regression,
we control for the average medical insurance reimbursement generosity of patients treated by the physician, year fixed effects,
season fixed effects, and the physician fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.




                                                                                   33
                                Table 1: Demographic Statistics of Inpatient Patients


                                       Full Sample                        Township Centers                  County Hospitals

                              All        Before       After         All        Before    After        All        Before      After
                                 (1)       (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)           (7)        (8)        (9)

 Age (%)
 0-19                           5.07       7.70        3.47          4.90       7.61     3.14           5.61      8.05       4.41
 20-40                         14.43      18.71       11.83         13.36      17.74     10.52         17.89      22.45      15.65
 41-64                         46.02      45.03       46.63         45.18      44.44     45.66         48.72      47.27      49.44
 65+                           34.48      28.56       38.07         36.57      30.22     40.67         27.77      22.23      30.5
 Gender (%)
 Male                          41.49      40.70       41.97         40.99      40.06     41.59         43.10      43.15      43.08
 Marital Status (%)
 Never married                  8.41      10.20        7.33          7.67       9.92     6.21           10.8      11.27      10.57
 Married                       71.96      71.09       72.49         71.86      70.61     72.66         72.29      72.91      71.99
 Other                         19.63      18.72       20.19         20.48      19.47     21.13         16.91      15.81      17.45
 Education (%)
 Illiterate                    30.16      28.35       31.26         31.91      29.55     33.44         24.54      23.78      24.91
 Primary school                40.98      39.28       42.01         41.23       39.5     42.35         40.16      38.42      41.02
 Junior middle school          24.92      27.54       23.33         23.36      26.42     21.38         29.93      31.8       29.01
 High school                    3.31       3.99        2.90          2.95       3.74     2.44           4.47      4.96       4.23
 College and above              0.63       0.85        0.50          0.55       0.79     0.39           0.89      1.04       0.82

 Obs.                         82,356     31,125       51,231        62,791     24,675   38,116        19,565      6,450     13,115


Notes: We define the admissions from January 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010 as occurring before the reform, and the admissions
from October 1, 2010 to September 30, 2013 as occurring after the reform. We define College and above to include 2-year college,
3-year college, 4-year college, and graduate education. Column (1) summarizes the patients' demographic characteristics for
inpatient visits. In Columns (2) and (3), we break down the inpatient sample into pre- and post-reform periods. In Column
(4), we summarize the patients' demographic statistics for inpatient visits in township health centers. In Columns (5) and (6),
we decompose the township inpatient sample into pre- and post- reform periods. In Column (7), we summarize the patients'
demographic statistics for inpatient visits in county hospitals. In Columns (8) and (9), we decompose the county hospital
inpatient sample into pre- and post-reform periods.




                                                               34
                       Table 2: Average Inpatient Experiences in the Township Centers and County Hospitals

                                                      All                           Before                         After
                                                                                                                                         Diff.
                                             Mean       Std. Dev.           Mean       Std. Dev.           Mean       Std. Dev.

     Variables                                (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)
     Panel A: Township Centers

     Total Exp. (RMB)                      1,079.66      1,114.29         1,039.13       997.42          1,105.89      1,183.07       66.76***
       Drug Exp. (RMB)                      482.94          477.16         582.32        464.50           418.60        474.21       -163.72***
       Non-Drug Exp. (RMB)                  596.59          809.28         456.50        664.46           687.29        878.74       230.79***
     Inpatient Duration (Day)                 6.90           8.17            6.33            5.80           7.27           9.37        0.93***
     Insurance Deductible (RMB)             102.98          28.93          100.50            7.07         104.59           36.60       4.08***
     Reimbursement Rate (%)                  79.77           7.40           72.71            3.26          84.35           5.49       12.42***
     30-day Readmission Rate (%)              2.51          15.65            2.08         14.27             2.79           16.48       0.72***
35




     Panel B: County Hospitals

     Total Exp. (RMB)                      3,133.28      4,694.14         2,810.57      4,300.37         3,291.99      4,868.47      481.41***
       Drug Exp. (RMB)                     1,132.50      1,493.84         1,057.73      1,264.63         1,169.27      1,593.28      111.53***
       Non-Drug Exp. (RMB)                 2,000.76      3,723.79         1,752.77      3,580.97         2,122.72      3,786.24      369.95***
     Inpatient Duration (Day)                12.30          25.41           11.94         21.84            12.47           27.00        0.54*
     Insurance Deductible (RMB)             274.89          63.88          283.07         42.83           270.87           71.67      -12.20***
     Reimbursement Rate (%)                  65.47          12.45           53.11            6.42          71.55           9.95       18.43***
     30-day Readmission Rate (%)              2.77          16.41            2.06         14.21             3.12           17.38       1.06***
     Notes: We define the admissions from January 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010 as occurring before the reform, and define the admissions
     from October 1, 2010 to September 30, 2013 as occurring after the reform. The inpatient reimbursement is only qualified for expenditures
     exceeding a certain threshold. Here we denote that threshold as insurance deductible, which might change annually according to the
     government policies. The reimbursement rate would also change annually according to the local government policies. 30-day readmission
     is a dummy that takes value 1 if the patient incurred revisits to any medical facility for the same diagnosis within a month of discharge.
Table 3: Impact of the ZMP on Drug, Non-Drug and Total Expenditures: Admission-Level Analysis

                            Drug Expenditures                   Non-Drug Expenditures                Total Expenditures

                              (1)                (2)                 (3)             (4)                (5)           (6)


  Town × Post              -0.626***         -0.634***          0.278***         0.272***             -0.108        -0.114
                            (0.111)            (0.107)           (0.099)          (0.095)            (0.090)        (0.088)


  Hospital FE                Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes
  Quarter FE                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes
  Insurance Policy           Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes
  Demographics                No                 Yes                 No             Yes                 No            Yes
  Diagnosis                   No                 Yes                 No             Yes                 No            Yes
  Adj. R2                    0.278              0.328             0.467            0.521               0.393         0.444
  Obs.                      82,356             82,356            82,356           82,356              82,356        82,356
  Notes: In Columns (1) and (2), the dependent variables are the drug expenditure per visit; in Columns (3)
  and (4), the dependent variables are the non-drug expenditure per visit; and in Columns (5) and (6), the
  dependent variables are the total medical expenditure per visit. All dependent variables are in log values. We
  estimate the regression based on Eq. (17). Insurance policy measures the generosity of the insurance, and is
  calculated as the out-of-pocket expenditures of a typical enrollee based on the population's average inpatient
  expense last year according to the current year's policy. Demographics include age, gender, education and
  marital status. Diagnosis includes a group of dummy variables indicating to which Major Disease Categories
  the diagnosis belongs.    ,       and      represent statistical significance at 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 level, respectively.
  Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.




                                                                36
Table 4: Impact of the ZMP on Non-Drug Expenditures by Subcategories

                          Infusion        Bed       Nurse         Exam.      Material

                             (1)           (2)        (3)            (4)         (5)


  Town × Post              0.166         0.261**    0.223         0.352*       0.035
                          (0.120)        (0.116)   (0.142)        (0.195)     (0.153)


  Hospital FE               Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes
  Quarter FE                Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes
  Insurance Policy          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes
  Demographics              Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes
  Diagnosis                 Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes
  Adj. R   2
                           0.245          0.330     0.515         0.398        0.378
  Obs.                     82,356        82,356     82,356        82,356       82,356
  Note: We extend our analysis based on Eq. (17) to the subcategories of exam-
  ination and service expenditure. We check the total infusion expenditure, bed
  expenditure, nursing care expenditure, examination and service expenditure and
  medical device material expenditures separately. The outcome variables are all
  in log values. In all the regressions, we control for the generosity of the insurance
  policy. We also control for the demographic characteristics for each patient and
  the diagnosis in 20 Major Disease Categories. ,           and      represent represent
  statistical significance at 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 level, respectively. Standard errors
  are clustered at the hospital level.




                                           37
Table 5: Impact of the ZMP on Drug, Non-Drug, Total Expenditures and Number of Admissions:
                               Physician-Level and Hospital-Level Analysis

                                     Drug Exp.         Non-Drug Exp.          Total Exp.       Num. Admissions

                                           (1)                  (2)                (3)                   (4)
 A. Physician-Level Results

 Town × Post                         -0.634***              0.230**            -0.135**               -0.359*
                                      (0.0863)              (0.0915)           (0.0640)               (0.177)
 Quarter FE                                Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Physician FE                              Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Adj. R   2
                                        0.703                0.791               0.744                 0.608
 Obs.                                   4,060                4,060               4,060                 4,060
 B. Hospital-Level Results
 Town × Post                         -0.549***             0.353***             -0.0581              -0.487***
                                       (0.107)              (0.113)            (0.0862)               (0.174)
 Hospital FE                               Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Quarter FE                                Yes                  Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Adj. R2                                0.849                0.904               0.896                 0.844
 Obs.                                      487                  487               487                   487
 Note: The upper panel of this table analyzes the physician-level outcome change based on Eq. (19). The de-
 pendent variables are calculated at the physician-quarter level. We first calculate the total drug/non-drug/total
 expenditure and the total number of inpatient admissions treated by that physician in the quarter. Then we
 divide the total expenditure by the total number of inpatient admissions to calculate the average drug/non-drug
 expenditure/total expenditure incurred by a specific physician. Then we take the log value of the average ex-
 penditures and the total number of admissions as the outcome variable. The lower Panel of this table analyzes
 the hospital-level outcome change. Similar to the upper panel, we construct the average hospital-quarter level
 drug, non-drug and total expenditure, as well as the total number of admissions, and take the log values for
 all the outcome variables.    ,     and      represent represent statistical significance at 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 level,
 respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.




                                                           38
             Table 6: Impact of the ZMP on Drug Variety, Quantity, Retail Price and Expenditure


                                                                                  Expensive Drug          Expensive Drug
                          Quant.        Price          Exp.           Variety        Exp. Share            Quant. Share
                            (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)                     (6)


Town×Post                -0.178**      -0.171**     -0.348***          -0.024           -0.085                  -0.061
                          (0.081)      (0.081)       (0.055)          (0.062)          (0.059)                 (0.052)


Quarter FE                  Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Hospital FE                 Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Insurance Policy            Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Demographics                Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Diagnosis                   Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes                    Yes
Drug-Season FE              Yes          Yes           Yes                -                -                       -
Adj. R   2
                           0.879        0.955         0.810            0.181            0.335                   0.177
Obs.                      862,402      862,402       862,402          82,356            82,274                  82,274
Note: In Columns (1) to (3), each observation is at the visit-drug level. In Column (1) drug quantity is the standardized
quantity defined as the total units prescribed in the visit times the package volume for a certain type of drug. In Column
(2), the drug retail price is defined as the drug expenditure divided by the standardized prescription quantity in the
visit. In Column (3), we calculate the total expenditure for each type of drug during the inpatient visit. In Column
(4), each observation is at the inpatient visit level, and the dependent variable is the total number of different types of
drugs prescribed in the visit. All outcome variables in Columns (1)-(4) are in logs. In Columns (5) and (6), we define
the "Expensive" drug as drugs whose average wholesale price is above the median wholesale price of drugs with the same
chemical name during our sample period. In Column (5), we calculate the share of "Expensive" drug expenditure out of
the total drug expenditure in the visit. In Column (6), we calculate the share of "Expensive" drug prescription quantity
of the total drug prescription quantity in the visit. In all regressions, we control for quarter fixed effects, hospital fixed
effects and patients demographics and disease codes, and Columns (1)-(3) control for the drug-season fixed effects as well.
 ,      and      represent statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 levels, respectively. Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the hospital-drug level for Columns (1)-(3) and are clustered at the hospital level for Columns (4)-(6).




                                                               39
                     Table 7: Readmission Rate and Inpatient Duration


                      Revisit in 2 Weeks           Revisit in a Month               Inpatient Duration

Mean value                      0.016                        0.026                            8.18

                        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)


Town × Post            -0.006       -0.007          -0.005        -0.005             -0.033       -0.107
                      (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.004)            (1.186)       (1.198)


Hospital FE             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
Quarter FE              Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
Payment Policy          Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
Demographics            No              Yes            No            Yes              No             Yes
Diagnosis               No              Yes            No            Yes              No             Yes
Adj. R   2
                       0.009        0.028           0.011         0.022              0.135           0.148
Obs.                  82,356        82,356          82,356       82,356             82,356        82,356
Notes: For each inpatient admission record, we calculate whether the patient incurs another
inpatient visit within a certain period of time due to the same disease. In Columns (1) and (2),
the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the same patient revisited the hospitals
for the same diagnosis within 2 weeks, and in Columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable is a
dummy indicating whether the same patient revisited hospitals for the same diagnosis within
a month. In Columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is the inpatient duration in logs.
The regressions all follow the same specification as Eq. (17).    ,    and      represent statistical
significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
hospital level.




                                                  40
                          Table A1: Disease Distributions in Township Centers and County Hospitals before and after the ZMP

                                                                                    Before ZMP                                After ZMP
                                                                                                                                                         Difference
                                                                         County     Township     Difference       County     Township      Difference

                                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)

     Certain infectious and parasitic diseases                            0.213       0.014       0.200***         0.224        0.010      0.213***         0.013
     Neoplasms                                                            0.042       0.031       0.011***         0.043        0.035      0.008***         -0.003
     Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain           0.002       0.002         0.000          0.004        0.004        0.000          0.000
     disorders involving the immune mechanism
     Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases                       0.008       0.005        0.002*          0.010        0.010        -0.001         -0.003
     Mental and behavioral disorders                                      0.025       0.000       0.025***         0.026        0.001      0.025***         0.000
     Diseases of the nervous system                                       0.004       0.002         0.001          0.003        0.003        0.000          -0.001
     Diseases of the eye and adnexa                                       0.023       0.001       0.022***         0.030        0.001      0.029***        0.007**
     Diseases of the ear and mastoid process                              0.009       0.015       -0.005***        0.011        0.018      -0.007***        -0.001
A1




     Diseases of the circulatory system                                   0.057       0.056         0.000          0.055        0.062       -0.006*         -0.007
     Diseases of the respiratory system                                   0.177       0.439       -0.262***        0.182        0.457      -0.275***        -0.013
     Diseases of the digestive system                                     0.118       0.175       -0.057***        0.111        0.160      -0.049***        0.008
     Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue                         0.010       0.010         0.000          0.010        0.009        0.001          0.001
     Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue         0.023       0.025         -0.002         0.030        0.028        0.001          0.003
     Diseases of the genitourinary system                                 0.106       0.121       -0.015**         0.086        0.107      -0.022***        -0.007
     Pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium                            0.006       0.002       0.004***         0.005        0.002      0.003***         0.000
     Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal              0.001       0.001         0.000          0.002        0.000      0.002***        0.002**
     abnormalities
     Symptoms, signs, and abnormal clinical and laboratory find-          0.011       0.023       -0.012***        0.015        0.021      -0.006***        0.005*
     ings, not elsewhere classified
     Injury, poisoning, and certain other consequences of external        0.140       0.066       0.074***         0.131        0.057      0.074***         0.000
     causes
     External causes of morbidity and mortality                           0.013       0.004       0.009***         0.012        0.006      0.007***         -0.003
     Factors influencing health status and contact with health ser-       0.010       0.008         0.002          0.010        0.010        0.000          -0.002
     vices

     Note: We define January 1, 2009 - September 30, 2010 as before ZMP, and define October 1, 2010 - September 30, 2013 as after the ZMP. We first calculate the
     mean disease rate for 20 disease categories. Then we calculate the difference between township center and county hospitals both before and after the ZMP. Finally
     we check whether such difference has been consistent over time.
     Table A2: Robust Check: Patients' Risk Score


                                Patients' Risk Score
                               (1)         (2)          (3)

   Town × Post               0.516        0.188       -0.122
                            (0.434)      (0.542)     (0.413)


   Hospital FE                 No          Yes         Yes
   Quarter FE                  No          Yes         Yes
   Insurance Policy            No          Yes         Yes
   Demographics                No          No          Yes
   Diagnosis                   No          No          Yes
   Adj. R2                   0.010        0.058       0.494
   Obs.                     82,356       82,356       82,356
Note: We analyze Eq. (17) by setting patient's risk score as the
outcome variable to check the robustness of the sample distri-
bution before and after the ZMP. To calculate the patients' risk
score, we project the patients' total medical expenditure per year
on their age, gender and disease codes. Then we normalize their
expenditure by the average annual medical expenditure across all
patients in that county as the risk score.    ,      and      represent
statistical significant at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 levels, respectively.
The standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.




                                 A2
                                                        Table A3: Robustness Checks: Alternative Sample Restrictions


                               Including the Two Largest County Hospitals                    Excluding 6 Months Prior to the Reform                                 Excluding Private Hospitals

                               Drug Exp.       Non-drug Exp.           Total Exp.           Drug Exp.        Non-drug Exp.         Total Exp.          Drug Exp.          Non-drug Exp.    Total Exp.

                                   (1)                (2)                  (3)                   (4)                (5)                (6)                    (7)               (8)             (9)


     Town × Post               -0.514***            0.173**            -0.201***             -0.629***           0.281**              -0.119           -0.666***              0.263*         -0.173
                                 (0.069)            (0.076)              (0.061)               (0.094)            (0.118)            (0.101)                (0.068)           (0.143)        (0.103)


     Hospital FE                   Yes                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes            Yes
     Quarter FE                    Yes                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes            Yes
     Insurance Policy              Yes                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes            Yes
     Demographic                   Yes                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes            Yes
A3




     Diagnosis                     Yes                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes                   Yes               Yes            Yes
     Adj. R    2
                                  0.957              0.581                0.536                 0.358              0.524              0.453                 0.294             0.504          0.392
     Obs.                       127,249             127,249              127,249               72,801             72,801             72,801                 72,642            72,642         72,642
     Note: We analyze Eq. (17) using different sample specifications to check the robustness of the estimation results. In Columns (1)-(3), we analyze the sample results by including
     the two largest county hospitals in our sample. In Columns (4)-(6), we analyze the sample results excluding observations that took place within 6 months prior to the reform. In
     Columns (7)-(9), we analyze the sample excluding the four private hospitals. In all the regressions, we set the log value of drug expenditure, non-drug expenditure, and the total
     medical expenditure as the dependent variable, and include the patients' demographic characteristics, disease code, and reimbursement rate as the independent variable.               , 

     and      represent statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 levels, respectively. The standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.
                     Table A4: Robustness Check: Month Fixed Effects

                                  Drug Exp.                Non-Drug Exp.             Total Exp.
                             (1)           (2)              (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)
Town × Post              -0.634    
                                       -0.631     
                                                       0.272     
                                                                    0.270   
                                                                                 -0.114       -0.115
                          (0.107)        (0.106)          (0.095)   (0.095)     (0.088)      (0.088)
Hospital FE                  Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Quarter FE                   Yes              -            Yes          -          Yes           -
Month FE                      -            Yes               -        Yes           -          Yes
Insurance Policy             Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Demographics                 Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Diagnosis                    Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Adj. R2                    0.328          0.329           0.521      0.522       0.444        0.445
Obs.                       82,356        82,356           82,356    82,356       82,356       82,356
Note: We analyze Eq. (17) by including month fixed effects to check the robustness of the
estimation results. In Columns (1), (3), and (5), we show our baseline regression results. In
Columns (2), (4), and (6), we include month fixed effects to control for more cyclical changes.
 ,      and      represent statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 levels, respectively. The
standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.




                                                     A4
