                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INNOVATION-DRIVEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                        Tristan L. Botelho
                                          Daniel Fehder
                                         Yael Hochberg

                                       Working Paper 28990
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28990


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




Andrew Hebert, Emma Kirby, Abigail Liu, Arden Onanian, Gabriel Rojas and Sidney Saint-
Hilaire provided excellent research assistance. Daniel Lee provided valuable input to early
proposal drafts. Opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do
not represent the opinions or policy of the institutions with which the authors are affiliated. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tristan L. Botelho, Daniel Fehder, and Yael Hochberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurship
Tristan L. Botelho, Daniel Fehder, and Yael Hochberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28990
July 2021
JEL No. O0,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Entrepreneurship is thought to be a key driver of economic growth. While there are myriad forms
of entrepreneurship, ranging from self-employment to small and medium size enterprises to
technology-and innovation-driven startups, recent research provides evidence that the relationship
between entrepreneurship and economic growth is driven not by overall quantity of new firm
entry, but rather by a small subset of high-growth startups that are primarily categorized as
innovation-driven. This paper provides a survey of the growing literature on the economics of
such innovation-driven entrepreneurship. We begin by distinguishing between the various forms
of entrepreneurship, which are often confounded in both theory and empirical work. We lay out
the current state of knowledge, and describe the challenges faced by researchers in the field,
particularly around measurement, data and identification. We conclude with an overview of the
major open questions and directions for future research in the area.

Tristan L. Botelho                              Yael Hochberg
Yale University                                 Jones Graduate School of Business
Yale School of Management                       Rice University
165 Whitney Avenue, Office 5473                 6100 Main Street, MS-531
New Haven, CT 06511                             McNair Hall Room 331
tristan.botelho@yale.edu                        Houston, TX 77005
                                                and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Daniel Fehder                                   and also NBER
University of Southern California               hochberg@rice.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90007
fehder@marshall.usc.edu
1. Introduction

"...the entrepreneur is the single most important player in a modern economy."
       ­Edward Lazear (2005)


   Entrepreneurship is an area of study that is not new to the economics literature. The
introduction of new ideas into the economy sits at the front and center of our current understanding
of economic growth (Aghion and Howitt 1992; Romer 1990). These new ideas take many forms,
ranging from brand-new discoveries to innovative recombinations of existing material and labor,
and are limited only by the laws of nature (Weitzman 1998). A significant source of integration of
new ideas into the economy are entrepreneurial firms. One of the first proponents of this role for
entrepreneurs was Schumpeter (1942), who described them as engaging in a process of "creative
destruction," constantly replacing current modes of production with more productive ones.
Schumpeter's observations spawned a large theoretical literature examining the nature of
entrepreneurial discovery (see e.g. Kirzner 1997), which has since been incorporated into a
coherent equilibrium account of endogenous economic growth that stresses the role of entry by
new firms (Aghion and Howitt 1992). These theoretical developments were followed by a raft of
empirical studies that further emphasize the importance of new firm entry for economic growth
(e.g. Davis and Haltiwanger 1992; Davis et al. 1998; Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2012;
Decker et al. 2014).
   These empirical studies have furthered the notion that economic growth is tied to business
dynamics--the process of firm entry, expansion, contraction and exit (e.g. Jovanovic and
MacDonald 1994). For example, studies using U.S. Census data show that job growth is
disproportionately driven by new firms (Davis and Haltiwanger 1992; Davis et al. 1998;
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2012; Decker et al. 2014; Fairlie, Miranda, and Zolas 2019).
These young firms, however, exhibit positive skewness in their growth rate distribution, suggesting
that the relationship between entrepreneurship and economic growth is driven not by the overall
quantity of new firm activity, but rather by smaller subset of high-growth, innovation-driven
startups (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2012; Decker et al. 2014)--not only in the U.S., but




                                                 2
also across many other developed countries (Bravo-Biosca et al. 2016). 1 These patterns are perhaps
not surprising: studies of small business entrepreneurs emphasize the low growth prospects of the
average self-employed individual (Hamilton 2000; Hurst and Pugsley 2011) and suggest that most
small business owners are different from the Kirzner or Schumpeterian view of "innovation-
driven" entrepreneurs--with little desire to grow, innovate, or bring new products to market.
Further emphasizing this distinction between types of entrepreneurs, recent studies such as
Guzman and Stern (2015, 2020) document substantial regional and intra-regional variation in the
growth potential for startups, even within the same industry. Only a fraction of new firm starts
exhibit high growth and contribute substantially to job creation, innovation, and productivity
growth. The vast majority of new ventures have low growth potential from the outset (Schoar
2010; Hamilton 2000; Hurst and Pugsley 2011).
    While this distinction between types of new ventures is not always straightforward to ascertain
ex ante, it is of great importance to entrepreneurs, policy makers, and researchers. The drivers of
discovery, founding, funding, growth, and success are likely to be heavily dependent on the type
of entrepreneurship entered into. Yet both policy makers and researchers often treat entrepreneurs
as a homogenous group (Hurst and Pugsley 2011). As an example, while population-level indices
such as the Business Dynamics Statistics Database suggest a secular decline in the rate of business
dynamism and new firm formation overall (Decker et al., 2016; Hathaway & Litan, 2014), research
focused on venture capital and innovation-driven entrepreneurship documents a sizable increase
in the funding of growth-oriented entrepreneurial businesses (Gornall & Strebulaev, 2015), and
quality-adjusted measures of new business formation that capture the likelihood that a startup is
innovation-driven appear to follow a cyclical pattern sensitive to economic and capital market
conditions (Guzman & Stern, 2020). Put differently, different definitions of entrepreneurship lead
to different conclusions about the rate of entrepreneurship activity in the economy.
    As researchers increasingly turn their focus to the topic of entrepreneurial activity, it is ever
more important that we distinguish between the varying types of entrepreneurial activity and their
different dynamics and needs. This survey takes this as a starting point, emphasizing the known




     1   Consistent with these findings, related work by Acemoglu and Cao (2015) shows that in innovation intensive
sectors, young firms are also the most innovation intensive.
                                                          3
and unknown regarding innovation-driven entrepreneurship, and where further study could shed
critical light.
    Much of the economics literature in entrepreneurship, however, confounds multiple of the
above categories of entrepreneurial activity. As a result, we often know less than we think we do
about the specific mechanisms at work in the entrepreneurial production function of each of these
groups. This survey aims to solidify what we know regarding the innovation-driven
entrepreneurship that is so critical to future economic growth, while highlighting gaps and areas
of particular interest for future research.

2. Types of Entrepreneurship

    We begin by describing the distinction between the various types of entrepreneurship that have
been studied in the economics literature. Definitions of entrepreneurs in economic theory vary
from individuals who take economic risks (Knight, 1921; Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979), to those
who innovate and render older technologies obsolete (Schumpeter 1942), to those who assemble
human, physical and information resources in an efficient manner (Lazear 2004). Policy-makers
and practitioners often define entrepreneurs as those who set up a business and take on financial
risks in the hope of profit, consistent with the view of entrepreneurs as job creators and drivers of
economic growth. In the popular press, the image of the entrepreneur is often tied to the process
of technological innovation that drives economic growth.
    Certainly, many activities can be reasonably labeled as entrepreneurship, from creation of a
new product or service line to establishment of a new company to self-employment. The types of
entrepreneurship studied in the economics literature can be broadly classified into four buckets.
First, a larger literature, primarily in development economics, has explored what we label here as
subsistence entrepreneurs. Subsistence entrepreneurship has primarily been studied in the context
of developing countries but is more generally defined as poverty-driven individual
entrepreneurship that provides services in a local community in a variety of manners. Typically,
subsistence entrepreneurs are providing for themselves and their families, often at a minimal level,
as a substitute for low-wage employment. The typical subsistence entrepreneur has limited
alternative employment opportunities. While present in large numbers in many developing
economies, such entrepreneurs often have limited spillovers outside their own households. A
second category, common to both developed and developing economy, are the self-employed. In
                                                 4
the western world, this category typically includes consultants, ad hoc self-employed doing free-
lancing or piece work jobs as a Schedule C activity, lawyers and doctors in private practice, and
gig economy workers. Importantly, this category of self-employed typically is not organized for
growth or for the purposes of employing others.
   While both these categories of entrepreneurial activity are important and influential areas of
research that deserve their own coverage, they are distinct from the process of creating an employer
business. The remaining two buckets in the entrepreneurship literature, in contrast, study
incorporated, employer-based businesses. Most commonly, in much of the entrepreneurship
literature, these entrepreneurs are split in two categories: "traditional" business entrepreneurs
(TBE), and innovation-driven entrepreneurs (IDE). The distinction between these categories is
primarily driven by differences in the level of uncertainty surrounding the type of business being
launched.
   Entrepreneurs in the "traditional" business category are typically starting businesses that are
based on traditional business models and approaches and in existing markets, where probability
distributions for outcomes can be well-estimated, and risk profiles are known. These entrepreneurs
may, in fact, be oriented towards growth (for example, an entrepreneur starting a chain of cross-
fit gyms or Italian restaurants), but in contrast to innovation-driven entrepreneurs, they employ
well-understood business models and operate in known markets where risk can be well-assessed.
This category of new businesses may also involve incremental improvement on an existing model
brought about through learning by doing.
   In contrast, entrepreneurs in the final category--innovation-driven entrepreneurship--which
this article will focus on, enter into new--often unknown or unproven--markets, and are
characterized by high Knightian uncertainty. In other words, the markets, technologies and
business models employed by these entrepreneurs are such that the nature and parameterization of
the probability distribution of outcomes is entirely unknown. Thus, the definition of these different
categories of entrepreneurs is organized around a characterization of risk versus uncertainty, rather
than growth intentions. That said, innovation-driven startups, while relatively small in number,
have significant potential to be transformative. Entrepreneurs in this category typically do have
ambitions and capabilities aligned with scaling a dynamic and growing business, and usually have
a strong intent to grow.

2.1. Concretizing the Concept of Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurship
                                            5
   William Gibson, a noted futurist and author, once quipped that "the future is here--it's just
unevenly distributed." This aphorism concretizes the core theoretical constructs that have been
used to explain innovation: exploration and recombination. Large technical or scientific
discoveries are rare, and the full impact of these discoveries can take decades to fully manifest in
the economy and society more broadly (Rosenberg 1982; Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995). This
impact is realized through the creative recombination of these technologies with prior products,
technologies, and business models. For example, the computer has existed since 1946; the creation
of the internet dates back at least to the creation of TCP/IP in the 1970s; and the world wide web
to 1990--yet it was not until 2011 that Marc Andreessen, the founder of Netscape and a well-
known venture capitalist, proclaimed that "software is eating the world" (Andreessen 2011).
Similarly, new business models or management practices often emerge in specific contexts and
industries, only to slowly diffuse across other industries and applications as they are combined
with other existing technologies or scientific advances. It is entrepreneurial activity that is based
in this process of exploration and recombination that we term innovation-driven entrepreneurship.
   Importantly, innovation-driven entrepreneurship does not necessarily require a new high-
technological advance per se, but merely a new recombination that produces a new way of
conducting a particular type of economic activity. For example, Chipotle Corporation began as a
simple taqueria competing in the fast-food industry with a relatively undifferentiated menu of tacos
and burritos. With their second store, however, Chipotle began innovating, inventing a novel (for
the food industry) assembly line concept that allowed 65,000 unique customizations of their menu.
This combinatorics-based assembly line approach allowed a seemingly customized eating
experience that both enabled higher prices while also delivering food faster than competitors such
as McDonalds or Burger King (Stock and Wong 2015). The assembly line and economies of scope
that were critical to this innovative approach are not a new concept; their application in the context
of the fast-food industry was the innovation. Chipotle's experiments ran contrary to the received
wisdom in the fast food industry and enabled a new niche--fast casual--that straddled fast-food
and casual dining (Yohn 2014). A similar story can be found in the application of the assembly
line in automobile manufacturing. Ford managers adapted the assembly line operations they
observed in the slaughterhouses of the meat-packing industry, realizing that step-wise disassembly
of carcasses could be redesigned to enable step-wise assembly of automobiles (Sloan 1963).


                                                  6
    Importantly, the nature of IDE startups leads to substantial differences relative to entrepreneurs
in the traditional business category and self-employment and subsistence entrepreneurship. These
differences manifest across a wide variety of aspects of the entrepreneur and venture, including
entrepreneur characteristics, human capital, funding and growth opportunities, competitive
dynamics, the nature of the intermediaries they deal with, and ecosystem and policy needs. These
differences are often largest in areas where the differences between risk and uncertainty are most
important (financing, incentives) and in human capital (innovation versus exploitation). The
distinction between categories of entrepreneurs is thus of substantial import--it affects how policy,
regulation and entrepreneur support programs should be designed, depending on the type of
entrepreneurship the social planner wishes to encourage or support. Yet much of the economic
literature to date does not distinguish between these very different types of entrepreneurship. As a
result, any survey of the literature needs not only review extant scholarship that touches on
entrepreneurship, but also highlight whether and to what extent such research is focused on or
pertains to IDE, TBE, or both. This is particularly important as many key data sources, including
private census data, do not make such a distinction.

3. Who Enters into Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurship?

    The factors that drive entry into innovation-driven entrepreneurial activity are not truly
understood as of yet. 2 Presumably, individuals should enter into entrepreneurship only if the utility
of entry into entrepreneurship exceeds the utility for wage employment. Many factors may enter
into this utility function: entry may happen when an individual expects to earn more from
entrepreneurship than from wage employment, and/or when they highly value the non-wage
aspects of entrepreneurship. Consistent with this, on the small business side, a substantial body of
research argues that the mean entrepreneur earns less than a similar salaried worker (Borjas and
Bronars 1989; Evans and Leighton 1989; Hamilton 2000). Other evidence suggest that the returns
to entrepreneurial activity are insufficiently high to justify entry into entrepreneurship (Moskowitz


     2 Relatedly, there are still outstanding questions about the optimal-level of entry of innovation-driven firms for

stimulating productivity growth and improving social welfare. Building off of canonical micro-founded dynamic macro
models (Hopenhayn, 1992; Klette & Kortum, 2004; Lentz & Mortensen, 2008), a burgeoning literature in macro dynamics
has begun to give us a deeper understanding of the interplay between industry structure and innovation on productivity
growth (Acemoglu et al., 2018), tempering our largely positive view of the role of innovation-driven entrepreneurship on
productivity growth and social welfare (Garcia Macia et al., 2019). While these topics are connected to innovation-driven
entrepreneurship, coverage of this large and fast-growing literature falls out of the scope of this review.
                                                           7
and Vissing-Jørgensen 2002; Hall and Woodward 2010), although more recent work has suggested
that calculation of return on investment to entrepreneurship is sensitive to the time window used
(Kartashova 2014).
   As a result, researchers have argued that other elements must play into the decision to start
one's own small business, such as non-pecuniary benefits, higher order risk-preferences, and so
forth. Indeed, Hurst and Pugsley (2011) find that a large share of US business owners were
originally motivated to enter into entrepreneurship for reasons other than money, such as wanting
flexible work hours, to be their own boss, or to pursue a passion. Only 32.2% entered because they
felt they had a good business idea, and a further 2.2% enter because of lack of other job options.
In contrast, Manso (2016) argues that research on the costs of entrepreneurial entry fail to account
for the option value of experimenting with new ideas: entering into entrepreneurship may be
equivalent to buying a lottery ticket on high wage, and thus, across all ventures might be NPV
positive even if most ventures fail and lead to wage reduction and drop out.
   Many of the existing studies on entry, however, mix the different types of entrepreneurship,
such as small business and innovation driven, and therefore are not straightforward to interpret. If
higher risk-aversion is observed across the self-employed and small business owners, it does not
necessarily follow that we will observe similar behavioral preferences in innovation-driven
entrepreneurs, an incredibly small but important fraction of business owners. To understand who
enters into innovation-driven entrepreneurship, in the below we discuss research along two
dimensions: structural factors, such as policy and programs, and individual factors, such as
behavioral traits and human capital. Although we use this line of demarcation for simplicity,
structural and individual factors are highly related and dependent on one another.

3.1. Structural Factors

   Knight (1921) argues that bearing risk is one of the essential characteristics of
entrepreneurship, and therefore, entrepreneurs must finance themselves and bear the risk of failure.
In contrast, (Schumpeter 1942) argues that the role of the entrepreneur is to identify arbitrage
opportunities in the economy, and it is the role of the capital markets to find him an investor willing
to bear the risks for them. For TBE, the majority of this financial risk is experienced by the
entrepreneur. In contrast, for IDE, much of this financial risk is shared by investors. Thus, relaxing
some constraints may motivate TBE while relaxing others will motivate IDE, or both. This is

                                                  8
another important reason for research to be explicit regarding the type of entrepreneurship their
theory and analysis is informing, or else subsequent policy risks being misguided.
   Several leading theories posit that liquidity constraints limit entry into entrepreneurship (see
Bernanke and Gertler 1989; Kiyotaki and Moore 1997; Cagetti and De Nardi 2006; Evans and
Jovanovic 1989). Consistent with this, considerable research suggests that wealth in general shapes
entry into self-employment (Bellon et al. 2020; Evans and Jovanovic 1989; Evans and Leighton
1989; Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen 1994; Fairlie 1999) and that housing wealth in particular
influences both entry into self-employment (Black, Meza, and Jeffreys 1996; Fairlie and
Krashinsky 2012; Fort et al. 2013; Corradin and Popov 2015; Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar 2017)
and employment in small firms (Adelino, Schoar, and Severino 2015). For small and traditional
businesses, however, Hurst and Lusardi (2004) show that the propensity to become a business
owner is a nonlinear function of wealth: the relationship between wealth and entry into
entrepreneurship is essentially flat over the majority of the wealth distribution, and it is only at the
top of the wealth distribution--after the ninety-fifth percentile--that a positive relationship can be
found. In terms of debt, Krishnan and Wang (2018) find that students loan debt decreases the
likelihood of entrepreneurship--$10,000 of student debt lowers rate of entrepreneurship by 7
percent relative to $0 of debt--with the largest effect for IDE.
   In a similar manner, declining costs of becoming an entrepreneur may also motivate
entrepreneurial entry. A significant barrier to entry for IDE relates to the increased cost of material
and labor. From a material perspective, Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) document that
the costs of starting a new software business have fallen dramatically due to cloud computing, and
that, as a result, resource requirements to assess market receptivity have been reduced
significantly. Relatedly there has been a robust line of work analyzing entrepreneurship subsidies
around the world: Baumgartner and Caliendo (2008), Caliendo and Kritikos (2010), and Pfeiffer
and Reize (2000), for Germany; Wadensjö and Andersson (2007), for Sweden; Monte and Scalera
(2001), for Italy; Meager, Bates, and Cowling (2003), for UK; Cueto and Mato (2006), for Spain;
and Ejrnaes and Hochguertel (2008), for Denmark.
   Researchers have recently taken advantage of policy changes at the firm and government level
to better identify the role of general wealth effects on entrepreneurship, with Lerner (2020)
providing a review of government incentives in entrepreneurship. Jensen, Leth-Petersen, and
Nanda (2014) find that mortgage reform in Denmark leads to a small increase in the number of
                                                   9
individuals who become entrepreneurs. Here, a $30,000 increase in credit led to a 4 percent
increase in the number of entrepreneurs; however, these firms are lower quality. Ferreira et al.
(2020) find that a program in Portugal, which allows those on unemployment to collect benefits to
start a business, increases entrepreneurship (see also Hombert et al., 2020 for another example of
unemployment insurance and entrepreneurship). At the university level, a change in ownership
rights--decreasing founder compensation--in Norway led to a significant decrease in the rates of
entrepreneurial entry and venture quality (Hvide and Jones 2018). Again, it is prudent to highlight
that many of these wealth effects may motivate TBE but not IDE. For example, most founders of
IDE would enjoy a $30,000 increase in credit, however, for ventures that rely on millions of dollars
of funding this is unlikely to be enough impetus.
   In terms of indirect wealth effects, Fairlie, Kapur, and Gates (2011) find that a friction to
entrepreneurial entry is employer-provided health insurance. Individuals without health insurance
from their spouse are less likely to become entrepreneurs. Further consistent with
"entrepreneurship lock," Fairlie, Kapur, and Gates (2011) show that business ownership rates are
higher for individuals just over age 65 (who are eligible for Medicare) relative to individuals just
under age 65. Other studies in the literature find mixed results, with some estimating that health
insurance reduces transitions into self-employed business ownership by as much as 25% and others
finding no evidence that health insurance reduces business creation (Holtz-Eakin, Penrod, and
Rosen 1996; Currie and Madrian 1999; Bruce, Hotlz-Eakin, and Quinn 2000; Wellington 2001;
DeCicca 2007).
   Apart from financial factors, researchers have highlighted the role of other structural factors in
motivating entrepreneurship, such as economic environment, training programs, peer effects, and
employer dynamics. Fairlie (2013) shows that local labor market conditions are a major
determinant of entrepreneurship, pooling all types of entrepreneurship. Higher local
unemployment rates are found to increase the probability that individuals start businesses. Home
ownership and local home values for homeowners are also found to have positive effects on
business creation, but these effects are noticeably smaller. Individuals who are initially not
employed respond more to high local unemployment rates by starting businesses than wage/salary
workers. The results point to a consistent picture ­ the positive influences of slack in labor markets
outweigh the negative influences, resulting in higher levels of business creation.


                                                 10
   Relatedly, the availability of career risk protection or a safety net has been found to spur
entrepreneurial activity. Gottlieb, Townsend, and Xu (2016) find that extended job-protected
maternity leave increased the likelihood of entrepreneurship by 1.9 percentage points across
various industries. Barrios, Hochberg, and Yi (2020) show that income fallbacks help encourage
entry, using the staggered entry of the gig economy. Here, entrepreneurs are motivated to realize
the risk of entrepreneurship knowing that they have another avenue by which to earn an income.
Although this has been studied more generally, there is reason to believe that such security could
be helpful for both TBE and IDE.
   IDE entrepreneurs might also weigh entry based on the competitive dynamics of the industry
they might enter. Acquirer market concentration appears affects the propensity to become an
entrepreneur, with more fragmented markets leading to more entrepreneurial entry, but of lower
quality (Wang 2018). Similarly, platform strategies, which allow incumbents to subsidize
competition in one industry with customers in another, lead to substantially reduced entry in the
subsidized industry (where prices often are approaching or at zero) (Kamepalli, Rajan, and
Zingales 2020). For entrepreneurs entering with patents or other intellectual property rights,
conditional on entry, the quality of the patents in more competitive industries are higher (Wang
2020) but the ability of IPR to forestall competition or facilitate acquisition varies substantially
across industries (Cohen, Nelson and Walsh 2000; Gans, Hsu, and Stern 2002). Overall, evidence
suggests that the greater the ability of incumbents to compete with the potential startup, the less
entry is observed, but that the firms that do enter seem more oriented towards acquisition by
incumbents.
   In terms of entrepreneurship programs, Lyons and Zhang (2017) find that exposure to
entrepreneurship training increases the likelihood of subsequent IDE entry. They find that this
training is less impactful for individuals who have prior IDE experience and who have access to
important resources (e.g., social network). Accelerators play a similar role in helping entrepreneurs
learn about the viability of their venture thus resolving the aforementioned Knightian uncertainty
(Knight 1921). Supporting this point, Yu (2019) finds that accelerators lead to expedited failure
whereby accelerator companies close down earlier and raise less money conditional on closing.
   Exposure to peers with entrepreneurial experience has an effect on tendencies to engage in
entrepreneurial activity. Using an educational setting, Lerner and Malmendier (2013) find having
peers in one's MBA section decreases the rate of subsequent entrepreneurial entry. However,
                                                 11
evidence suggests that this decrease is due to the filtering out of lower quality entrepreneurship
ventures. Exposure to workplace peers also has an entry effect. Nanda and Sorensen (2009) find
that having co-workers who were entrepreneurs increases the likelihood of subsequent
entrepreneurial entry. Hacamo and Kleiner (2019) find in an educational setting that exposure to
peers confident in their entrepreneurial ability increases the likelihood of pursuing entrepreneurial
entry. This is also the case for children of entrepreneurs, who are more likely to start their own
firm (Lindquist, Sol, and Van Praag 2015).
   More broad research suggests that social networks are a key resource for entrepreneurial entry
and performance. Using Danish registry data, Dahl and Sorenson (2012) show that
entrepreneurs--across venture type and industry--that locate in their home region outperform
generate more profit and survive longer than entrepreneurs who do not. They contribute some of
this outperformance to superior opportunity recognition in an individual's home region (see also
Giannetti and Simonov 2009).
   The role of firm-level characteristics has also been highlighted. Employees from innovation-
driven firms that have spawned more entrepreneurs in the past are more likely to spawn subsequent
IDE in the future (Babina 2020; Habib, Hege, and Mella-Barral 2013); these ventures are more
likely to get financing (Burton, Sørensen, and Beckman 2002). Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein
(2005) explore entrepreneurial spawning of innovation-driven ventures from established
corporations and find that venture-backed firms are the most likely to spawn entrepreneurs (Babina
& Howell 2018) and among these firms that undiversified firms spawn the most subsequent firms.

3.2. Individual Factors

   Much of what motivates an individual to enter entrepreneurship has been tied to individual
factors from their behavioral traits to the human capital they possess. Behavioral traits and
characteristics such as time preferences, risk preferences, risk aversion and ambiguity aversion,
are thought to be key contributors to the choice to enter (or not enter) into entrepreneurial activity.
(Knight 1921) was the first to focus attention on the specific individuals that engage in
entrepreneurial activity and on an understanding of what makes them distinct from non-
entrepreneurs. Understanding the traits and preferences that drive entry are important because they
provide the basic building blocks that allow us to further expand theory in this area. This is
particularly important in light of the ever-growing findings that for most entrepreneurial activity,

                                                  12
individuals who choose to enter do so despite the fact that can expect to earn low risk-adjusted
returns (Astebro et al. 2014; Hamilton 2000). In terms of overview, Kerr, Kerr, and Xu (2018)
provide an extensive review of research in economics, psychology, and sociology literature on the
personality traits that entrepreneurs possess and how some differ from non-entrepreneurs (see also
Sauermann 2017 for an example of employee motivates in IDE versus established firms).
   Much of the literature to date focuses on small business entrepreneurs. Levine and Rubinstein
(2017) document that smart and illicit (risk-taking) tendencies as youth predict entry into self-
employment/small business. Puri and Robinson (2013) use data from the Survey of Consumer
Finance to measure and isolate the enjoyment of private benefits, attitudes toward risk, and
optimism for these groups. They find that small business entrepreneurs are more optimistic and
enjoy the nonpecuniary benefits of work more than wage earners. Small business entrepreneurs
embrace risk, but perhaps less so than commonly believed, as their risk-bearing is tempered by
longer planning horizons. Guiso and Paiella (2008) use household data to construct measures of
risk aversion and find that moving from the 10th to the 90th percentile of the distribution of risk
aversion lowers the probability of being self-employed by 19% of the sample mean, and that of
being an entrepreneur by 13%. Andersen and Nielsen (2012) show in sample of Danish
entrepreneurs that small business entrepreneurs are no more or less risk averse than the general
population, but that they have an S-shaped probability weighting function: they overweight the
probability of big success and underweight the probability of big failure. Moskowitz and Vissing-
Jørgensen (2002) posit that higher order risk preferences may provide one (of many) possible
explanation for their private equity premium puzzle--entrepreneurs may have a preference for
skewness.
   Other traits that have been less explored in the context of entrepreneurial entry are ambiguity
aversion and overconfidence (Bernardo & Welch, 2001; Camerer & Lovallo, 1999; Galasso &
Simcoe, 2011; Landier & Thesmar, 2009; Malmendier & Tate, 2005). Astebro et al. (2014) provide
an excellent survey on the topic of behavioral inputs into the decision to engage in entrepreneurial
activity. They present three candidate explanations for understanding the empirical facts related to
entry into entrepreneurial activity. None, however, can completely account for the patterns of low
returns observed by prior studies. As Astebro et al. (2014) note, understanding whether the pattern
of entry we observe are driven by behavioral biases versus preferences we can easily model is
important for the social planner when considering policies to promote entrepreneurial activity.
                                                13
Research has also shown how behavioral traits can be at odds for founders and the implications of
this. For example, Wasserman (2017) details the "rich versus king" trade-off that entrepreneurs
must make and the implications of these desires being at odds. Founders can strive towards
increasing value at all costs, such as allowing themselves to be replaced on the leadership team
(rich) or strive towards cementing their position as a leader at the firm at the expenses of value
creation (king). However, fully maximizing both dimensions is often too difficult.
   While behavioral traits are likely to be a factor in entry for both traditional business and
innovation-driven entrepreneurship, human capital may play a particularly strong role in entry into
entrepreneurship. Self-employed individuals are similar to wage employees in terms of general
skills and educational attainment (Fairlie 2002) however, entrepreneurs seemingly have a wide
breadth of human capital (Lazear 2004). Several leading theories emphasize that entrepreneurs
have unique human capital traits--including creativity, analytical skills, education, and managerial
acumen (Schumpeter, 1942; Lucas, 1978; Hvide & Oyer, 2018; Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979; Evans
& Jovanovic, 1989; Baumol, 1968; Murphy et al., 1991; Gennaioli et al., 2013). Entrepreneurs are
highly remunerated for these scarce skills and for the additional risks associated with
entrepreneurial endeavors (Lucas 1978; Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979).
   This has led to an influential discussion that entrepreneurs must be "jacks-of-all-trades,"
possessing a wide breadth of human capital, instead of specialists whose skills are more narrowly
focused (Lazear 2004). Accordingly, and in terms of IDE, Åstebro and Thompson (2011) find that
inventor entrepreneurs have more varied work experience. More generally, Levine and Rubinstein
(2017) show that incorporated businesses perform activities that demand strong non-routine
cognitive skills, such as creativity, analytical flexibility, and generalized problem solving (see also
Bernstein et al. 2018). Moreover, incorporated businesses utilize complex interpersonal
communications that are associated with managing and persuading. Burton, Sørensen, and
Beckman (2002) that those with jobs that are less innovative (sales, finance) are less likely to
pursue an IDE. These findings contrast starkly with the activities of non-incorporated self-
employed individuals, who tend to engage in activities that require relatively low levels of
cognitive skills (Levine and Rubinstein 2017). The incorporated small business owner tends to be
more educated and scored higher on learning aptitude tests as a teenager. When IDE entrepreneurs
are involved, education is even more important: Burton, Sørensen, and Beckman (2002) find that
individuals with advanced degrees are more likely to pursue IDE startups.
                                                  14
    More generally, this link between human capital and entry into entrepreneurship has been well
established (e.g., Campbell et al. 2012; Dobrev and Barnett 2005; Elfenbein, Hamilton, and Zenger
2010; Groysberg and Lee 2009; Hurst and Lusardi 2004; Nanda and Sorensen 2009). Along these
lines researchers have demonstrated that extracting rents from superior human capital can motivate
entrepreneurship. Carnahan et al. (2012) find that in the legal profession high performers are the
least to leave their firm; however, conditional on leaving the highest performers are the most likely
to enter entrepreneurship (see also Groysberg and Lee (2009). In addition to general human capital,
entrepreneurs can bring ideas and intellectual property that are unused or underutilized in
incumbent firms into their new ventures, a phenomenon commonly referred to as spin-outs or
spinoffs (Klepper 2007; Klepper & Sleeper 2005). The human capital needed also differs
depending on the type of entrepreneurship. Levine and Rubinstein (2017) show that business
owners from incorporated businesses perform activities that demand strong non-routine cognitive
skills, such as generalized problem solving, utilize complex interpersonal communications that are
associated with managing and persuading, and are more educated relative to the business owners
of unincorporated businesses.
    In terms of other individual characteristics, researchers have focused on the relationship
between age and entrepreneurial entry leading to some conflicting results. In terms of
entrepreneurial entry favoring younger individuals, researchers have put forth models related to
occupational choice which imply that individuals will try riskier occupations, such as
entrepreneurship when they are younger (Johnson, 1978; Jovanovic 1979; Miller 1984). Consistent
with this, Liang, Wang, and Lazear (2018) document that a standard deviation decrease in the
average age of a country leads to 2.5 percentage points more entrepreneurship. 3 These papers
contrast with empirical findings by Evans and Leighton (1989), who show that the hazard of entry
into self-employment is constant in age. In terms of entrepreneurial entry favoring the older
individuals, Azoulay et al. (2020) study data from the U.S. Census, and in terms of general
entrepreneurship they find that founders tend to be older. Among the fastest growing companies
the average founder age is 45 years old. Finally, although serial entrepreneurship has received little




     3   The aging of the U.S. population may in fact be a driver of the documented secular decline in new business
formation.
                                                          15
attention, especially for IDE, there is some broad evidence that prior entrepreneurship experience
is correlated with subsequent entrepreneurial activity (Lafontaine and Shaw 2016).

4. Strategic Choices

   The canonical entry models for entrepreneurship (e.g. Blanchflower and Oswald 1998; Evans
and Jovanovic 1989; Evans and Leighton 1989; Hamilton 2000; Hurst and Lusardi 2004; Levine
and Rubinstein 2017; Sørensen 2007) posit that an entrepreneur is endowed with a new idea for a
given industry and a certain level of productivity that enables her to successfully sustain
competition (or not) in this industry. These benchmark models of entry raise a number of questions
about the strategies chosen by entrepreneurs in their quest to enter into an industry and attempt to
grow and thrive: How do entrepreneurs choose the industry or location they will enter? What is
the relationship between new firms and incumbents? And how do new firms acquire the resources
they require to compete? Further complicating these strategic choices is the fact that entrepreneurs
have imperfect information and limited resources to use in order to discern which choice is
"correct" (Gans, Stern, and Agrawal 2020).
   One of the most parsimonious definitions of entrepreneurship is "the pursuit of opportunity in
advance of resources" (Stevenson and Jarillo 1990), and new IDE ventures are typically resource-
constrained. Given these constraints, "the central strategic challenge for an entrepreneur is how to
choose" (Gans, Stern, and Wu 2019). The choices faced by entrepreneurs encompass many key
areas, including with whom and in what manner they will compete and collaborate, how the
product (or service) will be commercialized, which customers will be served, and where to locate
the firm. These strategic choices are critical to an entrepreneur's ability to create value, as a high-
quality idea that is commercialized inefficiently or targeted to the wrong customer will
underperform. Resolving the uncertainties associated with these strategic choices can help an
entrepreneur maximize their likelihood of success (Knight, 1921; Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979;
O'Brien et al., 2003).

4.1. Competition versus Collaboration

   As new ideas and technical capabilities are created across the economy through research and
development from companies and universities, the applicability of these new-to-the-world recipes
and awareness of them varies across firms depending on their position in the economy (Griliches
                                                  16
1992; Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen 2013). Spillovers from these R&D processes create
new opportunities for new entrants: incumbent firms do not take advantage of all the new
opportunities that arise (Henderson 1993), and their capacity to do so seems to vary by the size of
the firm (Aghion et al. 2014; Akcigit and Kerr 2018). While firms can contract over ideas through
intellectual property rights (IPR), which allows cooperation between incumbents and entrants, as
an alternative to creative destruction (Arora and Gambardella 2010), this does not diminish the
role of new entry in these accounts. Rather, a nuanced view of the role of entrepreneurs suggests
that there can be excess entry and excess creative destruction, yielding not only productivity
growth, but also dissipation of resources through duplication of effort (Aghion et al. 2005).
   There is a clear distinction between TBE and IDE in the relationship between an entrepreneur
and incumbents. For TBE, incumbents pose a direct threat of competition. Take for example, a
founder that is starting a new pizza restaurant or patent advising firm. Other proximate
incumbents--pizza restaurants or patent attorneys--pose a direct competitive threat to the founder.
It is difficult to envision a scenario where these proximate incumbents would offer a direct benefit
to these founders. On the other hand, while many IDE founders may view incumbents as direct
competition, incumbents can also offer benefits to IDE, and vice versa: new entrants provide both
a source of competition and a potential source of value for incumbents through cooperation (Anton
and Yao 1995; Christensen 1997; Gans and Stern 2000; Gans and Stern 2003; Hsu 2006; Katz and
Shapiro 1987; Lerner 1997; Reinganum 1983; Teece 1986).
   One key benefit of cooperation is increasing immediate returns. Botelho (2018) provides
evidence that in the face of costs related to loss of competitive advantage, investment professionals
act entrepreneurially by cooperating with their competition. Specifically, they engage in detailed
knowledge sharing in an effort to solve their own resource constraints, which leads to performance
increases. Another benefit of cooperation is that it delays the costs of competition (Gans et al.
2002). Navis and Glynn (2010) in their study of Sirius and XM in the US satellite radio market,
find that both the new entrant (Sirius) and the incumbent (XM) focused their efforts on legitimizing
the new industry rather than directly competing. It was not until the market matured that the firms
engaged in direct competition and between-firm differentiation. Hsu (2006) finds that stakeholders
can also increase the likelihood of cooperation, with VC-backed startups engaging in more
cooperative behavior than startups that were not VC-backed. Startups may also engage in a
multifaceted strategy with regards to cooperating with incumbents, choosing to first compete
                                                 17
against incumbents and then subsequently cooperate once costs and uncertainty have decreased
(Marx, Gans, and Hsu 2014).
   The choice to compete or cooperate with incumbents can exist even for the same underlying
product or service. Gans, Scott, and Stern (2018) discuss the innovation of online groceries through
the case of Peapod versus Webvan. From the consumer standpoint, both companies offered the
same service: online grocery shopping, delivered to the home. Peapod chose the strategic path of
treating online groceries as a way to enhance the value of the existing assets of grocery store
incumbents (e.g., physical retail space, lower cost labor), offering a value-added service that
allowed grocery stores to service online clients through delivery. Webvan, in contrast, viewed
online groceries as a disruptive innovation which would upend incumbents (Christensen 1997),
and positioned themselves as an integrated substitute for the grocery store value chain, building
their own supply chain and warehouses to service online orders, with the intention of competing
directly against incumbent brick and mortar retailers. Both startups leveraged the internet to create
value for their customers, but in very different manner. The example underscores the power of
recombination for economic growth (Weitzman 1998). Each strategic direction had its merits, but
in the short-term, Peapod's strategic choice was superior. While Webvan failed, a significant
amount of its IP and automation knowhow was sold to Amazon, and has underlined much of
Amazon's innovative capacity (Barr 2013). Amazon has recently successfully implemented
Webvan's concept of online grocery delivery, underscoring the importance of timing.
   The role of hard to reproduce complementary assets appears to structure the degree to which
new entrants pose an immediate threat to incumbents in a particular market (Teece 1986). For
many incumbents, the control of sales channels, critical IP, and key inputs ensures that they are
able to protect their most profitable products (and often customers) from new entrants. Depending
upon the existing assets of the incumbent firm versus the startup, and the incentive effects of
ownership to the startup founders, an innovative idea might be worth more to an incumbent firm
than to a startup (Teece 1986; Aghion and Tirole 1994). This creates the potential for bargaining
between incumbents and new entrants in the form of investment, partnerships, alliances, etc. This
can be seen most strongly in industries such as pharmaceuticals, where the required regulatory
infrastructure and expertise is costly (in time and money) to develop. In the face of limited patent
life, new biotech firms often choose to license their IP to established players for clinical
development. Gans, Hsu, and Stern (2008) discuss the uncertainty related to the scope and degree
                                                 18
of IP rights will facilitate cooperation and the sharing of knowledge within an industry (e.g. Hoberg
et al. 2018).
    A similar line of work that has been used to inform our thinking on competition versus
collaborating is research on strategic alliances and joint ventures. Much of this work is in the field
of management and discusses this tradeoff in a more general sense (e.g., Chesbrough 2003; Koza
and Lewin 1998; Mowery, Oxley, and Silverman 1996; Schilling and Phelps 2007; Teece 1986).
Much of the work described above would fit under the general umbrella of strategic alliances or
joint ventures. However, our focus on this research is due to the subject matter being more directly
related to the decision between competition and cooperation for new firms.

4.2. Product Markets versus the Market for Ideas

    Related to the above decision between competing and cooperating, IDE entrepreneurs must
choose whether to compete in the traditional product market, or whether to compete in the market
for ideas (Teece 1986; Arora et al. 2001; Winter 1984). Whether an entrepreneur enters the product
market versus the market for ideas appears to depend on many factors, such as competition in the
market (Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella 2001), regulations (Chatterji and Fabrizio 2016), control
of intellectual property (Gans et al. 2002; Gilbert and Newbery 1982; Salant 1984), and the ability
to contract (Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella 2001; Arora and Gambardella 2010). Furthermore,
this decision has the potential to affect other strategic choices, such as the human capital, team,
and financing needed.
    In the product market, an entrepreneur creates a product or a service with the goal of marketing
and selling that product or service directly to a customer base. For example, consider Tesla, a
company that is attempting to revolutionize the automobile industry. While their approach relies
significantly on cutting edge technology and innovations, their end goal is to compete against
incumbent automobile manufacturers in the product market. This is the modal strategic choice for
both IDE and SBE. As a result, from a research perspective, much of the research on
entrepreneurship is concerned with entrepreneurship in the product market.
    In contrast, competing in the market for ideas consists of developing an idea, knowledge or
technology, which is sold or licensed to an incumbent firm that then commercializes and sells that
technology (Teece 1986; Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella 2001). Relative to the product market,
entrepreneurship through the market for idea is less common (Gans and Stern 2010) . An example

                                                 19
of a startup entering the market for ideas is Qualcomm. In its early days, Qualcomm's strategy
consisted primarily of conducting research and development that would then be licensed and used
by other firms. Institutions, in particular those related to control of intellectual property, such as
patents, play a key role in intermediation of relationships between startups and established firms
in the market for ideas (Gans, Hsu, and Stern 2008). More broadly, intellectual property rights
allow a broad range of relationships between IDE firms and incumbents ranging from competition,
investment, and cooperation. Alliances and investment by incumbent firms into research intensive
startups is common across many industries and has been especially well-studied in areas like
biotechnology where intellectual property rights allow a more fulsome development of the
marketplace for ideas (Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh 2000; Walsh, Cohen, and Cho 2007; Arora,
Fosfuri, and Gambardella 2001; Arora and Gambardella 2010).

4.3. Location

    Another key strategic choice an entrepreneur must make is where they will locate their new
venture. The factors influencing and implications of this choice of new venture location has been
of great interest to researchers. For TBE, this choice is usually predicated on the market or
customer the entrepreneur wants to serve. TBE opportunities are often linked to a given location,
such as a desire to serve a given region. TBE often found their business near where they live, which
is usually close to where they were born (Michelacci and Silva 2007). In contrast, IDE
entrepreneurs can often choose to locate anywhere, and still serve their intended market. As certain
locales or ecosystems provide specific resources that can help entrepreneurs maximize their
likelihood of success, location for IDE venture becomes an extremely salient strategic choice.
    There has been considerable discussion in the literature regarding the benefits of
ecosystem/location choices for entrepreneurs (Krugman 1991; Saxenian 1994; Carroll and Wade
1991; Hannan and Caroll 1992; Ingram and Inman 1996; Sorenson and Audia 2000; Ellison and
Glaeser 1999). In this context, a large literature has focused on agglomeration and its benefits. To
an extent, coordination among new ventures on location choices exists, often due to "natural
advantages." Firms in the U.S. wine industry, for example, are mostly located in states where wine-
quality grape growing is prevalent, due to the cost advantages of being located near raw materials
(Ellison and Glaeser 1999). A substantial proportion of agglomeration of new ventures, however,
cannot be explained by natural resource advantages of this sort (Ellison and Glaeser 1999). Rather,

                                                 20
the key resources provided to entrepreneurs by location include access to similar entrepreneurs for
the purpose of knowledge sharing and social networks (Chinitz 1961; Sorenson and Audia 2000;
Michelacci and Silva 2007; Dahl and Sorenson 2010), supply of capital (Sorenson and Stuart 2001;
Hsu 2006), supply of specialized human capital (Florida 2005; Glaeser and Kerr 2010; Saxenian
1994; Jara-Figueroa et al. 2018), and research and development (Agrawal and Goldfarb 2008;
Delgado, Porter, and Stern 2014).
    While firms face stronger competition from their local competitors, leading to a higher
likelihood of failure (Carroll and Wade 1991; Hannan and Caroll 1992; Ingram and Inman 1996),
geographical agglomeration of similar firms is still quite common (Krugman 1991; Saxenian
1994). Entrepreneurs are often willing to incur these costs in order to extract benefits from
agglomeration. These benefits, in fact, may extend beyond the entrepreneurs themselves to their
founding teams and employees, who are more likely to remain in the industry in the startup fails
if there are more geographically proximate competitors, thus preventing a brain drain from the
industry (Botelho and Marx 2020)
    The benefits of agglomeration differ across IDE and TBE. For many TBE, a proximate
competitor is a key reason to avoid starting their company in that locale. For example, a corner
grocery or consulting practice may benefit from being a unique offering in an area, as the
availability of proximate substitutes may cannibalize the venture's revenue, and there are often
little compensating benefits to proximity to similar ventures. In contrast, while IDE also face
stronger competition from local competitors (Carroll and Wade 1991; Hannan and Caroll 1992;
Ingram and Inman 1996), in many cases these benefits outweigh the costs.
    A key question for researchers is whether locations truly offer entrepreneurs these benefits, or
whether it is simply the case that specific locations spawn better entrepreneurs and new ventures.
Here too, the evidence for IDE versus TBE differs. Research focused on employment, profit and
survival has often found negative performance implications to migration of a business. These
studies, conducted with European data (Italy, Denmark) that includes entrepreneurship of all types,
find that firms created by those local to a region are more valuable (Michelacci and Silva 2007),
and that home-based entrepreneurs outperform nonlocals. In contrast, Guzman (2019), using U.S.
data, finds that IDE ventures that start in one location but migrate to Silicon Valley have superior
outcomes, substantially increasing their likelihood of a high-growth outcome (IPO).

4.4. Ramifications of Strategic Choices
                                                21
    A natural question for entrepreneurs, particularly in times of underperformance, is whether
they made the correct strategic choices. Would the same venture have done better in a sparser
locale relative to a denser locale? Would the entrepreneur have been better off selling idea versus
implementing it? This is a challenging question to answer given that it is particularly difficult to
gather data on failed firms in order to understand which choices they made. While strategic choices
appear to be consequential, affecting both the likelihood that an entrepreneur succeeds and the
resources they pursue, these strategic choices can be changed over time. In fact, a popular
viewpoint in the literature is that entrepreneurship is a type of experimentation (Alvarez, Barney,
and Anderson 2012; Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2014; Gans, Stern, and Agrawal 2020).
Experimentation is also a core feature of the popular Lean Startup methodology (Ries 2011).
Research on pivoting or strategic switchbacks has demonstrated that many of these choices can be
changed when entrepreneurs receive signals that their current strategic positioning is not working
(Marx and Hsu 2015) . This work extends research that has focused on how the external
environment affects an entrepreneur's commercialization strategy (e.g. Gans et al. 2002; Gans and
Stern 2003) to show that factors internal to the firm also have consequences.

5. Teams, Incentives and Internal Organization

   Another area whether IDE ventures differ from TBE is in the nature of the teams that found
and manage the business. As IDE firms typically pursue ventures that differ intrinsically from
TBE--as discussed above--it is no surprise that the teams that found and manage the business,
and the internal structures set up to incentivize them, differ accordingly. Much of TBE ventures
are sole proprietorships, having only one founder, or are partnerships who share common resources
(e.g., law firms). Conversely, as Schumpeter (1942:132) noted, "technological progress is
increasingly becoming the business of teams of trained specialists," and thus IDE ventures
commonly have multiple founders. Founders of IDE versus TBE also typically differ in their
skillsets and educational background.
   Anecdotally, teams play a significant role in success, for example, in data collected on 1,100
tech companies and related to the causes of venture failure "not the right team" was listed as the
number three most common reason for failure by 101 ventures that failed (CB Insights 2018).
Venture capitalists report focusing on a venture's team and attribute a venture's failure and success
more to the team than the business (Gompers et al. 2020). Earlier stage investors are particularly
                                                 22
focused on the founding team: Bernstein, Korteweg, and Laws (2017) execute a field experiment
on AngelList where they measure investor interest in a venture and manipulated information
related to a venture's current investors, founding teams, and market traction. They find that most
significant focus of these investors were the founding team.
   While the discussion of teams and team dynamics seems integral to the study of
entrepreneurship, researchers have not dedicated extensive effort to studying the role of teams in
entrepreneurship--broadly defined--and most research has been done outside of economics: in
management, psychology, and sociology. This work has discussed that a benefit of teams (in and
out of the entrepreneurship context) is joint problem solving, increased trust, and improved
knowledge sharing (Ahuja 2000; Aldrich and Zimmer 1986; Uzzi 1997; Vedres and Stark 2010).
A major roadblock to completing research on teams in the context of entrepreneurship is that
founding team choice and composition is an endogenous process. Moreover, the lack of
comprehensive or representative databases on founding teams, non-founder managers, and their
backgrounds and demographics hamper empirical research outside the lab. Finally, we most often
observe successful teams, as data on failed ventures is difficult to collect and analyze (cf. Botelho
and Chang 2019; Botelho and Marx 2020).

5.1. Performance and Composition

   A first-order question in the discussion of entrepreneurship and teams is whether teams lead to
better entrepreneurial outcomes relative to ventures that are solo founded. An analysis from the 10
Year Project demonstrates that in their data of over 300 IDE companies, founding teams
outperform solo founders by 163 percent and the seed valuations of solo founder ventures were 25
percent lower relative to ventures with more than one founder. In a study of IDE in Canada,
Åstebro and Serrano (2015) find that after controlling for selection into teams having multiple
founders doubles the likelihood of commercialization and increases expected revenue by 29
percent relative to having a solo founder. However, this team preference may not be constant for
all types of entrepreneurship. In a study of crowdfunding, Greenberg and Mollick (2018) find that
ventures from solo founders outperform team founders and survive longer. However, while some
IDE ventures seek crowdfunding (e.g., Oculus VR), the modal venture on crowdfunding ventures
would not be classified as such and would be more appropriately discussed as a TBE venture.


                                                 23
   Conditional on a founding team being present, the next relevant question relates to the
composition of founding teams. The success of innovation-driven ventures relies on members of
the venture possessing a broad and balanced skillset. For example, the ability to assess and
complete technical assignments, communicating with clients, managing diverse teams, promoting
the venture's offering, and raising funds. Therefore, researchers have highlighted that a benefit of
teams is the ability to combined complementary skills (Haeussler and Sauermann 2015; Roach and
Sauermann 2015). Teams have been found to offer benefits: joint problem solving, increased trust,
and improved knowledge sharing in research on entrepreneurial teams and innovation teams more
generally (Ahuja 2000; Aldrich and Zimmer 1986). More generally, teams have been found to
make better decisions than individuals. Charness and Sutter (2012) find in a laboratory setting that
teams make less biased decisions than individuals and that teams are more cognitively
sophisticated than individuals.
   A benefit of larger founding teams is the ability to bring in complementary skill sets, larger
stock of human and social capital, as well as share the workload (cf. Venugopal and Yerramilli
2019). All else equal we should expect a founding team of four members to have a larger social
network and thus access to greater resources than if any one of these founders started a venture
alone. Similarly, larger teams should have at least as much human capital as smaller teams. A
broader set of skills has been tied to improved outcomes in the domain of crowdfunding (Jiang et
al. 2020). However, these benefits may come at the cost of increasing coordination costs and
accounting for heterogeneous preferences. For example, Eesley et al. (2014) show that the
alignment between founding-team composition and commercialization strategy is consequential.
Thus, as team size increases, we should expect diminishing return. Although there has not been
much research in this area, Shrivastava and Tamvada (2011) examine this relationship and find an
inverted-U shape between firm size and firm performance--with a peak at three founding team
members--using data on 5,000 ventures from the Kauffman foundation.
   A common characteristic related to the composition of founding teams is homophily along
founder characteristics (Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter 2003; Gompers, Huang, and Wang 2017) . One
key reason that homophily is common is that many founding teams are based on prior relationships.
Specifically, friendship, work, or familial ties connect many members of a founding team. Using
data from the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED), which includes all types of
entrepreneurship, Ruef (2010) finds that over half of ventures that have a team include a couple
                                                24
that is either married or cohabitating. He further finds that around 15 percent of teams include
other family members and 20 percent include other friends or associates. Although scholars have
called for a better understanding of how these relationships, such as familial ties (Aldrich and Cliff
2003), affect entrepreneurship, to our knowledge no study presents a rigorous examination of how
the prior relationships of founding team members affects entrepreneurial outcomes--for
innovative-driven ventures or otherwise. In terms of performance, research in sociology has
provided some evidence that founding team diversity increases firm performance (Beckman,
Burton, and O'Reilly 2007; Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter 2003).

5.2. Incentives and Structure

   An important area for studying entrepreneurial outcomes and for entrepreneurs is incentivizing
founding team members. More generally, it is important to understand how to optimally structure
a contract and expectations among founding team members. More practically, many founders enter
into what is called a founders' agreements, which can vary from simple discussing the vesting
schedule of founder equity, to complex outlining various provisions that every founder is legally
bound to. For example, a founders' agreement may discuss "carry-along right," which specifies
that majority shareholders can force minority shareholders to sell their shares when a fair offer for
the venture is presented. (Hellmann and Thiele 2015) develop theory regarding various issues
related to contracting among founders and Ewens, Nanda, and Stanton (2020) discuss contracting
of founder-CEO compensation in VC-backed ventures (see also Aghion and Tirole 1994 for a
discussion on contracting innovation as well as Gans and Stern 2000 and Gans et al. 2002).
   Along these lines, a key area for discussion for all founding team members is the relative value
they will extract from the firm, often formalized through splitting the venture's equity (Ashbrook
2000). There are no guidelines regarding how to split a venture's equity with founders agreeing to
a "fair" split, making the process more of an art than a science. Although this decision is
consequential, researchers have not spent much timing understanding what leads to observed
equity splits or how these splits incentivize subsequent founder action affecting venture outcomes.
One exception is Hellmann and Wasserman (2016) who model this process and test it using survey
data. A difficulty of equity splits is an ability to correctly predict each founder's relative value;
moreover, a split that does not allocate equal equity among all founders signifies that some
founders may be more valuable than another founder (cf. Fehr and Schmidt 2006; Dawes et al.

                                                 25
2007). While this is rational and true in most cases, it may create issues within the team. For
example, Breugst, Patzelt, and Rathgeber (2015) develop a case study of eight teams and find that
there is substantial variation in the perceived distributive justice of equity splits across and within
teams in their sample. In their survey data of innovation-driven ventures, Hellmann and
Wasserman (2016) find that 32 percent of founding teams equally split venture equity and that 42
percent of teams decide on this split within one day. Furthermore, they find that this equal split is
correlated with a lower likelihood of raising outside capital. However, the authors argue that these
results are not causal and are instead driven by founder selection.

5.3. Succession and Evolution

   A venture's founding team evolves over time, and changes to the team, such as a founder being
replaced or a founder leaving, may have significant effects for the venture's future performance.
There is some disagreement regarding the importance of founders altogether. Research has
provided evidence that the venture's idea, especially once the business is more stable, is paramount
(Kaplan, Sensoy, and Strömberg 2009; Kulchina and Gjerløv-Juel 2019; Wasserman 2017).
Consistently, researchers have documented that founders, especially of IDE ventures, are often
replaced (Wasserman 2003; Hellmann and Puri 2002; Chen and Thompson 2015). Hellmann and
Puri (2002) document the increased likelihood of founder departure after VC investment. They
discuss this effect as "professionalization" because it was associated with higher performance of
teams. Furthermore, investors often replace founders. The reasoning for this replacement is varied;
it may be due to disagreement on vision, the need for a different skill set, or valuing the idea more
than the founder. Ewens and Marx (2017) find that about 20 percent of founders of VC-backed
ventures are replaced. While replacement is more common when the venture is struggling, it does
lead to better performance in their sample.
   There is less evidence that founder replacement has an adverse effect on venture performance,
most likely due to the fact that replacement is most logical in the face of underperformance.
Bamford, Bruton, and Hinson (2006) offer an exception and in their study of newly formed banks
they find that founder exit has a negative effect on subsequent performance. Supporting this
adverse effect, some work has analyzed the effect of the unexpected departure of a founding team
member (Becker and Hvide 2013; Choi et al. 2019) . Both of these papers analyze the effect of a
founder's premature death on firm performance. These studies find that a founder's death has a

                                                  26
persistent effect on venture performance. Furthermore, this effect is consistent across IDE and
TBE, and while the effect is stronger when team size is small, a decrease in performance is found
when team size is large.

6. Financing

   One of the most important issues facing entrepreneurial firms is their ability to access capital
to fund their growth and operations. In raising startup capital, new ventures face two fundamental
problems that form the basis for much of corporate finance theory: agency problems and
information asymmetries. For entrepreneurial firms, however--and particularly for IDE
ventures--the magnitude of these two problems is considerably larger than in the typical corporate
finance setting. All firms face a menu of options for financing, ranging from non-dilutive debt to
various types of equity financing, with standard pecking order theory arguing that debt is most
preferable before equity. These seminal models, however, were developed to match the context of
financing of traditional business, or larger, established corporations, where risk is relatively
quantifiable, markets are known, and collateral can be offered.
   For innovation-driven entrepreneurs, who are often commercializing unproven technologies
and services, attracting external capital through debt channels can be exceedingly difficult (Leland
and Pyle 1977; de Meza and Webb 1987). The market value of IDE start-up companies often rests
on intangible assets that are hard to value ex ante and difficult to sell ex post and for which the
value can vary substantially across different firms (Fresard, Hoberg, and Phillips 2015). As a
result, collateralizing the loan is often impossible for IDE entrepreneurs. Information asymmetries
are particularly acute in this setting, exacerbating frictions between lenders and debtors (Leland
and Pyle 1977; Stiglitz and Weiss 1981). Even though loans would allow entrepreneurs to avoid
costly dilution of ownership stakes, external debt is widely viewed as an unlikely way to fund risky
projects in the absence of tangible assets or stable cash flows to secure the loan (Hall and Lerner
2010).
   As a result, most IDE efforts are financed through equity. The most well-known type of equity
financing provider for IDE startups is venture capital (VC), for which many thorough survey
papers have been written (see e.g. Da Rin, Hellmann, and Puri 2013; Lerner and Nanda 2020), and
the associated venture debt industry. Over the last decade, however, the price of early stage
experimentation in certain types of IDE has fallen significantly (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf
                                                27
2014; Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2018). This falling cost of experimentation has shifted
the allocation of financial and human capital towards smaller, faster, higher-risk projects, and has
led to the emergence of new forms of financing and support programs. In financial economics,
recent literature has drawn attention to the growing role of angel investors and equity
crowdfunding, as well as reward-based crowdfunding platforms and initial coin offerings (ICOs).
At the later stage, changes in securities laws and markets have led to the entry of non-traditional
investors such as hedge funds and mutual funds, leading startups to raise larger sums of private
capital and remain private longer (Gao, Ritter, and Zhu 2013; Ewens & Farre-Mensa 2020).

6.1. Venture Capital

    The most prominent source of equity financing for IDE entrepreneurs is Venture Capital (VC).
VCs specialize in investment in new ventures characterized by high risk and uncertainty, but also
high growth potential (Sahlman 1990). 4 The VC industry plays an outsized role in the economy,
with VC-backed firms constituting over 50% initial public offerings on U.S. stock markets (Kaplan
and Lerner 2010). Kortum and Lerner (2000) demonstrate a strong association between increased
VC funding and patenting, and Samila and Sorenson (2011) document a positive relationship
between VC funding, employment and aggregate income. VC-backed startups grow larger and
employ more people (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2014; Puri and Zarutskie 2012) . There is
an extensive literature on VC financing and on VC firms themselves. Many good surveys exist, so
we will not try to be comprehensive, but instead focus on main issues.
    VCs are equity investors who in addition to capital provide a range of value-added services to
their investments (Sahlman 1990). There are a number of different types of VC organizations.
These include independent, financially driven, VC firms, corporate VCs who represent the
strategic interests and invest the capital of large corporations, and bank-affiliated VC firms. Much
of the literature to date (with some notable exceptions) has focused on traditional independent
VCs. VC funds are pools of capital provided primarily by institutional investors, who are typically
referred to as Limited Partners (LPs). VC firms, who manage the funds, typically raised VC funds



     4   For a description of the origins of the VC industry and its institutionalization in the 1980s as a result of
reductions in the capital gains tax rate and amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, see e.g.
Gompers (1994).
                                                             28
as overlapping dedicated 10-12 year investment vehicles. These funds are typically organized as
Limited Partnerships. The VCs who manage the funds are referred to as General Partners. The year
in which each fund is raised is denoted its vintage year, and typically the fund has a 3-5 year
investment period during which the GPs deploy the capital into a series of startup investments. As
the investment period draws to a close, the GPs will typically begin fundraising for their next fund.
The remaining years of each fund are spent nurturing the existing investments, funding follow-up
rounds, and eventually, exiting the investments through sale or IPO and returning capital to the
LPs.
   VC firms, and the funds they raise, vary widely in both size and industry and geographic
specialization (Gompers et al. 2008; Hochberg and Westerfield 2012; Hochberg, Mazzeo, and
McDevitt 2015). Specialization and fund size appear to be substitutes: smaller funds tend to be
specialized, while larger funds tend to be more generalist (Hochberg and Westerfield 2010), and
specialization serves as a product differentiator for VC funds (Hochberg, Mazzeo, and McDevitt
2015). In addition to the wide variation in fund specialization and size, there is significant
heterogeneity in fund returns, with an inter-quartile spread between managers that dwarfs that seen
in other asset classes, such as mutual funds. Fund performance within a given VC firm appears to
persist over time (Kaplan and Schoar 2005; Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Vissing-Jørgensen 2013;
Harris et al. 2020), suggesting VCs have skill, either in selection of which ventures to invest in, or
in adding value to their portfolio companies.
   Because innovative technologies and business models suffer from fundamental uncertainty
about their commercialization possibilities and chances of success, understanding the potential of
IDE ventures requires a sequence of experiments over time, each reducing the risk and uncertainty
associated with the venture (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf 2016; Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf
2018). As a result, investment in IDE ventures is typically done through staged capital
commitment, in the form of sequential rounds of financing meant to help the startup company
achieve milestones that reduce the riskiness of the venture. If the startup does not achieve the
milestones, investors do not need to follow good money with bad. This process is particularly
valuable in the IDE setting, where most ventures fail completely (Hall and Woodward 2010).
Investing in stages allows the VC investor to learn more about the venture's chances of success
and preserve the real option to abandon the venture (Gompers 1995; Cornelli and Yosha 2003;
Bergemann and Hege 2005; Fluck and Garrison 2006; Tian 2011).
                                                 29
   The terms and contract structures used in venture capital align themselves to the uncertain
nature of IDE startups and the staged investment process (Kaplan and Strömberg 2003, 2004).
Agency and hold-up problems appear to be important in the design of VC contracts with
entrepreneurs, while risk sharing is not (Kaplan and Strömberg 2004). VC financings separately
allocate cash flow rights, board right, voting rights, and other control rights, and incorporate
contingent contracting features that allocate increased control to the VC investor in the event of
poor performance, and to the entrepreneur in the event of good performance (Hellmann 1998;
Kaplan and Strömberg 2003). VC contracts further include non-compete and vesting provisions
that make it more expensive for the entrepreneur to leave the firm, thus mitigating potential hold-
up problems between the entrepreneur and the investor. More generally, VC contracts are
structured in a manner that upholds many of the central theories of financial contracting between
an investor and an entrepreneur (e.g. Hölmstrom 1979; Lazear 1986; Grossman and Hart 1986;
Hart and Moore 1990; Aghion and Bolton 1992; Dewatripont and Tirole 1994; Ewens, Gorbenko,
and Korteweg 2019).
   Importantly, unlike the arms-length transactions often modeled in the finance literature, VC
investors are widely believe to offer more than just capital: VCs are active investors (Bottazzi, Da
Rin, and Hellmann 2008) and have been shown to offer value-add in the form of
professionalization of startup teams (Hellmann and Puri 2002), time to product market (Hellmann
and Puri 2000), monitoring of behavior (Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend 2016; Tian, Udell, and
Yu 2016), board involvement (Lerner 1995; Gompers et al. 2020), improvement of firm
governance structures (Hochberg 2011), and active matchmaking between portfolio companies to
create strategic alliances (Lindsey 2008). VC's understanding of the uncertain nature of IDE
startups and their tolerance for failure allows their portfolio companies to pursue innovation more
successfully (Tian and Wang 2011).
   Hsu (2004) demonstrates that entrepreneurs are aware of the value-added aspect of VC, and
are willing to accept lower valuations in order to have a higher value-added VC, and Nahata (2008)
reinforces these findings with evidence that startups backed by higher reputation VCs are more
likely to go public. (Sørensen 2007) estimates that approximately 40% of the performance
differential between VC and non-VC backed firms is attributable to added value services.
   Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007) demonstrate that VCs with better networks are able to
add more value to their portfolio companies, with better-networked VCs exhibiting higher
                                                30
performance both for individual portfolio companies and their overall funds. Hochberg,
Ljungqvist, and Lu, however, show that these network benefits also come with costs: regions with
strong networks of VCs act as a barrier to entry by new investors, and startups in these areas receive
lower valuations in their financing rounds. Networking in VC is important not only for the venture
capitalists themselves, however, but also for entrepreneurs, and recent research suggests that some
gender differences in VC financing may be driven by differences between male and female
entrepreneurs in their proactive networking with VCs (Howell & Nanda 2019).
   Networks between venture capital partners and firms are often built through their syndication
practices. Rather than investing alone, VCs typically invest in portfolio companies in syndicates,
pooling expertise and capital in pursuit of better investment performance (Admati and Pfleiderer
1994; Lerner 1995; Brander, Amit, and Antweiler 2002; Hellmann 2007; Tian 2011; Hochberg,
Lindsey, and Westerfield 2015) . In addition to syndication that stems from the desire to combine
or trade scarce resources and skills (Hochberg, Lindsey, and Westerfield 2015), other factors also
drive syndication patterns, such as educational ties between VCs and ethnic similarity (Bhagwat
2013; Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan 2016). Factors such as co-ethnicity also drive selection
of startups to invest in (Hegde and Tumlinson 2014; Bengtsson and Hsu 2015).
   The VC market, much like the equity market itself, is cyclical, and affected by macroeconomic
factors (Gompers and Lerner 1998). Hot markets, with large influxes of capital into VC funds, are
characterized by "money chasing deals" (Gompers and Lerner 2000). Companies of lower quality
can be funded during these hot periods, and valuations rise. The pro-cyclicality of early stage VC
investment has implications for innovation more generally, with VC-backed firms producing lower
quality innovation during recessions (Howell et al. 2020) In recent years, the large influx of capital
into the VC industry, particularly into VC funds that invest in later stage startups, has led to
relatively larger investments in a smaller number of firms, as VC firms struggle to scale. This has
filtered down and affected the decisions of early stage investors, who have responded by reducing
funding to firms that show less early promise (Bernstein et al. 2020).
   In addition to private, independent VCs, many large corporations also maintain VC investment
arms, to mixed results (Gompers and Lerner 2000; Masulis and Nahata 2009; Chemmanur,
Loutskina, and Tian 2014). Corporate VCs often have strategic goals in addition to (or instead of)
financial goals, and are frequently acquired by the corporate venture capitalist's parent corporation
(Benson and Ziedonis 2010) .
                                                 31
6.2. Venture Debt

    While IDE firms generally rely on equity financing, and are often unable to utilize debt
markets, there are a few exceptions to the "no debt" rule. The first and foremost of these exceptions
is venture debt. Venture loans are typically arm's-length (formal) loans supplied by banks and
other for-profit financial institutions to science and technology start-ups. Although technology
start-ups and outside debt seem poorly suited for one another in theory, evidence suggests that the
venture lending market is surprisingly large and active. Robb and Robinson (2014) report
surprisingly high debt reliance by start-ups with external equity owners. Ibrahim (2009) estimates
that venture lenders supply roughly $5 billion to start-ups annually. Hochberg, Serrano, and
Ziedonis (2018) provide evidence of a large market for venture debt for innovation-driven startups,
with venture debt financing tied to the liquidity of the secondary market for the venture's patent
portfolio, firm-specificity of the patents, and the presence of existing equity investors, consistent
with Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). Venture debt is often used by entrepreneurs to "extend the
runway" and delay the need for further equity financing rounds (Hochberg, Serrano, and Ziedonis
2018; Davis et al. 2020).

6.3. Angel Investors and Friends and Family Financing

   The second exception to the "no debt" rule is Angel investors and family and friends, who
bridge debt and equity and often invest in startup ventures using convertible debt notes that convert
to equity upon achievement of certain milestones, such as raising of a significant equity capital
round from institutional investors. Angel financing appears to play an important role as a source
of entrepreneurial financing (Lindsey & Stein 2019). The literature on angel and friends and family
financing is less robust than that for VC, primarily due to relative difficulty in obtaining large
representative datasets for analysis. Lee and Persson (2016) provide one of the few treatments of
friends and family financing, suggesting that family finance is a poor source of risk capital for
entrepreneurs. (Wong 2006; Wong, Bhatia, and Freeman 2009) provides one of the first empirical
looks at angel financing. Hellmann and Thiele (2015) examine the interplay between angel and
venture financing. Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2011) use regression discontinuity methods to assess
the effects of angel financing on startups, while Lerner et al. (2017) examine the globalization of
angel investing and complementarities between table setting policies and angel investment.

                                                 32
Finally, Bernstein, Korteweg, and Laws (2017) show that angel investors respond most strongly
to information about the founding team, rather than product or traction.

6.4. Crowdfunding

    Finally, a newer source of financing for IDE entrepreneurs is crowdfunding. Crowdfunding
(CF) generally refers to the use of online platforms or intermediaries to solicit funding from a large
number of smaller investors, either through pre-sales of product--typically referred to as rewards-
based crowdfunding--or through sale of equity stakes. While pre-sale of products has always been
allowed, rewards-based CF platforms have made this process simpler, and as a result, rewards-
based CF has become almost ubiquitous for startups offering a consumer-based physical product.
Kickstarter, IndieGogo and other platforms with open APIs have provided a laboratory for
exploring CF in some detail. For consumer-based startups, the attraction of CF lies both in the
raising of funds and in the ability to obtain market validation of demand for their product or service,
thus mitigating the uncertainty associated with entry into new markets or with new technologies
(Tu, Anh, and Thu 2018; Chemla and Tinn, 2019).
    Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb (2013) provide an overview of the economics of rewards-
based crowdfunding, Mollick (2013) suggests that entrepreneurial quality is assessed in similar
manner by both VCs and crowdfunders on rewards-based platforms; these findings are bolstered
by those in Mollick and Nanda (2015), who present a random sample of arts projects featured on
Kickstarter to a panel of 30 domain experts, finding that CF platforms are at least as good in finding
and funding quality projects. Mollick (2013) also finds that the geographic and gender biases
exhibited by VCs are somewhat alleviated in rewards-based crowdfunding. Only a small
percentage of the projects that utilize rewards-based crowdfunding platforms, however, are IDE
startups.
    More recently, new legislation has opened the door to equity crowdfunding (also referred to
as securities-based CF), which has emerged as an alternative financing vehicle, with mixed
success. The SEC promulgated rules for equity CF in 2015; fundraising under regulation CF began
in May 2016. In equity CF, startups sell equity stakes in their companies to investors, much as they
might to an angel investor or angel syndicate. Brown and Davies (2020) provide a theory model
of equity CF. Abrams (2017) explores the relationship between pricing on equity crowdfunding
platforms and economic fundamentals, while Ivanov and Knyazeva (2017) explore the roles of

                                                  33
hard and soft information in this market. Agrawal, Galasso, and Oettl (2016), Catalini and Hui
(2017), Itenberg and Smith (2017) examine syndicates in equity crowdfunding, and Hellmann,
Mostipan , and Vulkan (2019) examine crowdfunding fundraising strategies.
    A final form of crowdfunding that has taken form in the last few years with the emergence of
blockchain technologies is the initial coin offering (ICO). An ICO enables a blockchain-based
startup to raise funds through the sale of cryptographically secured tokens which will in future be
used as the sole form of payment for the startup's products or services. An emerging literature on
this topic provides descriptive evidence on the nature and scale of the ICO market (Howell,
Niessner, and Yermack 2019; Lyandres, Palazzo, and Rabetti 2019), retention of tokens by
entrepreneurs (Davydiuk, Rosen, and Gupta 2020), and exploration of the theoretical
underpinnings (Lee and Parlour 2019; Bakos and Halaburda 2020).

6.5. Grants and Other Non-Dilutive Financing

    In addition to source of private investment capital, IDE entrepreneurs may also access certain
source of non-dilutive funding specifically designated to promote innovation and economic
growth. Governments across the globe dedicate funding for innovation-driven small businesses.
In the U.S., Federal Agencies annually allocate funding to both the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. The SBIR and
STTR programs award non-dilutive funding to startups and small businesses across a large range
of technology areas, markets, and risk levels (Link and Scott 2010) with the goal of stimulating
technological innovation, meeting Federal research and development (R&D) needs, and increasing
commercialization of R&D into private sector impact. State-specific noncompetitive matching
programs offer some awardees additional funds regardless of their project's quality or content
(Lanahan and Feldman 2018). An emerging body of research suggests that the SBIR/STTR awards
lead to faster growth (Lerner 2020) and enable the production of new citation-weighted patents by
awardee firms (Howell 2017), though the positive performance of awardees appears to be
concentrated in regions and industry segments that also exhibit high volumes of venture capital
investment (Lerner 2000; Gans and Stern 2003).
    A final form of non-dilutive funding for IDE entrepreneurs comes in the form of prizes
awarded through venture competitions. In these competitions, early stage startup founders pitch
their startup businesses to a panel of expert judges, whose scores determine which ventures will

                                                34
win monetary (and, sometimes, non-monetary) prizes. In an emerging market setting with random
assignment of awards, (McKenzie 2017) finds that that winning leads to greater firm entry, more
survival, higher profits and sales, and higher employment. In the U.S. context, Howell (2020)
demonstrates that competitions, through certification, can help resolve the very large information
problems that exist in new venture finance. Science-based startups appear to be the predominant
beneficiaries of such certification (de Rassenfosse and van den Heuvel 2020).

6.6. Late Stage Capital

    Finally, one recent emerging trend in IDE entrepreneurial finance has been the emergence of
hedge funds, pension funds, mutual funds, sovereign wealth funds, and other non-VC investors as
late stage investors in private, venture-backed companies (Kwon, Lowry, and Qian 2019; Ewens
& Farre-Mensa, 2020; Chernenko, Lerner, and Zeng 2021). The entry of these financiers, who
traditionally did not fund uncertain private growth stage startups, has allowed venture-backed
startups to remain privately-owned for longer, and to raise significantly more private capital. This
trend, combined with the emergence of global markets, the move towards software and mobile,
and the rise in importance of economies-of-scope in winner-take-all global markets (Gao, Ritter,
and Zhu 2013), have led to a significant drop in IPO activity in the U.S. and abroad.

7. Fostering Regional Entrepreneurial Activity through Policies and Programs

    The final set of literature we discuss relates to the question of how policy makers can act to
encourage and support entrepreneurial activity in their local area. Certainly, some regions seem
more capable of creating new firms and fostering their growth into high impact companies. The
spatial distribution of IDEs with the potential for high growth shows a high degree of
concentration. Firms in Silicon Valley account for 48.1% of venture capital allocated in the United
States and 18.4% of patents, leading the world in both venture capital investment and the number
of "unicorn companies" (Kerr and Robert-Nicoud, 2020) . 5 Even within the Silicon Valley region,
high growth firms are remarkably clustered (Kerr and Kominers 2014; Guzman and Stern 2015)
and this clustering seems to have a dramatic impact on the productivity of inventive labor (Moretti


     5   A "unicorn" company is an informal designation for a company that has been valued at least at $1 billion
dollars by investors.
                                                          35
2019). Interestingly, though many believe that Silicon Valley had high rates of entrepreneurship
with its emergence, this remains a matter of debate in the literature, with some work suggesting
that rates of entrepreneurship were relatively low at the time Silicon Valley began to emerge
(Fairlie and Chatterji 2013).
   Silicon Valley and other certain geographic clusters in the U.S. are major engines of economic
growth for their states and for the United States more broadly. Increases in venture capital, a key
marker for IDE activity in a region, have been shown to increase both employment and aggregate
income in a region (Samila and Sorenson 2011). This in part because VC-backed firms grow larger
and employ more people on average (Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf 2014; Puri and Zarutskie
2012) and in part due to the existence of wage multipliers for workers in other sectors of the
economy in regions with robust IDE-driven growth (Moretti and Thulin 2013). It is not surprising,
therefore, that many regions within the United States, as well as governments around the world,
have attempted to institute policies and programs to increase the rates of IDEs in an attempt to
foster a self-sustaining startup hub. Despite their supposed ex ante promise, however, the success
of most government programs has been limited at best (Lerner 2013, 2020).
   Of course, Silicon Valley has a plethora of resources that underpin its regional IDE advantage
(Kerr and Robert-Nicoud 2020). A natural question is thus what scale of resource accumulation is
needed for regional advantages to take hold in a manner similar to Silicon Valley, and whether
virtuous cycles can be created at smaller scale through the judicious use of programs and policies
to catalyze IDE entry and success. The last two decades have witnessed an explosion of innovative
programs, from startup accelerators to pitch competitions and hackathons, that have attempted to
intervene in the entrepreneurial process in ways that might impact the rate, direction and success
of IDE entrepreneurship (Cohen et al. 2019). Among practitioners, some view these programs as
the key to a radical improvement of entrepreneurial ecosystems (Feld 2012) while others doubt
that the unique cluster of factors that allow Silicon Valley to flourish can be replicated anywhere
else (Graham 2006). We next discuss a number of literatures that explore elements related to the
entry of new ideas into the local economy and the formation of entrepreneurial clusters.

7.1. Intellectual Property Policy

   Often, IDE serves as the channel through which new ideas and discoveries enter into markets
and the economy. New IDE clusters can emerge because of technical or scientific discovery in a

                                                36
region that can confer upon it a new technological trajectory from which the region can gain an
advantage. Examples of this include the pursuit of integrated circuits in Silicon Valley, the
assembly line production of automobiles in Detroit, the pursuit of the petrochemical revolution in
Cleveland, and the pursuit of biotechnology in San Diego and Boston (Bresnahan, Gambardella,
and Saxenian 2001; Kerr and Robert-Nicoud 2020; Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokoloff 2006;
Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998). In many cases, these new discoveries emerge from research
hubs such as universities. The subsequent innovation output from these research centers serves to
attract private capital investment to the region to launch new IDE companies, igniting a virtuous
cycle of innovation and capital (Hausman, Fehder, and Hochberg 2020; Kortum and Lerner 2000).
    Large general-purpose discoveries such as integrated circuits or petrochemicals 6 which open
up new technical trajectories are infrequent and difficult to forecast or predict. There are many
technical discoveries that fall short of the general-purpose technology standard, however, that may
also have dramatic economic impact if properly nurtured. Bringing such ideas out of the lab and
into the economy, while a nontrivial task, can potentially be encouraged with appropriate programs
and policies.
    The literature provides a number of key insights for economists and policy makers as to the
effectiveness of programs and policies, but also leaves certain areas less explored. One area that
has received considerable attention is intellectual property policy. As much basic research is
conducted in universities and research institutes, there has been considerable attention turned to
university IP creation. The main channel for the creation of IP inside the university which can be
transferred into the economy has been the Bayh-Dole act of 1989. Yet there are substantial
variations in the structure of how innovators within universities are rewarded for their work which
can impact how much IP is created and how it is leveraged. Moving property rights to universities
seems to have a stimulating effect on both IP creation and innovative activity (Mowery et al 2001;
Henderson, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 1998; Sampat and Mowery 2004), although more direct
allocation to the actual scientists could potentially reap even more economic rewards (Hvide and
Jones 2018). Institutional differences in licensing policies and incentives to professors at the
university-level seem to impact the rate of out-licensing and university spin-outs (Lockett and



6David (1990) and Brenahan and Trajtenberg (1995) provide early explorations of the concept of General Purpose
Technologies. See Bresnahan (2010) for a more current literature review.
                                                      37
Wright 2005; Lach and Schankerman 2008; Belenzon and Schankerman 2009). Interconnections
between local industries and universities mean that the location of universities and the nature of
their ecosystems matter for their ability to transfer new ideas into the economy (Bikard and Marx
2020; Hausman 2012; Hausman, Fehder, and Hochberg 2020).
   Empirically, it is clear that university-level differences in IP policies and location matter for
the degree to which their research generates innovative output and intellectual property, but less is
understood about translational programs that seek to accelerate the transfer of technology out of
the university and into commercial application. Examples of such programs include science parks
and the NSF iCorps program. Of these, the science park is the most pervasive type of
entrepreneurship program connected to universities. The Stanford Research Park, established by
Terman in 1951, is believed to have anchored the growth of Silicon Valley (Moore and Davis
2004). The overall evidence on the impact of these programs, however, is far more modest
(Rothaermel and Thursby 2005a, 2005b; Link and Scott 2007). Far less is understood about other
programs. The NSF's iCorp Program has received limited attention (Kearney 2019), for example.

7.2. Human Capital Accumulation

   A second area that has been explored in the literature relates to the accumulation of human
capital in a region. The creation of high growth IDEs has been shown to be systematically related
to the accumulation of a specific set of human capital (Lazear 2004b; Baumol 2005). Exposure to
certain opportunities during higher education seems to be important; this includes practical
experience with engineers (Boudreau and Marx 2019) and introductions to current and former
entrepreneurs (Lerner and Malmendier 2013; Eesley and Wang 2017). Some universities have
formal programs where alumni entrepreneurs volunteer to provide each other support and
guidance; this supply of interest and advice predicts the future success of the venture (Scott, Shu,
and Lubynsky 2019). At other universities, this process may happen informally through the cohort
structure of certain types of programs (Lerner and Malmendier 2013). Outside of educational
institutions, pitch competitions and other programs provide important information to entrepreneurs
about the quality of their idea and the potential to improve that idea (Howell 2020), while
accelerators provide training, mentorship and support for new entrepreneurs (Cohen and Hochberg
2014; Hochberg 2016; Cohen et al. 2019).


                                                 38
   Certain government policies and programs can increase the rate at which individuals with the
appropriate human capital endowments can utilize their insights in the formation of new IDE. In
particular, much attention has been payed to the role of non-competes in moderating new firm
formation and the flow of information between firms more broadly. Qualitatively, Saxenian notes
that individuals within Silicon Valley jumped from firm to firm quite promiscuously compared to
other regions like route 128 in Boston where the shadow of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC)
loomed large (Saxenian 1996). Quantitative accounts of this effect have supported that the freeing
up of technical talent through the non-enforcement of non-competes indeed seems intimately tied
to the functioning of Silicon Valley (Fallick, Fleischman, and Rebitzer 2006; Jeffers 2020).
   Having new firms that are pursuing new and valuable ideas does not guarantee that those firms
will succeed in scaling to a sustainable level, however. Regions can be successful in stimulating
the entry of new companies backed by new and innovative ideas and yet be unsuccessful at scaling
these companies into large firms capable of fully competing in national and international markets
(Guzman and Stern 2020). In innovation-driven entrepreneurship, the recombination of ideas to
create potentially valuable economic experiments continues for some time after the initial idea
phase. The impact of human capital accumulation is not only on initial entry but also on scaling
and growth. The ability to scale, grow, and adapt to opportunities require a deep pool of human
capital. For example, Google was founded in 1998 shortly after the creation of PageRank algorithm
was invented, yet it was the combination of PageRank with keyword-based advertising through
second-price auctions in 2002 that propelled Google's ultimate success, through chance meetings
with a potential competitor, Overture, and input from prominent economists in the Silicon Valley
(Batelle 2005). While the scale of human capital pooling has figured prominently in broader
explanations of entrepreneurial agglomeration (Chatterji, Glaeser, and Kerr 2014) and features
prominently in discussions about Silicon Valley's success, we have less understanding in how the
depth, breadth and density of human capital in a region impacts the performance and growth of
nascent ventures across regions.
   Our understanding of the processes by which startups in IDE rich regions are able to leverage
the human capital in the area to grow their firms is an area with limited research. There is reason
to believe that these processes might look substantially different than those by which other types
of entrepreneurial firms grow. Reflecting on the success of Silicon Valley, one of its founding
fathers, Gordon Moore, wrote that in Silicon Valley, "scientists and engineers of this particular
                                                39
economy learned to organize themselves and their businesses differently. . . learning to build firms
and markets in ways unique to high-technology products" (Moore and Davis 2004). While
qualitative research has suggested that there was an open exchange of ideas and approaches both
inside and across firms inside Silicon Valley which stood at odds with other regions (Saxenian
1994; Powell et al. 2005), our ability to characterize these differences in a rigorous economic frame
remains limited.
   Google's story is but one of thousands in Silicon Valley that suggest that regional advantage
is built upon the close proximity of many talented individuals in geographic and social space that
allows the recombination of new ideas together into new economic experiments (Liebeskind et al.
1996; Storper and Venables 2004). Even within the broader Silicon Valley, there seem to be
pockets of more intense interactions that seem to be driven by the commuting patterns and
distribution of existing firms and their technological similarity (Kerr and Kominers 2014).
Sociological studies suggest that networks and social capitals between individuals and firms in a
region moderate the extent to which the random interactions enabled by regional density can be
leveraged into successful startups even when other resources, like venture capital, is available
(Powell et al. 1999, 2005; Samila and Sorenson 2017). Interestingly, the effect of targeted
interventions like accelerators on their portfolio startups are moderated by the social capital and
networks of the startup's founding geography, despite the fact that accelerators are intended to
substitute in some ways for the informal and unplanned "collisions" within these entrepreneurial
ecosystems (Fehder 2020). Questions remain for future work about the balance of these forces in
fostering the types of collisions and cooperation that generate valuable experiments in the
economy.

7.3. Incumbent Corporations

   Universities are not the only source of new ideas in the economy. Corporations invest
substantially in R&D and the knowledge produced from these efforts can lead to innovation within
the company that benefits subsequent entrepreneurship in at least two ways. First working within
companies at the vanguard of new technologies seems to yield a higher likelihood of starting a
high impact firm (Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein 2005), and this relationship seems tightly tied
to corporate R&D allocation (Babina & Howell 2018). Second, not all new product avenues and
innovations are used by incumbents. Spinouts can leverage the ideas and intellectual property that

                                                 40
are unused or underutilized in incumbent corporations as a source of entrepreneurial entry,
especially in the early stages of an industry's lifecycle (Klepper 1996; Klepper & Graddy 1990;
Klepper & Sleeper 2005). Similarly, there is a strong empirical relationship between the industrial
structure of a region in the past and the likelihood of new firm entry and employment in the current
period (Glaeser et al. 2014; Hausman, 2020; Klepper 2007, 2010).
   Despite these empirical findings, our understanding of the levers available to policy-makers
that wish to capture the benefits of the industrial organization in their region or spawning firms is
limited at best. Emerging work, however, has begun to explore policies designed to enhance
positive relationships and spillovers between established and startup firms. For example,
Economic Technological Development Zones in China appear to have produced measurable
increases in both IDE and innovation in existing firms (Tian and Xu 2020). These zones and the
incentives they provide are targeted toward the development of technology and IDE, and thus are
substantially different from other special economic zones for which there are mixed evidence of
efficacy (Busso, Gregory, and Kline 2013; Neumark and Kolko 2010). Similarly, for example, the
attraction of large plants has been shown to increase regional productivity through spillovers
(Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010). There has been limited systematic exploration of the
effects of incentives such as tax credits to attract technology firms, however, a practice that has
accelerated in recent year, and is perhaps best exemplified by the competition between cities over
attracting Tesla's Gigafactory in 2014 and Amazon's HQ2 in 2019 (Soper, Day, and Goldman
2020).

7.4. Funding Availability

   Once a discovery and an opportunity are recognized, whether inside a university, corporation
or garage, it typically requires early-stage capital to reach the market. Unfortunately for originators
of new ideas seeking to create new IDE, venture capitalists and other early-stage investors show a
substantial preference for firms near to their headquarters (Chen et al. 2010). The geographic
distribution of venture capital and other forms of investment for IDE is highly concentrated. In
2019, Silicon Valley firms received 39% of all U.S. VC allocation, the top three cities received
60%, and the top five received 69% (PwC MoneyTree 2019). Lack of access to capital to grow
innovative new companies is frequently cited reason why regions might not have a well-


                                                  41
functioning IDE ecosystem and has been one of the most frequently targeted areas for intervention
by policy makers.
   One prominent example of such interventions is tax-credit schemes to encourage angel-
investing. While these programs do appear to lead to the allocation of more early-stage capital,
they do not lead to increases in employment, patenting, or other markers of IDE entrepreneurship
(Lindsey & Stein 2019; Denes et al., 2020). The lackluster effect of angel investing programs
might be found in the compliance issues surrounding the soliciting and acceptance of money from
angel investors (Xu 2020). It also might create incentives for inexperienced investors to enter the
early-stage market in ways that be inefficient for the allocation of capital to the best firms (Lerner
2009; Denes et al. 2020). Another avenue favored by policy makers are efforts to attract existing,
experienced VC investors to invest in the local region. One of the few programs that has helped
stimulate IDE in a region in this manner is the Yozma program in Israel. Yozma provided
matching, non-dilutive funds for established venture capitalists that wanted to invest in Israeli
high-tech companies, thereby increasing the attractiveness of investments in Israeli firms by
increasing the marginal impact of each dollar invested by a VC without impacting their equity
stake (Lerner 2009). Finally, other interventions aim to create local VC firms funded by economic
development funds provided by the local government. Evidence on the role of government venture
capital programs is scant, though programs which focus on joint investment with established
venture capitalists appear to succeed in increasing performance of IDE startups in their region
more than programs that "go it alone" (Brander, Du, and Hellmann 2015).
   While policy makers have often focused on endowing the region exogenously with new
sources of capital, more recent work suggests a more effective way to spur new funding availability
in a region is to focus on spurring innovative activity itself. Shocks to innovative output in a region
appear to spur venture investment and VC activity through the provision of new investment
opportunities which draw private capital to the region (Hausman, Fehder, and Hochberg 2020).
This can then ignite a virtuous cycle of innovation and capital that serves as a key input into the
formation of entrepreneurial clusters (Hausman, Fehder, and Hochberg 2020).
   Another path to increasing venture capital investment in a region appears to be the provision
of non-dilutive financing grants at the earliest stage of an IDE's development to support
translational research needed for successful commercialization and attraction of private market
investment capital. In the U.S., grant programs such as the SBIR program have attempted to serve
                                                  42
this role, yet the impact of the SBIR program seems to be mixed. Due to vagaries in the design of
the program, SBIR grants seem to be allocated more towards larger, more established small
businesses (Wallsten 2000), leading to potential crowding out of some types of investment and to
no large impact on employment. On the other hand, receiving an SBIR grant appears to improve
the performance of firms, though much of the impact seems to have been isolated to regions with
well-functioning venture capital pools (Lerner 2000). Grant programs such as the SBIR program
might serve a role beyond simple allocation of capital, however. Because the evaluation panels of
the SBIR program are staffed with top scientists, their evaluation of the technical merit of the
applicants can provide a certification signal for the winners of the grant. Indeed, Howell (2017)
finds that the impact of the SBIR grant program flows mostly through the certification signal itself
rather than the total number of dollars allocated. Similarly, Zhao and Ziedonis (2020) find that the
largest impact on an SBIR-like program in Michigan is in stimulating downstream investments in
winning firms that hail from outside regions in Michigan where venture capital investment is
common.
   The role of government programs as certification signals for future venture capital investment
shows the importance of investment frictions that exist for early-stage investors, most importantly
time and attention. Venture capitalists are willing to invest in startups outside of their home region
if the startup has a higher chance of creating a significant return (Chen et al. 2010). Investments
that decrease the amount of time required for an investor to evaluate or monitor a startup in a
region increases the venture capitalist's willingness to allocate capital there (Bernstein, Giroud,
and Townsend 2016). Program design, therefore, may best focus on both improving the quality of
startups in a region and certifying the best startups to receive attention from potential funders. An
increasing number of programs appear to serve this latter role. Pitch competitions can provide
go/no-go signals to entrepreneurs as to whether they should continue to pursue ideas, while also
providing easier access to capital through certification (Howell 2020). Startup accelerators serve
similar roles in helping to quickly shut down low-quality startups (Yu 2019). By helping to
decrease the cost of experimentation, such programs can increase the entry of higher quality
entrepreneurs who might face stronger trade-offs between entrepreneurship and their outside
option in wage employment (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf 2016; Manso 2016).




                                                 43
8. Wrapping Up: Future of the Field

    Relative to other areas of research in economics, the study of innovation-driven
entrepreneurship is a new development that has grown in importance across a number of fields of
economics over the past few decades. The main goal of this review was to highlight the key areas
of research in the economics of entrepreneurship, and innovation-driven entrepreneurship in
particular, and highlight the need to distinguish between different types of entrepreneurship and
how they vary along key economic constructs. While we distinguish between IDE, TBE, and self-
employment and subsistence entrepreneurship early in our discussion, this review focused on IDE
primarily due to its outsized potential for spurring economic growth.
    While some areas of study in IDE entrepreneurs are particularly well-developed (e.g. the
financing of IDE ventures), there remain many open questions for future research. In this section,
we focus on important open questions and areas of research in the economics of IDE that not only
may facilitate better understanding of the differences between TBE and IDE but also contribute to
our understanding of critical factors that can foster higher rates of IDE and greater likelihood of
success for IDE ventures.

8.1. Data

    At a basic level, our understanding of IDE entrepreneurship is fundamentally limited by the
availability of data. Areas of research such as entrepreneurial finance through VC are particularly
well-developed simply because of the availability of relatively comprehensive data on new IDE
venture financings through commercially available databases. In contrast, other areas of IDE
remain black boxes primarily because no data is available for empirical exploration. More
generally, the availability of data presents a clear constraint for progress in the field.
    One of the most significant challenges for empirical research is the ability to produce data
covering representative samples of IDE entrepreneurs. While certain databases, such as the Census
LEHD present population-level samples of new firms that have reached a certain stage of
development (at least one employee), the ability to distinguish between IDE and TBE
entrepreneurs in such data is limited, and as a result analysis of these data often confound different
types of entrepreneurship that may be influenced by different economic forces. While the LEHD
allows researchers to restrict samples by industry or to match firms to USPTO data, both of these

                                                  44
methods provide imperfect identification of IDE startups. On the other end of the spectrum are
data sources like Crunchbase and Pitchbook. These databases create datasets of early-stage
entrepreneurs through both self-reporting and web presence, both of which require certain choices
on the part of the entrepreneurs, and which limit the presence of stealth startups and early-exiting
startups in the data. Importantly, these datasets also do not allow identification of failure at later
stages.
    The inability to clearly distinguish between IDE and TBE in the data sources that are the most
representative on other dimensions means that some of the most fundamental empirical findings
in the economics of entrepreneurship represent an average over TBE and IDE entrepreneurship.
As mentioned in Section 3, basic questions such as those regarding the returns to entrepreneurship
have largely been answered using datasets in which IDE entrepreneurs represent a relatively small
portion (Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen 2002; Hall and Woodward 2010). What are the
differences in returns to IDE vs TBE? Under what conditions are the returns to IDE
entrepreneurship are significantly higher? Answers to these questions are particularly important
for regional and national level economic growth, but the literature to-date affords limited answers.
    Currently available data sources also provide limited visibility into two key parts of the
entrepreneurial process: entry and exit. The best available sample for entry processes comes from
nationally representative samples of prospective entrepreneurs in surveys like the PSED but their
focus on a nationally representative of individuals with entrepreneurial intentions sample results
in a small number of IDE firms in the sample that precludes fine-grained analysis (Reynolds and
Curtin 2008). Similarly, in most existing large-scale data sources, it is difficult to identify when
firms have exited, particularly in downside cases. The ability to distinguish between "lifestyle"
firms, "living dead" firms, and firms that have been disbanded, is substantially limited in many
existing data sources either because reporting on the firms is periodic and does not require a yearly
or quarterly update, or because data is sourced from web presence which often is not updated, nor
removed immediately when the firm disbands. The lack of reliable data on entry and exit places
bounds on the type questions researchers can inform.
    Paradoxically, the data that is "best" in terms of population-level representation and clear
indication of entry and exit, such as the LEHD, suffers from a separate key issue: lack of covariates
about founders and founder backgrounds. Relatedly, it is often impossible to discern the role of an
individual (e.g., founder versus early employee) from these data, or to gain an understanding of
                                                 45
key decisions, such as strategic tradeoffs made by the founders. Key theoretical issues around IDE
entrepreneurship involve the relationship between the human capital investments of its founders
and the performance of their ventures (Lazear 2004b, 2005a). Similarly, there remain many open
questions regarding how individual-level differences in founder preferences and personality
impact their decision making, and thus the performance of their ventures (Astebro et al. 2014;
Kerr, Kerr and Dalton et al. 2019; Wasserman 2017). As we detail below, many key theories in
entrepreneurship that speak to entry, persistence, and performance, suggest that individual-level
differences at the founder level are key drivers of entrepreneurship, yet data constraints severely
limit our ability to test these theories and the interconnections between them.
     Development of new sources of detailed data on ventures and their founders remains a key
need for further development of knowledge in the field. One opportunity for such data
development lies in the conduct of more extensive field studies, which we discuss in more detail
later in this section.

8.2. Non-IPO Exits and Venture Failure

     While a large and substantive literature explores the notion of startup company exit via IPO,
much less is known about exit through other modalities, and, in particular, about exit through
venture failure. The vast majority of startups do not reach an IPO, but, rather, are either acquired
or are liquidated. This decrease in the use of IPOs as an exit vehicles has accelerated in recent
years, as IPOs themselves have declined in number. 7 Despite this, there has been limited
research exploring failure of IDE startups or exit through acquisition. This is a target rich area
for future research.
     Entrepreneurship is rife with uncertainty, and an entrepreneur's identification and response to
this uncertainty is a key starting point for much of the research conducted on entrepreneurship.
The resolution of this uncertainty triangulates on one key question: Will the venture succeed? For
the majority of ventures, the answer is no. This is especially true for IDE, where venture failure is
a high probability event (e.g. Davis et al. 1998 for a general discussion). In a sample of over 30,000



     7   The decline in IPOs and its causes has been the subject of a number of recent research papers in the finance
literature. See e.g. Gao et al. (2013), Doidge et al. (2013, 2017), Ewens & Farre-Mensa (2020). No consensus has
been reached on the cause of this decline, suggesting room for future research in this area.
                                                           46
startups tracked by the Startup Genome project (Startup Genome 2019), approximately 11 out of
12 ventures fail. Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003), in a large sample of VC investments by a
major limited partner, estimate the failure at 3 out of 4 companies. A venture's failure has a
substantive impact on all stakeholders: founders, employees, investors, and suppliers, however, a
venture's founders and employees often face the greatest consequences. Given the prevalence of
failure and its significant impact, the phenomenon is deserving of more attention and research.
    A primary reason for the lack of research on the general implications of entrepreneurial failure
is a dearth of data. There is often a survivorship bias in the study of entrepreneurship, as ventures
that succeed are the easiest to collect data on. It is challenging to collect data on new ventures in
general, as many entrepreneurs will not officially register their business until they have reached a
minimum level of derisking. Moreover, the low barrier to business registration may also result in
the formation of many firms whose founder has no real plan to actually grow a business. Data
availability on an IDE venture is often subject to the venture reaching a specific milestone, such
as raising venture capital funds. This also leads to an over-selection on firms from the right tail of
the quality distribution. Research with these data, much of which we have discussed in prior
sections, offer important insights into entrepreneurship, however, we often lose sight of the modal
founder, venture, and startup employee. While administrative data (e.g., US Census) casts a wider
net with regards to venture quality, it frequently mixes IDE with TBE, and the nature of the data
makes identifying mechanisms challenging. For example, administrative data does not allow for
unpacking demand-side mechanisms from supply side mechanisms, as we only observe realized
events, such as an employee leaving to join a new firm.
    The economics literature does acknowledge the existence of significant failure rates. Manso
(2016) uses general population survey data to suggest that the cost of failure at entrepreneurship
may be overstated, given that important learning comes from an individual attempting
entrepreneurship (see also Vereshchagina and Hopenhayn 2009; Dillon and Stanton 2017). By
experimenting with entrepreneurship, individuals may, for example, be better able to understand
their career and make appropriate choices. However, this cost may be higher for individuals with
less experience to reply on subsequently. Would-be entrepreneurs may also learn from the
experiences of former entrepreneurs with whom they interact. Lerner and Malmendier (2013) use
a sample of Harvard Business School MBA students to understand the peer effects of having
former founders as peers, finding that their presence decreases the rate of entrepreneurship due a
                                                 47
reduction in the launch of unsuccessful ventures--in other words, it lowers this failure rate.
Similarly, Nanda and Sorensen (2009) find that having former entrepreneurs as co-workers
increase the likelihood that an individual enters entrepreneurship. Failure (or even success) of
general ventures (a mix of TBE and IDE) may thus have utility for former founders--by allowing
them to experiment--and for potential founders, through peer effects.
    Recent research in management and strategy provides some insight into the relationship
between IDE failure and the subsequent careers of the founders and employees. Botelho and Chang
(2019) use a field experiment to study how former founders are evaluated by recruiters when they
attempt to enter the traditional labor market. They find that IDE founders receive fewer callbacks
than otherwise identical non-founders, with formerly successful founders receiving fewer
callbacks than former "failed" founders. This overall founder discount appears to be due to
concerns on the part of hiring firms that former founders may be unable to fit into and remain
committed to wage employment. Many important questions regarding the mechanisms that may
affect how former IDE founders are perceived and evaluated in the labor market remain
unanswered, however. For example, does substantial wage employment experience prior to
founding a venture attenuate the founder "discount?" Does a founder's network help when
attempting to (re)enter wage employment?
    A related set of questions regard how startup experience affects the careers of employees, and
especially the effect of a failed venture on its employees. Given that over 100,000 individuals join
IDE ventures each year (Goldschlag and Miranda 2020; Botelho and Marx 2020), and that most
IDE ventures fail, these questions are first order. In economics, most research on employee careers
and firm failure relates to general displacement effects (Gibbons and Katz 1991; Jacobson,
LaLonde, and Sullivan 1993). For entrepreneurial ventures, we know much less, with much of
what is known coming from research outside of economics. Even here, many of these studies are
restricted to particular industries; for example, in the Semiconductor industry, experience as an
early employee, which includes founders, leads to a positive wage effect conditional on being hired
(Campbell 2012). Some evidence mixing IDE and TBE ventures also exists, and suggests that
startup employees who join other startups earn less than those startup employees who join more
established firms (Sorenson et al. 2021). Research focused on IDE ventures is more limited, even
in management. directly study the likelihood that employees of failed ventures exit the industry.
Comparing over 100 firms in the innovation-driven Automated Speech Recognition Industry--
                                                48
many of which are early-staged ventures--they find that exit rates for employees who voluntarily
choose to leave their firm and those for employees from failed firms are similar. This similarity,
however, is driven by employees with specialized human capital from failed firms being the most
likely to remain in the industry, and if firm failure is associated with a scandal, those employees
are the most likely to exit--regardless of their human capital.
    Many questions regarding entrepreneurial failure and its effects on the subsequent careers of
the venture's founders and employees remain fertile areas for future research. For example, who
becomes an entrepreneur? There is reason to believe that work experience at an IDE venture may
increase the likelihood that an individual enters entrepreneurship themselves, and that this rate
may be moderated by whether the venture they worked out succeeded or failed. At the founder
level, serial entrepreneurship and the effects of previous entrepreneurial experience, even at a
failed venture, also remains relatively unexplored. Prior entrepreneurial experience, even or
perhaps even particularly at a failed venture, may benefit the founder through learning-by-doing,
and thus potential employees and investors may prefer founders with previous experience.
Furthermore, there is much that remains to be understood regarding the causes of startup venture
failure and the likelihood of a venture reaching particular milestones, and how they relate to the
founding team or strategy.
    Of course, even those ventures that do succeed do not always result in an IPO. Whereas 20
years ago IPOs were the majority of venture-backed startup exits, they now account for only 10%
of exits for venture-backed startups (National Venture Capital Association (NCVA) 2020).The rest
exit through acquisition. Despite this, acquisition as an exit strategy remains relatively unexplored
in the literature. Researchers have recently begun to pick up on this gap in our understanding, with
explorations of acquihires--acquisitions in which the startup is purchased as a way to hire its team
for other purposes (Ng and Stuart 2019; Kim 2020), the role of the competitive landscape and
competitor acquisitions (Conti, Guzman, and Rabi 2020), and exploration of killer acquisitions--
acquisitions in which the incumbent purchaser buys the startup in order to dismantle it
(Cunningham, Ederer, and Ma 2020; Callander and Matouschek 2020). While acquisitions appear
to be a desired outcome for entrepreneurs, many open questions remain with regards to how these
acquisitions affect the founders, employees, investors, and the acquirers themselves.

8.3. Individual Characteristics of Entrepreneurs


                                                 49
    Much like data on other aspects of entrepreneurial firms, comprehensive data on the individual
characteristics of IDE founders are typically unavailable. For example, the literature lacks a deep
understanding of how founder gender and founder race affect the entrepreneurial process. The little
evidence we have paints a stark picture regarding the founding rates of IDE by underrepresented
individuals. In recent decades, women represent less than 10% of the entrepreneurial and venture
capital labor pool, and Blacks represent less than 1% (Gompers and Wang 2017). While supply-
side mechanisms may account for some of the discrepancy in founding rates, there are likely
systematic demand-side barriers faced by underrepresented individuals who are attempting to
found an IDE venture.
    Demand-side biases for underrepresented individuals are well documented in economics
research, especially from a labor market perspective (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004; Goldin and
Rouse 2000; Blau and Kahn 2000; see Cain 1986 and Neumark 2018 for reviews). This research
joins a vast amount of work in psychology and sociology, which has also consistently documented
that underrepresented individuals receive worse evaluations than comparable White men. While
there is little research that analyzes the effect of ascriptive founder characteristics in the context of
IDE, there is convincing evidence that demand-side biases are prevalent. In an experiment,
(Brooks et al. 2014) find that investors prefer pitches presented by men relative to the identical
pitches when presented by women. Similarly, Ewens and Townsend (2020) find that male
investors express less interest in female entrepreneurs relative to male entrepreneurs, and that the
male-led ventures they select underperform. These findings are especially important given that
entrepreneurship is fraught with uncertainty, which increases observed bias in evaluation processes
(Botelho and Abraham 2017). Furthermore, this bias is most likely cumulative, as entrepreneurs
depend on positive evaluations in one area to assist in another. For example, if underrepresented
founders face greater difficulty in attracting initial employees, and investors use founder
characteristics, as well as employee quality, to base their decisions, then bias in one domain
magnifies bias in another. Furthermore, the fact that underrepresented individuals may utilize their
social networks differently in the IDE will increases the challenges faced by underrepresented
founders (Howell & Nanda 2019).
    Many important questions also remain unanswered on how ascriptive founder characteristics,
such as gender and race, affect their observed outcomes. Furthermore, there is a need for research
in this area that goes beyond documenting bias and focuses on possible policy levers to reduce
                                                   50
such biases and improve outcomes. Since the demand-side preferences do not appear to be
performance-based (Ewens and Townsend 2020), one potential avenue for future work is to
explore the interaction between supply-side representation (e.g., investors) and demand-side
evaluation of founders. Relatedly, future work should also focus on how improving a founder's
initial resources can affect participation, given that both gender and race have been associated with
more limited access to various resources (Robb, Consulting, and Rafael 2012), and that resource
access appears to affect entry into entrepreneurship and subsequent performance. Similarly, female
entrepreneurs are less likely to have a venture capitalist in their professional network (Brush et al.
2004) and, on average, have smaller professional networks than men (See Klyver and Terjesen
2007; Renzulli, Aldrich, and Moody 2000)
   While substantial differences in outcomes are clear along ascriptive characteristics, there are
other individual differences that can be explored and which might also yield substantial insight
into the entrepreneurial process. Behavioral parameters, such as risk tolerance and overconfidence,
have been connected theoretically to entrepreneurship in economics (Camerer & Lovallo, 1999;
Kihlstrom & Laffont, 1979), and in psychology, a significant literature has developed connecting
personality traits to entrepreneurial decision making and performance (Stewart and Roth 2001;
Zhao et al. 2010; Zhao and Seibert 2006). Recently, there has been a growing interest in using
personality traits identified in the psychology literature to understand individual differences in
decision-making across a number of economic settings (Almlund et al. 2011; Borghans et al. 2008;
Proto and Rustichini 2014), and in particular, in entrepreneurship (Kerr, Kerr, and Xu 2018).
Empirical work has documented personality differences across founders and early employees of
startups (Kerr, Kerr and Dalton 2019), has shown that personality traits are related to changes in
risk aversion of IDE entrepreneurs in response to COVID-19 (Fehder et al. 2021), and are related
to variation in how angel investors evaluate startups (Fehder et al. 2021).
   The majority of this research has focused on the Big 5 personality inventory and its connection
to entrepreneurial decision-making. While this focus is understandable given the Big 5's
prominence in personality psychology, there are many other scales which might be systematically
related to entrepreneurial behavior and which can be identified through further research. In
addition, little attention has been paid to the interconnections between personality traits and
behavioral preference parameters, like risk tolerance, that are central to our current theoretical
account of entrepreneurship (Fehder et al. 2021). Further research that adds to the list of personality
                                                  51
traits connected to entrepreneurship and their own interrelatedness will help push forward our
theoretical understanding of entrepreneurial activity.

8.4. International Aspects

    Silicon Valley has been globally preeminent in fostering IDE entrepreneurship over the past
50 years. The remainder of the top areas for entrepreneurship activity were also in the United
States. Yet it is unclear whether Silicon Valley, and the United States more generally, will be able
to maintain its global advantage in IDE activity. Even within the U.S., other regions have seen
sustained periods of innovation and IDE, only to quickly fade in prominence (Lamoreaux,
Levenstein, and Sokoloff 2006). In fact, some theoretical models of agglomeration and innovation
suggest that clusters such as Silicon Valley should eventually unravel (Duranton 2007; Duranton
and Puga 2001). Three primary factors that have underpinned the United States' competitive
advantage, but which face significant change in the coming decades, are (i) the battle for global
talent, and (ii) global capital flows.
    While Silicon Valley in particular and the United States in general has been a wellspring of
IDE entrepreneurship over the past century, a substantial portion of that IDE entrepreneurship has
been generated from the hard work of individuals born in other countries and attracted to the
resources that Silicon Valley had to offer (for a review, see Kerr and Kerr 2020). In particular,
Indian and Chinese-born individuals are disproportionately represented in the ranks of the STEM
workforce and the roles of inventors in the United States (Kerr 2008; Kerr and Lincoln 2010).
Foreign-born innovators have strong positive externalities for innovation in general, but especially
for native-born inventors (Bernstein et al. 2018). They are also more likely to migrate to areas of
new invention and technical opportunity (Kerr 2010). The emergence of this phenomenon has
partial roots in the pre-eminence of U.S. universities in the post-WWII era that derived at least in
part to the reallocation of scientific and engineering talent from Europe to the United States
(Moser, Voena, and Waldinger 2014).
    In addition to contributing substantially to inventive activity, immigrants are more likely to
enter into entrepreneurship than similarly educated native-born workers (Hunt 2011).
Interestingly, U.S. immigration policies thus provide a seed of instability for U.S. entrepreneurial
activity. U.S. Permanent resident visas (green cards) are allocated on a per country basis that is not
proportional to the educated population of the country based on the Immigration Act of 1990 as of

                                                 52
the writing of this article. As a result, immigrants from certain countries, even if educated in the
U.S., face greater obstacles obtaining immigration status that allows for entrepreneurial activity
(Azoulay et al. 2020; Kerr and Kerr 2020). The delay and uncertainty in obtaining permanent
residence serves to drive immigrant STEM workers back to their home countries, an effect that is
increasing in their home country's GDP (Kahn and MacGarvie 2020; Khosla 2018). To the extent
that U.S. policies affect the flow of immigrant innovators into the U.S. and given that these
immigrant innovators are more likely to enter into IDE, the effect on U.S. IDE activity and
subsequent economic growth could be large, and IDE activity abroad may increase. Moreover, it
is unlikely that U.S. citizens will be able to substantially substitute for the sheer quantity of
immigrant STEM graduates demanded in Silicon Valley, or the U.S. more generally. If the deep
human capital pools in Silicon Valley start to shallow, the competitive advantage of the region
over others in the global economy will start to erode, potentially reshaping the geographic
distribution of tech clusters globally. Beyond the obvious impacts on U.S. competitiveness, any
declines in Silicon Valley may also have global effects, as there are substantial agglomerative
effects to the productivity of innovators (Moretti 2019) and negative spillovers to being located
outside of the U.S. for U.S.-educated foreign innovators (Kahn and MacGarvie 2016). Technology
spillovers to other counties may also be affected. Foreign corporate investments in Silicon Valley
firms serve as a channel for other countries' convergence to the global technological frontier
(Akcigit et al. 2020). Finally, increasing nationalistic competition for supremacy in certain key
technological areas like artificial intelligence may create an additional engine to spur technological
development. All of these topics deserve considerable additional attention and research.
    Beyond the ability to access global talent, a key contributor to Silicon Valley's rise was its
early creation of a successful venture capital industry (Bresnahan and Gambardella 2004). The
availability of early stage capital to fund risky new innovation-driven businesses attracted
entrepreneurs from across to globe to Silicon Valley, contributing to an agglomeration of IDE
ventures and talent. Changes to the geographic distribution of early stage capital and other financial
institutions globally, however, may change the calculus for startup ventures and their decisions of
where to locate. Recent increases in early stage investment in Chinese startups, as well as in the
market capitalization of listed firms on Chinese stock exchanges are just one set of examples of
new developments that could create worthy rivals to Silicon Valley abroad (Jiang et al. 2020). As
funding availability and technology talent availability increase in new regions, founder location
                                                 53
decisions may shift. Economists have just begun to compare the efficacy of early-stage investors
outside the United States to the benchmark of the American peers (Gompers and Wang 2017).
Because the institutional details, policies and ecosystems of different countries can have a large
impact on their ability to foster and sustain IDE (Lerner 2009), understanding the causal impact of
these differences is key to understanding how the global distribution of entrepreneurial activity
may shift going forward. For example, political control of economic decisions in China provides
a useful window into the role of policy uncertainty in dampening IDE entry and performance
(Cong and Howell 2018). The fast-changing landscape of global IDE, however, means that any
emerging agenda in international entrepreneurial finance must remain responsive to changes in the
phenomena on the ground.
    Of course, the growth in IDE activity and financing globally has arisen in parallel to the
reduction in geopolitical barriers and the opening of global markets to outside activity (Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti 2008). The number of international markets that were once off limits due to
geopolitical issues or high costs of entry is significantly smaller. The advent of the internet and
mobile devices and their rapid adoption at both the consumer and enterprise level has facilitated
access to these markets. As a result, startups today often sell their products into global markets
from the get go (Hochberg 2017). Future research will need to look to the breadth of the global
economy to capture these nuances.

8.5. Field Experiments

    As noted, understanding some of the most important phenomena in IDE entrepreneurship is
difficult to do with currently available datasets. These limitations result either because existing
datasets lack sufficient information about individual entrepreneurs and companies or because they
do not provide the researcher enough context regarding choice sets and decisions. One approach
to circumventing these limitations is through the generation of new data via the execution of field
studies and experiments. When designed properly, field experiments not only allow the researcher
to generate data on otherwise opaque elements of the IDE phenomenon, but also have the benefit
of isolating different causal channels which may impact decision making and outcomes. Field
experiments may serve to increase our understanding of IDE entrepreneurship through two
channels: evaluation of interventions that are prevalent in entrepreneurial communities and


                                                54
construction of more nuanced models of entrepreneurial choices building on the foundations of
behavioral economics (Astebro et al. 2014; Harrison and List 2004).
    A common type of field experiment in economics is the randomized controlled trial (RCT).
RCTs offer the opportunity to both test the efficacy of specific interventions as well as the
opportunity to design exogenous treatments that allow us to test specific theories regarding
entrepreneur choices and outcomes. To date, entrepreneurship-related experiments in the
economics literature have largely sought to evaluate the impact of specific policies and programs.
RCTs, however, offer the researcher the opportunity to think beyond program evaluation alone.
    For example, recent studies suggest the existence of substantial gender inequity in IDE
entrepreneurship, at both the population level (Guzman and Kacperczyk 2019) and in key resource
allocation decisions such as angel funding choices (Ewens and Townsend 2020). While
experimental evidence suggests that at least some of this inequity derives from statistical
discrimination on the part of investors (Brooks et al. 2014), much of the discussion of this topic
has revolved around the existence of specific bias on the part of overwhelmingly male investor
base. Administrative data from entrepreneurship programs like venture competitions suggest that
unequal outcomes in funding after the competition is at least in part due to behavioral differences
between men and women entrepreneurs in the competition (Howell & Nanda, 2019). Identifying
the most impactful channels for increasing female participation in IDE entrepreneurship and their
success will come from a more detailed understanding of how observed differences in behavior
tied to easily observed characteristics like gender might be related to deeper preference parameters.
RCT can provide a valuable tool both for developing a better understanding and for influencing
women's experience in IDE entrepreneurship, which may offer insight into interventions designed
to improve the rates of female entry and success and to change evaluator preferences over the long
run. Similar approaches have led to useful insights into the sources of observed wage premiums
(Niederle and Vesterlund 2007; Gneezy, Leonard, and List 2009).
       The role of gender in IDE entrepreneurship is just one of many examples where field
experiments may help scholars rule in and out preferences and traits which help explain systematic
differences in entrepreneurial or investor behavior. Researchers in entrepreneurship have long
intuited that entrepreneurs are different from the general population in important ways. Some have
emphasized differences in propensity to take risk (Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979), others have
suggested that there are substantial human capital differences (Lazear 2004a, 2005b), and others
                                                 55
have suggested that there are other important behavioral parameters along which entrepreneurs
vary from the standard population (Astebro et al. 2014). Similarly, studies have emphasized how
differences in an individual's environment may significantly shift the likelihood of becoming an
entrepreneur--whether through entrepreneurial parents (Hvide & Oyer, 2018), wealth
endowments (Kerr and Nanda 2009), or workplace or educational peers with entrepreneurial
intentions or backgrounds (Nanda and Sorensen,2009; Lerner and Malmendier 2013). While the
literature provides some sense of how these individual differences might be related to entry (i.e.
differences between entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs), we have less of an understanding of
how these individual differences carry forward into entrepreneurial choices after entry which
might impact entrepreneurial performance. For example, while it seems that entrepreneurs are
more likely to have higher risk tolerance than the average non-entrepreneur in the population, do
entrepreneurs with higher risk tolerance make different decisions regarding financing, contracts,
or competition, among other things? If so, do these decisions to lead to better or worse performance
for their ventures?
    Recent studies conducted during the pandemic within larger entrepreneurial field experiments
suggest important descriptive insights can be obtained from field-generated data that might
otherwise lie uncovered (Bailey et al. 2020). While many of individual differences cannot be
sources of experimental variation (we cannot assign individuals to have higher risk tolerance or
have parents with entrepreneurial backgrounds), field experiments offer an opportunity to measure
as many of these individual characteristics as possible, allowing for ex post exploration of patterns
of treatment heterogeneity and connections between individual differences and individual choices.
Recent work in machine learning provides methods that allow for disciplined ex post exploration
of patterns of heterogeneity in the data without p-hacking (see e.g. Bailey et al. 2020). Use of such
tools is likely to offer important insights from post hoc analysis, offering insight into previously
unexplored areas of entrepreneurial behavior and outcomes.
    Field experiments and RCTs, however, are not limited to providing insight solely on
entrepreneurs. IDE startup success often involves multiple stakeholders outside of the startup.
Field experiments can offer new insights into these stakeholders and their choices. For example,
recent field experiments attempt to understand how investors perceive and rank opportunities
(Bapna 2017; Bernstein, Korteweg, and Laws 2017; Brooks et al. 2014). Similarly, other recent
randomized studies attempt to understand how entrepreneurs value and prioritize external
                                                 56
resources and stakeholder interactions (Fehder et al. 2019). Such studies should be expanded to
explore how individual differences amongst investors and entrepreneurs may impact how they
deviate from mean behavior.
    Notably, a growing set of RCTs in mainstream and managerial economics have emphasized
the possibility of influencing and improving the entrepreneurial process (Camuffo et al. 2019;
Chatterji et al. 2019). Other studies suggest that entrepreneurs are harder to improve (Fairlie,
Karlan, and Zinman 2015). These studies, however, utilize dramatically different study
populations. Some focus on high human capital individuals primarily pursuing IDE
entrepreneurship (Camuffo et al. 2019), while others focus on under-employed and educated
individuals for whom entrepreneurship or self-employment might provide an avenue out of
unemployment (Fairlie, Karlan, and Zinman 2015). Heterogeneity in the treatment effect for
different populations for different types of interventions can be explored explicitly through trial
design. As field experiments continue to grow in importance in the study of entrepreneurship,
however, is as important that researchers explicitly recognize the differences between different
types of entrepreneurship and between the different entrepreneurial populations they are studying.
More careful consideration of these issues during initial trial design will then allow for deeper
understanding of external validity of the results and which populations and entrepreneurship types
they apply to.

8.6. Concluding Remarks

   Research on innovation-driven entrepreneurial activity has come a long way since the initial
thoughts of Kirzner and Schumpeter. We now know much more about the factors that determine
entry into different types of entrepreneurship, the financing of these ventures, and factors that
affect performance. We are beginning to scratch the surface of knowledge on how to build well-
functioning environments to promote and support IDE activity. These insights have considerable
policy implications. Yet there is still much to be learned. As we begin to properly differentiate
between types of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial activity, attention will need to be paid to
revisiting our canonical models to adapt and update them to fit the varying entrepreneurial paths.
   One area that deserves particular note on this dimension is the exploration of potential decline
in entrepreneurial activity and business dynamism over time. Researchers approaching this issue
from the viewpoint of different entrepreneur populations and types have arrived at vary

                                                57
conclusions regarding the extent and nature of the decline. More exploration of this phenomena
and how it differs along business type is warranted, given the importance of entrepreneurship as a
key driver of economic growth.
   Fortunately, recent years have seen a marked increase in the number of early career researchers
participating in the field and in adjacent areas such as innovation and productivity. We look
forward to seeing what the future holds.




                                               58
References
Abrams, E. (2017). Securities Crowdfunding: More than Family, Friends, and Fools? (SSRN
      Scholarly Paper ID 2902217). Social Science Research Network.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2902217
Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Alp, H., Bloom, N., & Kerr, W. (2018). Innovation, Reallocation,
     and Growth. American Economic Review, 108(11), 3450­3491.
     https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20130470
Adelino, M., Schoar, A., & Severino, F. (2015). House prices, collateral, and self-employment.
       Journal of Financial Economics, 117(2), 288­306.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.03.005
Admati, A. R., & Pfleiderer, P. (1994). Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture
      Capitalists. The Journal of Finance, 49(2), 371­402. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
      6261.1994.tb05146.x
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., & Howitt, P. (2005). Competition and
      Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 701­728.
Aghion, Philippe, Bechtold, S., Cassar, L., & Herz, H. (2014). The Causal Effects of Competition
      on Innovation: Experimental Evidence (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2413335). Social
      Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2413335
Aghion, Philippe, & Bolton, P. (1992). An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
      Contracting. The Review of Economic Studies, 59(3), 473­494.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/2297860
Aghion, Philippe, & Howitt, P. (1992). A model of growth through creative destruction.
      Econometrica, 60, 323­351.
Aghion, Philippe, & Tirole, J. (1994). The Management of Innovation. The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 109(4), 1185­1209. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118360
Agrawal, A., Catalini, C., & Goldfarb, A. (2016). Are syndicates the killer app of equity
      crowdfunding? California Management Review, 58(2), 111­124.
Agrawal, A., & Goldfarb, A. (2008). Restructuring Research: Communication Costs and the
      Democratization of University Innovation. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1578­
      1590. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.98.4.1578
Agrawal, A. K., Catalini, C., & Goldfarb, A. (2013). Some Simple Economics of Crowdfunding
      (Working Paper No. 19133). National Bureau of Economic Research.
      https://doi.org/10.3386/w19133
Ahuja, G. (2000). Collaboration Networks, Structural Holes, and Innovation: A Longitudinal
       Study. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45(3), 425­455.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2667105



                                               59
Akcigit, U., Ates, S. T., Lerner, J., Townsend, R. R., & Zhestkova, Y. (2020). Fencing Off
       Silicon Valley: Cross-Border Venture Capital and Technology Spillovers (No. w27828).
       National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27828
Akcigit, U., & Kerr, W. R. (2018). Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations. Journal of
       Political Economy, 126(4), 1374­1443. https://doi.org/10.1086/697901
Aldrich, H. E., & Cliff, J. E. (2003). The pervasive effects of family on entrepreneurship:
       Toward a family embeddedness perspective. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(5), 573­
       596. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-9026(03)00011-9
Aldrich, H., & Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship through social networks. The Art and
       Science of Entrepreneurship. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, 3­23.
Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J., & Kautz, T. (2011). Personality psychology and
      economics. In Handbook of the Economics of Education (Vol. 4, pp. 1­181). Elsevier.
Alvarez, S. A., Barney, J. B., & Anderson, P. (2012). Forming and Exploiting Opportunities: The
       Implications of Discovery and Creation Processes for Entrepreneurial and Organizational
       Research. Organization Science, 24(1), 301­317. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1110.0727
Andersen, S., & Nielsen, K. M. (2012). Ability or Finances as Constraints on Entrepreneurship?
      Evidence from Survival Rates in a Natural Experiment. The Review of Financial Studies,
      25(12), 3684­3710. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhs107
Andreessen, M. (2011). Why Software Is Eating The World. 9.
Anton, J. J., & Yao, D. A. (1995). Start-ups, spin-offs, and internal projects. Journal of Law,
       Economics, & Organization, 362­378.
Arora, A., & Gambardella, A. (2010). Ideas for rent: An overview of markets for technology.
       Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(3), 775­803. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtq022
Arora, Ashish, Fosfuri, A., & Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for technology: The economics of
       innovation and corporate strategy. MIT press.
Arora, Ashish, & Gambardella, A. (2010). Ideas for rent: An overview of markets for
       technology. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(3), 775­803.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtq022
Ashbrook, T. (2000). The Leap: A Memoir of Love and Madness in the Internet Gold Rush.
      Houghton Mifflin Company.
Åstebro, T., Herz, H., Nanda, R., & Weber, R. A. (2014). Seeking the Roots of Entrepreneurship:
       Insights from Behavioral Economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 49­70.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.3.49
Åstebro, T., & Serrano, C. J. (2015). Business Partners: Complementary Assets, Financing, and
       Invention Commercialization. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 24(2),
       228­252. https://doi.org/10.1111/jems.12095


                                                60
Åstebro, T., & Thompson, P. (2011). Entrepreneurs, Jacks of all trades or Hobos? Research
       Policy, 40(5), 637­649. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.01.010
Azoulay, P., Jones, B. F., Kim, J. D., & Miranda, J. (2020a). Age and High-Growth
      Entrepreneurship. American Economic Review: Insights, 2(1), 65­82.
      https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20180582
Azoulay, P., Jones, B., Kim, J. D., & Miranda, J. (2020b). Immigration and Entrepreneurship in
      the United States. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Babina, T. (2020). Destructive Creation at Work: How Financial Distress Spurs
       Entrepreneurship. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(9), 4061­4101.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz110
Babina, T., & Howell, S. T. (2018). Entrepreneurial Spillovers from Corporate R&D (Working
       Paper No. 25360). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w25360
Bakos, Y., & Halaburda, H. (2020). Platform Competition with Multi-Homing on Both Sides:
       Subsidize or Not? (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3545723). Social Science Research
       Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3545723
Bamford, C. E., Bruton, G. D., & Hinson, Y. L. (2006). Founder/Chief Executive Officer Exit: A
      Social Capital Perspective of New Ventures. Journal of Small Business Management,
      44(2), 207­220. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-627X.2006.00164.x
Bapna, S. (2017). Complementarity of Signals in Early-Stage Equity Investment Decisions:
       Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment. Management Science, 65(2), 933­952.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2017.2833
Barr, A. (2013, June 18). From the ashes of Webvan, Amazon builds a grocery business. Reuters.
       https://www.reuters.com/article/net-us-amazon-webvan-idUSBRE95H1CC20130618
Barrios, J. M., Hochberg, Y. V., & Yi, H. (2020). Launching with a Parachute: The Gig
       Economy and New Business Formation (No. w27183). National Bureau of Economic
       Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27183
Batelle, J. (2005, January 8). The Birth of Google | WIRED.
        https://www.wired.com/2005/08/battelle/
Baumgartner, H. J., & Caliendo, M. (2008). Turning Unemployment into Self-Employment:
     Effectiveness of Two Start-Up Programmes. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
     70(3), 347­373. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0084.2008.00505.x
Baumol, W. J. (1968). Entrepreneurship in Economic Theory. The American Economic Review,
     58(2), 64­71.
Baumol, W. J. (2005). Education for Innovation: Entrepreneurial Breakthroughs versus
     Corporate Incremental Improvements. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 5, 33­56.
     https://doi.org/10.1086/ipe.5.25056170


                                              61
Becker, S. O., & Hvide, H. K. (2013). Do Entrepreneurs Matter? SSRN Electronic Journal.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2199645
Beckman, C. M., Burton, M. D., & O'Reilly, C. (2007). Early teams: The impact of team
     demography on VC financing and going public. Journal of Business Venturing, 22(2),
     147­173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2006.02.001
Belenzon, S., & Schankerman, M. (2009). University Knowledge Transfer: Private Ownership,
      Incentives, and Local Development Objectives. The Journal of Law and Economics,
      52(1), 111­144. https://doi.org/10.1086/595763
Bellon, A., Gilje, E. P., Cookson, J. A., & Heimer, R. Z. (2020). Personal Wealth and Self-
       Employment (No. 27452). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bengtsson, O., & Hsu, D. H. (2015). Ethnic matching in the U.S. venture capital market. Journal
       of Business Venturing, 30(2), 338­354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2014.09.001
Benson, D., & Ziedonis, R. H. (2010). Corporate venture capital and the returns to acquiring
      portfolio companies. Journal of Financial Economics, 98(3), 478­499.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.07.003
Bergemann, D., & Hege, U. (2005). The Financing of Innovation: Learning and Stopping. The
      RAND Journal of Economics, 36(4), 719­752. JSTOR.
Bernanke, B., & Gertler, M. (1989). Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations. The
      American Economic Review, 79(1), 14­31.
Bernardo, A. E., & Welch, I. (2001). On the Evolution of Overconfidence and Entrepreneurs.
       Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 10(3), 301­330.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1430-9134.2001.00301.x
Bernstein, S., Colonnelli, E., Malacrino, D., & McQuade, T. (2018). Who Creates New Firms
       When Local Opportunities Arise? (Working Paper No. 25112). National Bureau of
       Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25112
Bernstein, S., Diamond, R., McQuade, T., & Pousada, B. (2018). The contribution of high-skilled
       immigrants to innovation in the United States.
Bernstein, S., Giroud, X., & Townsend, R. R. (2016). The Impact of Venture Capital Monitoring.
       The Journal of Finance, 71(4), 1591­1622. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12370
Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A., & Laws, K. (2017). Attracting Early-Stage Investors: Evidence
       from a Randomized Field Experiment. The Journal of Finance, 72(2), 509­538.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12470
Bernstein, S., McQuade, T., Nanda, R., & Roth, B. N. (2020). More Capital, Less Innovation?
       The Implications of Large Capital Inflows to the Venture Capital Industry. 28.
Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha
       and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. American Economic
       Review, 94(4), 991­1013. https://doi.org/10.1257/0002828042002561

                                               62
Bhagwat, V. (2013). Manager Networks and Coordination of Effort: Evidence from Venture
     Capital Syndication (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1962146). Social Science Research
     Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1962146
Bikard, M., & Marx, M. (2020). Bridging academia and industry: How geographic hubs connect
       university science and corporate technology. Management Science, 66(8), 3425­3443.
Black, J., Meza, D. de, & Jeffreys, D. (1996). House Prices, The Supply of Collateral and the
       Enterprise Economy. The Economic Journal, 106(434), 60­75.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2234931
Blanchflower, D. G., & Oswald, A. J. (1998). What Makes an Entrepreneur? 58.
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2000). Gender Differences in Pay. Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 14(4), 75­99. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.14.4.75
Bloom, N., Schankerman, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2013). Identifying Technology Spillovers and
      Product Market Rivalry. Econometrica, 81(4), 1347­1393.
      https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA9466
Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Ter Weel, B. (2008). The economics and
      psychology of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 972­1059.
Borjas, G. J., & Bronars, S. G. (1989). Consumer Discrimination and Self-Employment. Journal
        of Political Economy, 97(3), 581­605. https://doi.org/10.1086/261617
Botelho, T. L. (2018). Here's an Opportunity: Knowledge Sharing Among Competitors as a
       Response to Buy-in Uncertainty. Organization Science, 29(6), 1033­1055.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2018.1214
Botelho, T. L., & Abraham, M. (2017). Pursuing Quality: How Search Costs and Uncertainty
       Magnify Gender-based Double Standards in a Multistage Evaluation Process.
       Administrative Science Quarterly, 62(4), 698­730.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/0001839217694358
Botelho, T. L., & Chang, M. (2019). Founder Experience and Receiving a Callback in the Hiring
       Process: A Field Experiment. Yale SOM Working Paper.
Botelho, T. L., & Marx, M. (2020). Firm Failure, Scandal, and Employee Exit From Innovation-
       Driven Industries. Working Paper.
Bottazzi, L., Da Rin, M., & Hellmann, T. (2008). Who are the active investors?: Evidence from
       venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 89(3), 488­512.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2007.09.003
Boudreau, K., & Marx, M. (2019). From Theory to Practice: Field Experimental Evidence on
      Early Exposure of Engineering Majors to Professional Work (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
      3271144). Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3271144
Brander, J. A., Amit, R., & Antweiler, W. (2002). Venture-Capital Syndication: Improved
      Venture Selection vs. The Value-Added Hypothesis. Journal of Economics &

                                               63
       Management Strategy, 11(3), 423­452. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1430-
       9134.2002.00423.x
Brander, J. A., Du, Q., & Hellmann, T. (2015). The Effects of Government-Sponsored Venture
      Capital: International Evidence. Review of Finance, 19(2), 571­618.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfu009
Bravo-Biosca, A., Criscuolo, C., & Menon, C. (2016). What drives the dynamics of business
      growth? Economic Policy, 31(88), 703­742. https://doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eiw013
Bresnahan, T. F., & Trajtenberg, M. (1995). General purpose technologies `Engines of growth'?
      Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), 83­108. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(94)01598-T
Bresnahan, T., & Gambardella, A. (2004). Building high-tech clusters: Silicon Valley and
      beyond. Cambridge University Press.
Bresnahan, T., Gambardella, A., & Saxenian, A. (2001). `Old economy'inputs for `new
      economy'outcomes: Cluster formation in the new Silicon Valleys. Industrial and
      Corporate Change, 10(4), 835­860.
Breugst, N., Patzelt, H., & Rathgeber, P. (2015). How should we divide the pie? Equity
       distribution and its impact on entrepreneurial teams. Journal of Business Venturing,
       30(1), 66­94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2014.07.006
Brooks, A. W., Huang, L., Kearney, S. W., & Murray, F. E. (2014). Investors prefer
      entrepreneurial ventures pitched by attractive men. Proceedings of the National Academy
      of Sciences, 111(12), 4427. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1321202111
Brown, D. C., & Davies, S. W. (2020). Financing Efficiency of Securities-Based Crowdfunding.
      The Review of Financial Studies, hhaa025. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa025
Bruce, D., Holtz-Eakin, D., & Quinn, J. F. (2000). Self-employment and labor market transitions
       at older ages. http://dlib.bc.edu/islandora/object/bc-ir:100075
Brush, C. G., Carter, N. M., Gatewood, E. J., Greene, P. G., & Hart, M. (2004). Gatekeepers of
       Venture Growth: A Diana Project Report on the Role and Participation of Women in the
       Venture Capital Industry (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1260385). Social Science Research
       Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1260385
Burton, M. D., Sørensen, J. B., & Beckman, C. M. (2002). 7. Coming from good stock: Career
       histories and new venture formation. Research in the Sociology of Organizations, 19,
       229­262. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0733-558X(02)19007-0
Busso, M., Gregory, J., & Kline, P. (2013). Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a
       prominent place based policy. American Economic Review, 103(2), 897­947.
Cagetti, M., & De Nardi, M. (2006). Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth. Journal of
       Political Economy, 114(5), 835­870. https://doi.org/10.1086/508032
Cain, G. G. (1986). Chapter 13 The economic analysis of labor market discrimination: A survey.
       In Handbook of Labor Economics (Vol. 1, pp. 693­785). Elsevier.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-4463(86)01016-7
                                               64
Caliendo, M., & Kritikos, A. S. (2010). Start-ups by the unemployed: Characteristics, survival
       and direct employment effects. Small Business Economics, 35(1), 71­92.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-009-9208-4
Callander, S., & Matouschek, N. (2020). The Novelty of Innovation: Competition, Disruption,
       and Antitrust Policy. 23.
Camerer, C., & Lovallo, D. (1999). Overconfidence and Excess Entry: An Experimental
      Approach. The American Economic Review, 89(1), 59.
Campbell, B. A. (2012). Earnings Effects of Entrepreneurial Experience: Evidence from the
     Semiconductor Industry. Management Science, 59(2), 286­304.
     https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1593
Campbell, B. A., Ganco, M., Franco, A. M., & Agarwal, R. (2012). Who leaves, where to, and
     why worry? Employee mobility, entrepreneurship and effects on source firm
     performance. Strategic Management Journal, 33(1), 65­87.
     https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.943
Camuffo, A., Cordova, A., Gambardella, A., & Spina, C. (2019). A Scientific Approach to
      Entrepreneurial Decision Making: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial.
      Management Science, 66(2), 564­586. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3249
Carnahan, S., Agarwal, R., & Campbell, B. A. (2012). Heterogeneity in turnover: The effect of
      relative compensation dispersion of firms on the mobility and entrepreneurship of
      extreme performers. Strategic Management Journal, 33(12), 1411­1430.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.1991
Carroll, G. R., & Wade, J. (1991). Density dependence in the organizational evolution of the
        American brewing industry across different levels of analysis. Social Science Research,
        20(3), 271­302. https://doi.org/10.1016/0049-089X(91)90008-Q
Catalini, C., & Hui, X. (2017). Can Capital Defy the Law of Gravity? Investor Networks and
       Startup Investment. http://ide.mit.edu/sites/default/files/publications/SSRN-
       id2997710.pdf
CB Insights. (2018). The 2018 Global Corporate Venture Capital Report. CB Insights Research.
       https://www.cbinsights.com/research/report/corporate-venture-capital-trends-2018/
Charness, G., & Sutter, M. (2012). Groups Make Better Self-Interested Decisions. Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 26(3), 157­176. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.26.3.157
Chatterji, A., Delecourt, S., Hasan, S., & Koning, R. (2019). When does advice impact startup
       performance? Strategic Management Journal, 40(3), 331­356.
Chatterji, A., Glaeser, E., & Kerr, W. (2014). Clusters of entrepreneurship and innovation.
       Innovation Policy and the Economy, 14(1), 129­166.
Chatterji, A. K., & Fabrizio, K. R. (2016). Does the market for ideas influence the rate and
       direction of innovative activity? Evidence from the medical device industry. Strategic
       Management Journal, 37(3), 447­465. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2340

                                               65
Chemla, G., & Tinn, K. (2019). Learning Through Crowdfunding. Management Science, 66(5),
      1783­1801. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3278
Chemmanur, T. J., Loutskina, E., & Tian, X. (2014). Corporate Venture Capital, Value Creation,
     and Innovation. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), 2434­2473.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhu033
Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A., & Lerner, J. (2010). Buy local? The geography of venture
       capital. Special Issue: Cities and Entrepreneurship, 67(1), 90­102.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.09.013
Chen, J., & Thompson, P. (2015). New Firm Performance and the Replacement of Founder-
       CEOs. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 9(3), 243­262.
       https://doi.org/10.1002/sej.1203
Chernenko, S., Lerner, J., & Zeng, Y. (2021). Mutual Funds as Venture Capitalists? Evidence
      From Unicorns. Review of Financial Studies, 34(5), 2362­2410.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003). Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and profiting from
      technology. Harvard Business School Press.
Chinitz, B. (1961). Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh. The American
       Economic Review, 51(2), 279­289. JSTOR.
Choi, J., Goldschlag, N., Haltiwanger, J. C., & Kim, J. D. (2019). Founding Teams and Startup
        Performance. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3481850
Christensen, C. M. (1997). The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great
       Firms to Fail. https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=46
Cohen, S., Fehder, D. C., Hochberg, Y. V., & Murray, F. (2019). The design of startup
       accelerators. Research Policy, 48(7), 1781­1797.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.04.003
Cohen, S., & Hochberg, Y. V. (2014). Accelerating Startups: The Seed Accelerator Phenomenon
       (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2418000). Social Science Research Network.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2418000
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
       Appropriability conditions and why US manufacturing firms patent (or not). National
       Bureau of Economic Research.
Cong, L. W., & Howell, S. T. (2018). Policy Uncertainty and Innovation: Evidence from IPO
       Interventions in China (No. w24657). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w24657
Conti, A., Guzman, J., & Rabi, R. (2020). Information Frictions in the Market for Startup
       Acquisitions. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3678676
Cornelli, F., & Yosha, O. (2003). Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Securities. The
       Review of Economic Studies, 70(1), 1­32. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-937X.00235

                                               66
Corradin, S., & Popov, A. (2015). House Prices, Home Equity Borrowing, and Entrepreneurship.
       The Review of Financial Studies, 28(8), 2399­2428. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhv020
Cueto, B., & Mato, J. (2006). An analysis of self-employment subsidies with duration models.
       Applied Economics, 38(1), 23­32. https://doi.org/10.1080/00036840500367542
Cunningham, C., Ederer, F., & Ma, S. (2020). Killer Acquisitions. Journal of Political Economy,
      000­000. https://doi.org/10.1086/712506
Currie, J., & Madrian, B. C. (1999). Chapter 50 Health, health insurance and the labor market. In
        Handbook of Labor Economics (Vol. 3, pp. 3309­3416). Elsevier.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-4463(99)30041-9
Da Rin, M., Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2013). A survey of venture capital research. In Handbook
       of the Economics of Finance (Vol. 2, pp. 573­648). Elsevier.
Dahl, M. S., & Sorenson, O. (2010). The migration of technical workers. Special Issue: Cities
       and Entrepreneurship, 67(1), 33­45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.09.009
Dahl, M. S., & Sorenson, O. (2012). Home Sweet Home: Entrepreneurs' Location Choices and
       the Performance of Their Ventures. Management Science, 58(6), 1059­1071.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1110.1476
Davis, S. J., & Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
       Employment Reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819­863.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2118365
Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J. C., & Schuh, S. (1998). Job Creation and Destruction. In MIT Press
       Books (Vol. 1). The MIT Press. https://ideas.repec.org/b/mtp/titles/0262540932.html
Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Lipsius, B., Lerner, J., & Miranda, J. (2008). The
       Economic Effects of Private Equity Buyouts. MIT Press.
       https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/economics-growth
Davydiuk, T., Gupta, D., & Rosen, S. (2020). De-crypto-ing Signals in Initial Coin Offerings:
      Evidence of Rational Token Retention (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3286835). Social
      Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3286835
Dawes, C. T., Fowler, J. H., Johnson, T., McElreath, R., & Smirnov, O. (2007). Egalitarian
      motives in humans. Nature, 446(7137), 794­796. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05651
de Meza, D., & Webb, D. C. (1987). Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
      Information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2), 281­292.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/1885064
de Rassenfosse, G., & van den Heuvel, M. (2020). Certification or Cash Prize: The
       Heterogeneous Effect of Venture Competitions (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3692403).
       Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3692403
DeCicca, P. (2007). Health Insurance Availability and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from New
      Jersey (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1003309). Social Science Research Network.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1003309
                                                67
Decker, R. A., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2016). Declining Business
      Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward. American Economic Review, 106(5),
      203­207. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20161050
Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., & Miranda, J. (2014). The Role of Entrepreneurship in
      US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 3­
      24. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.3.3
Delgado, M., Porter, M. E., & Stern, S. (2014). Clusters, convergence, and economic
      performance. Research Policy, 43(10), 1785­1799.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.05.007
Denes, M. R., Howell, S. T., Mezzanotti, F., Wang, X., & Xu, T. (2020). Investor Tax Credits
       and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from U.S. States (No. w27751). National Bureau of
       Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27751
Dewatripont, M., & Tirole, J. (1994). A Theory of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securities and
      Manager-Shareholder Congruence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 1027­
      1054. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118355
Dillon, E. W., & Stanton, C. T. (2017). Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to
        Entrepreneurship (No. w23168). National Bureau of Economic Research.
        https://doi.org/10.3386/w23168
Dobrev, S. D., & Barnett, W. P. (2005). Organizational Roles and Transition to
      Entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Journal, 48(3), 433­449.
      https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2005.17407910
Doidge, C., Karolyi, G. A., & Stulz, R. M. (2013). The US left behind? Financial globalization
      and the rise of IPOs outside the US. Journal of Financial Economics, 110(3), 546­573.
Doidge, C., Karolyi, G. A., & Stulz, R. M. (2017). The US listing gap. Journal of Financial
      Economics, 123(3), 464­487.
Duranton, G. (2007). Urban evolutions: The fast, the slow, and the still. American Economic
      Review, 97(1), 197­221.
Duranton, G., & Puga, D. (2001). Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the
      Life Cycle of Products. American Economic Review, 91(5), 1454­1477.
      https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.91.5.1454
Eesley, C. E., Hsu, D. H., & Roberts, E. B. (2014). The contingent effects of top management
       teams on venture performance: Aligning founding team composition with innovation
       strategy and commercialization environment. Strategic Management Journal, 35(12),
       1798­1817. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2183
Eesley, C., & Wang, Y. (2017). Social influence in career choice: Evidence from a randomized
       field experiment on entrepreneurial mentorship. Research Policy, 46(3), 636­650.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.01.010



                                               68
Ejrnaes, M., & Hochguertel, S. (2008). Entrepreneurial Moral Hazard in Income Insurance:
       Empirical Evidence from a Large Administrative Sample (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
       1160134). Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1160134
Elfenbein, D. W., Hamilton, B. H., & Zenger, T. R. (2010). The Small Firm Effect and the
       Entrepreneurial Spawning of Scientists and Engineers. Management Science, 56(4), 659­
       681. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1090.1130
Ellison, G., & Glaeser, E. L. (1999). The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does Natural
        Advantage Explain Agglomeration? American Economic Review, 89(2), 311­316.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.89.2.311
Evans, D. S., & Jovanovic, B. (1989). An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
       Liquidity Constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808­827.
Evans, D. S., & Leighton, L. S. (1989). Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship. The
       American Economic Review, 79(3), 519­535.
Ewens, M., & Farre-Mensa, J. (2020). The deregulation of the private equity markets and the
      decline in IPOs. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(12), 5463­5509.
Ewens, M., Gorbenko, A. S., & Korteweg, A. (2019). Venture Capital Contracts (Working Paper
      No. 26115; Working Paper Series). National Bureau of Economic Research.
      https://doi.org/10.3386/w26115
Ewens, M., & Marx, M. (2017). Founder Replacement and Startup Performance. The Review of
      Financial Studies, 31(4), 1532­1565. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhx130
Ewens, M., Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2018). Cost of experimentation and the evolution
      of venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 128(3), 422­442.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.03.001
Ewens, M., Nanda, R., & Stanton, C. T. (2020). The Evolution of CEO Compensation in Venture
      Capital Backed Startups (No. w27296). National Bureau of Economic Research.
      https://doi.org/10.3386/w27296
Ewens, M., & Townsend, R. R. (2020). Are early stage investors biased against women? Journal
      of Financial Economics, 135(3), 653­677.
Fairlie, R., & Krashinsky, H. (2012). Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
         Entrepreneurship Revisited. Review of Income and Wealth, 58(2), 279­306.
         https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4991.2011.00491.x
Fairlie, R. W. (1999). The Absence of the AfricanAmerican Owned Business: An Analysis of
         the Dynamics of SelfEmployment. Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1), 80­108.
         https://doi.org/10.1086/209914
Fairlie, R. W. (2002). Drug Dealing and Legitimate SelfEmployment. Journal of Labor
         Economics, 20(3), 538­537. https://doi.org/10.1086/339610



                                              69
Fairlie, R. W. (2013). Entrepreneurship, Economic Conditions, and the Great Recession. Journal
         of Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2), 207­231.
         https://doi.org/10.1111/jems.12017
Fairlie, R. W., & Chatterji, A. K. (2013). High-Technology Entrepreneurship in Silicon Valley.
         Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2), 365­389.
         https://doi.org/10.1111/jems.12015
Fairlie, R. W., Kapur, K., & Gates, S. (2011). Is employer-based health insurance a barrier to
         entrepreneurship? Journal of Health Economics, 30(1), 146­162.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.09.003
Fairlie, R. W., Karlan, D., & Zinman, J. (2015). Behind the GATE Experiment: Evidence on
         Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship Training. American Economic
         Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2), 125­161. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20120337
Fairlie, R. W., Miranda, J., & Zolas, N. (2019). Measuring Job Creation, Growth, and Survival
         among the Universe of Start-ups in the United States Using a Combined Start-up Panel
         Data Set. ILR Review, 72(5), 1262­1277. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793919862764
Fallick, B., Fleischman, C. A., & Rebitzer, J. B. (2006). Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley: Some
        Evidence concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster. The Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 472­481.
Fehder, D. (2020). Coming from a Good Pond: The Organizational Consequences of a Startup's
       Early-Stage Ecosystem. Available at SSRN.
Fehder, D. C., Hochberg, Y. V., & Lee, D. J. (2019). What Resources Garner Managerial
       Attention in Startups? Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial. 45.
Fehder, D., Hochberg, Y., Bailey, E., Floyd, E., & Lee, D. (2021). The Impact of the COVID-19
       Crisis on the Risk Tolerance of Innovation-Driven Entrepreneurs.
Fehder, D., Prasad, S., & Wakslak, C. (2021). Angel Investor Personality and Judgement under
       Uncertainty.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. M. (2006). Chapter 8 The Economics of Fairness, Reciprocity and
       Altruism ­ Experimental Evidence and New Theories. In S.-C. Kolm & J. M. Ythier
       (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity (Vol. 1, pp. 615­
       691). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0714(06)01008-6
Feld, B. (2012). Startup communities: Building an entrepreneurial ecosystem in your city. John
       Wiley & Sons.
Ferreira, M. A., Lopes, M., Queiro, F., & Reis, H. (2019). Which Entrepreneurs are Financially
        Constrained? (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3543021). Social Science Research Network.
        https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3543021
Florida, R. (2005). Cities and the Creative Class. Routledge.
Fluck, Z., & Garrison, K. (2006). Venture Capital Contracting: Staged Financing and
       Syndication of Later-stage Investments.
                                               70
Fort, T. C., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2013). How Firms Respond to
        Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size. IMF Economic Review, 61(3),
        520­559. https://doi.org/10.1057/imfer.2013.15
Fresard, L., Hoberg, G., & Phillips, G. (2015). Innovation Activities and the Incentives for
       Vertical Acquisitions and Integration. 62.
Galasso, A., & Simcoe, T. S. (2011). CEO Overconfidence and Innovation. Management
       Science, 57(8), 1469­1484. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1110.1374
Gans, J., Stern, S., & Scott, E. (2018). Strategy for Start-ups. Harvard Business Review.
       https://hbr.org/2018/05/strategy-for-start-ups
Gans, Joshua S., & Stern, S. (2003). The product market and the market for "ideas":
       Commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs. Research Policy, 32(2), 333­
       350. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(02)00103-8
Gans, Joshua S., & Stern, S. (2010). Is there a market for ideas? Industrial and Corporate
       Change, 19(3), 805­837. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtq023
Gans, Joshua S., Stern, S., & Agrawal, A. K. (2020). Enabling Entrepreneurial Choice (SSRN
       Scholarly Paper ID 3592509). Social Science Research Network.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3592509
Gans, Joshua S., Stern, S., & Wu, J. (2019). Foundations of entrepreneurial strategy. Strategic
       Management Journal, 40(5), 736­756. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3010
Gans, J.S., Hsu, D. H., & Stern, S. (2002). When does start-up innovation spur the gale of
       creative destruction? The RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4), 571­586.
Gans, J.S., Hsu, D. H., & Stern, S. (2008). The impact of uncertain intellectual property rights on
       the market for ideas: Evidence from patent grant delays. Management Science, 54(5),
       982­997. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1070.0814
Gans, J.S., & Stern, S. (2000). Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the gale of creative
       destruction. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4), 485­511.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/105864000567945
Gao, X., Ritter, J. R., & Zhu, Z. (2013). Where Have All the IPOs Gone? Journal of Financial
      and Quantitative Analysis, 48(6), 1663­1692. Cambridge Core.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109014000015
GarciaMacia, D., Hsieh, C.-T., & Klenow, P. J. (2019). How Destructive Is Innovation?
      Econometrica, 87(5), 1507­1541. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA14930
Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., & Shleifer, A. (2013). Human Capital and
      Regional Development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 105­164.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs050
Genome, S. (2019). Startup Genome. Startup Genome. https://startupgenome.com/reports/global-
     startup-ecosystem-report-2019

                                                71
Giannetti, M., & Simonov, A. (2009). Social Interactions and Entrepreneurial Activity. Journal
      of Economics & Management Strategy, 18(3), 665­709. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
      9134.2009.00226.x
Gibbons, R., & Katz, L. F. (1991). Layoffs and Lemons. Journal of Labor Economics, 9(4), 351­
      380. https://doi.org/10.1086/298273
Gilbert, R. J., & Newbery, D. M. G. (1982). Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of
        Monopoly. The American Economic Review, 72(3), 514­526.
Glaeser, E. L., Kerr, S. P., & Kerr, W. R. (2014). Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An
       Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
       97(2), 498­520. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00456
Glaeser, E. L., & Kerr, W. R. (2010). What Makes a City Entrepreneurial? Harvard University
       Policy Briefs. http://www.bioin.or.kr/InnoDS/data/upload/policy/1269929952605.pdf
Gneezy, U., Leonard, K. L., & List, J. A. (2009). Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence
      From a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society. Econometrica, 77(5), 1637­1664.
      https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA6690
Goldin, C., & Rouse, C. (2000). Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of "Blind" Auditions on
       Female Musicians. American Economic Review, 90(4), 715­741.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.90.4.715
Goldschlag, N., & Miranda, J. (2020). Business dynamics statistics of High Tech industries.
      Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 29(1), 3­30.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/jems.12334
Gompers, P. A. (1995). Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital.
     The Journal of Finance, 50(5), 1461­1489. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
     6261.1995.tb05185.x
Gompers, P. A., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., & Strebulaev, I. A. (2020). How do venture
     capitalists make decisions? Journal of Financial Economics, 135(1), 169­190.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.06.011
Gompers, P. A., Huang, K., & Wang, S. Q. (2017). Homophily in Entrepreneurial Team
     Formation. 52.
Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V., & Xuan, Y. (2016). The cost of friendship. Journal of
     Financial Economics, 119(3), 626­644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2016.01.013
Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., & Scharfstein, D. (2008). Venture capital investment cycles:
     The impact of public markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(1), 1­23.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.12.002
Gompers, P., & Lerner, J. (1998). Venture Capital Distributions: Short-Run and Long-Run
     Reactions. The Journal of Finance, 53(6), 2161­2183. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-
     1082.00086


                                               72
Gompers, P., & Lerner, J. (2000). Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows on private
     equity valuations. Journal of Financial Economics, 55(2), 281­325.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-405X(99)00052-5
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., & Scharfstein, D. (2005). Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
     Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999. The Journal of Finance,
     60(2), 577­614. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2005.00740.x
Gompers, P., & Wang, S. (2017). Diversity in Innovation (No. w23082; p. w23082). National
     Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23082
Gornall, W., & Strebulaev, I. A. (2015). The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from
       public companies.
Gottlieb, J. D., Townsend, R. R., & Xu, T. (2016). Does Career Risk Deter Potential
       Entrepreneurs? (Working Paper No. 22446). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w22446
Graham, P. (2006). How to Be Silicon Valley. http://www.paulgraham.com/siliconvalley.html
Greenberg, J., & Mollick, E. R. (2018). Sole Survivors: Solo Ventures Versus Founding Teams
      (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3107898). Social Science Research Network.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3107898
Greenstone, M., Hornbeck, R., & Moretti, E. (2010). Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
       Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings. Journal of Political
       Economy, 118(3), 536­598. https://doi.org/10.1086/653714
Griliches, Z. (1992). The Search for R&D Spillovers. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94,
       S29-47.
Grossman, S. J., & Hart, O. D. (1986). The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
      Vertical and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 691­719.
      https://doi.org/10.1086/261404
Groysberg, B., & Lee, L.-E. (2009). Hiring Stars and Their Colleagues: Exploration and
      Exploitation in Professional Service Firms. Organization Science, 20(4), 740­758.
      https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1090.0430
Guiso, L., & Paiella, M. (2008). Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk. Journal of the
       European Economic Association, 6(6), 1109­1150.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/JEEA.2008.6.6.1109
Guzman, J. (2019). Go West Young Firm: Agglomeration and Embeddedness in Startup
     Migrations to Silicon Valley by Jorge Guzman: SSRN [Columbia Business School
     Research Paper No. 18-49].
     https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3175328
Guzman, J., & Kacperczyk, A. (Olenka). (2019). Gender gap in entrepreneurship. Research
     Policy, 48(7), 1666­1680. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.03.012


                                              73
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2015). Where is Silicon Valley? Science, 347(6222), 606­609.
     https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa0201
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2020). The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
     Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988­2014. American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Habib, M. A., Hege, U., & Mella-Barral, P. (2013). Entrepreneurial Spawning and Firm
       Characteristics. Management Science, 59(12), 2790­2804.
Hacamo, I., & Kleiner, K. (2019). Competing for Talent: Firms, Managers and Social Networks
     (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2954837). Social Science Research Network.
     https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2954837
Haeussler, C., & Sauermann, H. (2015). The Anatomy of Teams: Division of Labor in
      Collaborative Knowledge Production. Academy of Management Proceedings, 2015(1),
      11383. https://doi.org/10.5465/ambpp.2015.11383abstract
Hall, B. H., & Lerner, J. (2010). The Financing of R&D and Innovation. Handbook of the
       Economics of Innovation, 1, 609­639. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7218(10)01014-2
Hall, R. E., & Woodward, S. E. (2010). The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of
       entrepreneurship. American Economic Review, 100(3), 1163­1194.
Haltiwanger, J. C., Hyatt, H. R., McEntarfer, E., & Sousa, L. D. (2012). Business Dynamics
       Statistics Briefing: Job Creation, Worker Churning, and Wages at Young Businesses.
       SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2184328
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2012). Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large
       versus Young. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347­361.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00288
Hamilton, B. H. (2000). Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
      SelfEmployment. Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), 604­631.
      https://doi.org/10.1086/262131
Hannan, M. T., & Caroll, G. (1992). Dynamics of Organizational Populations: Density,
      Legitimation, and Competition. Oxford University Press.
Harris, R. S., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S. N., & Stucke, R. (2020). Has Persistence Persisted in
        Private Equity? Evidence from Buyout and Venture Capital Funds (SSRN Scholarly
        Paper ID 2304808). Social Science Research Network.
        https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2304808
Harrison, G. W., & List, J. A. (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4),
       1009­1055.
Hart, O., & Moore, J. (1990). Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm. Journal of Political
       Economy, 98(6), 1119­1158. https://doi.org/10.1086/261729
Hathaway, I., & Litan, R. E. (2014). What's driving the decline in the firm formation rate? A
      partial explanation. The Brookings Institution.
                                               74
Hausman, N. (2012). University Innovation, Local Economic Growth, and Entrepreneurship.
     https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2097842
Hausman, Naomi. (2020). Entrepreneurs and City Growth. Maurice Falk Institute for Economic
     Research in Israel. Discussion Paper Series., 7, 0_1-2B.
Hausman, Naomi, Fehder, D. C., & Hochberg, Y. V. (2020). The Virtuous Cycle of Innovation
     and Capital Flows. 50.
Hegde, D., & Tumlinson, J. (2014). Does Social Proximity Enhance Business Partnerships?
       Theory and Evidence from Ethnicity's Role in U.S. Venture Capital. Management
       Science, 60(9), 2355­2380. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1878
Hellmann, T. (1998). The Allocation of Control Rights in Venture Capital Contracts. The RAND
      Journal of Economics, 29(1), 57­76. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/2555816
Hellmann, T. (2007). Entrepreneurs and the Process of Obtaining Resources. Journal of
      Economics & Management Strategy, 16(1), 81­109. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
      9134.2007.00133.x
Hellmann, T., Mostipan, I., & Vulkan, N. (2019). Be Careful What You Ask For: Fundraising
      Strategies in Equity Crowdfunding (Working Paper No. 26275; Working Paper Series).
      National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26275
Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2000). The Interaction between Product Market and Financing
      Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital. The Review of Financial Studies, 13(4), 959­984.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/13.4.959
Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2002). Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up Firms:
      Empirical Evidence. The Journal of Finance, 57(1), 169­197.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6261.00419
Hellmann, T., & Thiele, V. (2015). Friends or foes? The interrelationship between angel and
      venture capital markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3), 639­653.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.10.009
Hellmann, T., & Wasserman, N. (2016). The First Deal: The Division of Founder Equity in New
      Ventures. Management Science, 63(8), 2647­2666.
      https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2016.2474
Henderson, R. (1993). Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to Radical Innovation:
      Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Equipment Industry. The RAND Journal
      of Economics, 24(2), 248­270. https://doi.org/10.2307/2555761
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A. B., & Trajtenberg, M. (1998). Universities as a Source of Commercial
      Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965­1988. The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 80(1), 119­127. https://doi.org/10.1162/003465398557221
Hoberg, G., Li, B. Y., & Phillips, G. M. (2018). U.S. Innovation and Chinese Competition for
      Innovation Production. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3294389


                                              75
Hochberg, Y. (2017). The Changing Face of Early Stage Investing. Landmark Partners.
      https://www.landmarkpartners.com/publications/2017/2/1/the-changing-face-of-early-
      stage-investing
Hochberg, Y. V. (2011). Venture Capital and Corporate Governance in the Newly Public Firm*.
      Review of Finance, 16(2), 429­480. https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfr035
Hochberg, Y. V. (2016). Accelerating Entrepreneurs and Ecosystems: The Seed Accelerator
      Model. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 16(1), 25­51.
      https://doi.org/10.1086/684985
Hochberg, Y. V., Lindsey, L. A., & Westerfield, M. M. (2015). Resource accumulation through
      economic ties: Evidence from venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(2),
      245­267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.06.008
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A., & Lu, Y. (2007). Whom You Know Matters: Venture Capital
      Networks and Investment Performance. The Journal of Finance, 62(1), 251­301.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2007.01207.x
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A., & Lu, Y. (2010). Networking as a Barrier to Entry and the
      Competitive Supply of Venture Capital. The Journal of Finance, 65(3), 829­859.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2010.01554.x
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A., & Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2013). Informational Holdup and
      Performance Persistence in Venture Capital. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(1),
      102­152. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hht046
Hochberg, Y. V., Mazzeo, M. J., & McDevitt, R. C. (2015). Specialization and Competition in
      the Venture Capital Industry. Review of Industrial Organization, 46(4), 323­347.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11151-015-9462-3
Hochberg, Y. V., Serrano, C. J., & Ziedonis, R. H. (2018). Patent collateral, investor
      commitment, and the market for venture lending. Journal of Financial Economics,
      130(1), 74­94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.06.003
Hochberg, Y., & Westerfield, M. (2010). The Size and Specialization of Direct Investment
      Portfolios. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1573307
Hölmstrom, B. (1979). Moral Hazard and Observability. The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1),
      74­91. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/3003320
Holmstrom, B., & Tirole, J. (1997). Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector.
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 663­691.
Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D., & Rosen, H. S. (1994). Sticking it Out: Entrepreneurial Survival
       and Liquidity Constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 102(1), 53­75.
Holtz-Eakin, D., Penrod, J. R., & Rosen, H. S. (1996). Health insurance and the supply of
       entrepreneurs. Proceedings of the Trans-Atlantic Public Economic Seminar on Market
       Failures and Public Policy, 62(1), 209­235. https://doi.org/10.1016/0047-
       2727(96)01579-4

                                                76
Hombert, J., Schoar, A., Sraer, D., & Thesmar, D. (2020). Can Unemployment Insurance Spur
     Entrepreneurial Activity? Evidence from France. The Journal of Finance, 75(3), 1247­
     1285. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12880
Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992). Entry, Exit, and firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.
      Econometrica, 60(5), 1127­1150. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/2951541
Howell, S. T. (2017). Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants. American Economic
      Review, 107(4), 1136­1164. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20150808
Howell, S. T. (2020). Reducing information frictions in venture capital: The role of new venture
      competitions. Journal of Financial Economics, 136(3), 676­694.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.10.009
Howell, S. T., Lerner, J., Nanda, R., & Townsend, R. (2020). Financial Distancing: How
      Venture Capital Follows the Economy Down and Curtails Innovation (SSRN Scholarly
      Paper ID 3603780). Social Science Research Network.
      https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3603780
Howell, S. T., & Nanda, R. (2019). Networking Frictions in Venture Capital, and the Gender
      Gap in Entrepreneurship (No. 26449; p. 58). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Howell, S. T., Niessner, M., & Yermack, D. (2019). Initial Coin Offerings: Financing Growth
      with Cryptocurrency Token Sales (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3201259). Social Science
      Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3201259
Hsu, D. H. (2004). What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation? The Journal of
       Finance, 59(4), 1805­1844. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2004.00680.x
Hsu, D. H. (2006). Venture Capitalists and Cooperative Start-up Commercialization Strategy.
       Management Science, 52(2), 204­219. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1050.0480
Hunt, J. (2011). Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions by
       Entry Visa. Journal of Labor Economics, 29(3), 417­457. https://doi.org/10.1086/659409
Hurst, E., & Lusardi, A. (2004). Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneurship.
       Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 319­347. https://doi.org/10.1086/381478
Hurst, E., & Pugsley, B. W. (2011). What Do Small Businesses Do? (Working Paper No. 17041).
       National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w17041
Hvide, H. K., & Jones, B. F. (2018). University Innovation and the Professor's Privilege.
       American Economic Review, 108(7), 1860­1898. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20160284
Hvide, H. K., & Oyer, P. (2018). Dinner Table Human Capital and Entrepreneurship (Working
       Paper No. 24198). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w24198
Ibrahim, D. M. (2009). Debt as Venture Capital (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1418148). Social
       Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1418148


                                               77
Ingram, P., & Inman, C. (1996). Institutions, Intergroup Competition, and the Evolution of Hotel
      Populations Around Niagara Falls. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41(4), 629­658.
      JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393870
Itenberg, O., & Smith, E. E. (2017). Syndicated Equity Crowdfunding: The Trade-Off between
       Deal Access and Conflicts of Interest.
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2933822
Ivanov, V., & Knyazeva, A. (2017). U.S. securities-based crowdfunding under Title III of the
       JOBS Act. 27.
Jacobson, L. S., LaLonde, R. J., & Sullivan, D. G. (1993). Earnings Losses of Displaced
       Workers. The American Economic Review, 83(4), 685­709. JSTOR.
Jara-Figueroa, C., Jun, B., Glaeser, E. L., & Hidalgo, C. A. (2018). The role of industry-specific,
       occupation-specific, and location-specific knowledge in the growth and survival of new
       firms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(50), 12646­12653.
       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800475115
Jeffers, J. (2020). The Impact of Restricting Labor Mobility on Corporate Investment and
        Entrepreneurship (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3040393). Social Science Research
        Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3040393
Jensen, T. L., Leth-Petersen, S., & Nanda, R. (2014). Housing Collateral, Credit Constraints and
       Entrepreneurship--Evidence from a Mortgage Reform (Working Paper No. 20583).
       National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w20583
Jiang, F., Jiang, Z., & Kim, K. A. (2020). Capital markets, financial institutions, and corporate
        finance in China. Journal of Corporate Finance, 63, 101309.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2017.12.001
Jiang, H., Wang, Z., Yang, L., Shen, J., & Hahn, J. (2020). How Rewarding Are Your Rewards?
        A Value-Based View of Crowdfunding Rewards and Crowdfunding Performance.
        Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 1042258720928922.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1042258720928922
Johnson, W. R. (1978). A Theory of Job Shopping. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92(2),
      261­278. https://doi.org/10.2307/1884162
Jovanovic, B. (1979). Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover. Journal of Political Economy,
      87(5, Part 1), 972­990. https://doi.org/10.1086/260808
Jovanovic, B., & MacDonald, G. M. (1994). The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry. Journal
      of Political Economy, 102(2), 322­347.
Kahn, S., & MacGarvie, M. (2020). The impact of permanent residency delays for stem PhDs:
       Who leaves and why. Research Policy, 49(9), 103879.
Kahn, S., & MacGarvie, M. J. (2016). How Important Is U.S. Location for Research in Science?
       The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2), 397­414.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00490

                                                78
Kamepalli, S. K., Rajan, R., & Zingales, L. (2020). Kill Zone. National Bureau of Economic
     Research.
Kaplan, S. N., & Lerner, J. (2010). It Ain't Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of Venture
      Capital. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 22(2), 36­47.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6622.2010.00272.x
Kaplan, S. N., & Schoar, A. (2005). Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence, and
      Capital Flows. The Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1791­1823. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
      6261.2005.00780.x
Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A., & Strömberg, P. (2009). Should Investors Bet on the Jockey or the
      Horse? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business Plans to Public
      Companies. The Journal of Finance, 64(1), 75­115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
      6261.2008.01429.x
Kaplan, S. N., & Strömberg, P. (2003). Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An
      Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts. The Review of Economic Studies, 70(2),
      281­315. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-937X.00245
Kaplan, S. N., & Strömberg, P. (2004). Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from
      Venture Capitalist Analyses. The Journal of Finance, 59(5), 2177­2210.
      https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2004.00696.x
Kartashova, K. (2014). Private Equity Premium Puzzle Revisited. American Economic Review,
       104(10), 3297­3334. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.10.3297
Katz, M. L., & Shapiro, C. (1987). R and D Rivalry with Licensing or Imitation. The American
       Economic Review, 77(3), 402­420. JSTOR.
Kearney, M. J. (2019). Essays on managing innovation.
      https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/124587
Kerr, S. P., & Kerr, W. R. (2020). Immigration policy levers for us innovation and startups.
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, w27040.
Kerr, S. P., Kerr, W. R., & Dalton, M. (2019). Risk attitudes and personality traits of
       entrepreneurs and venture team members. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences, 116(36), 17712­17716.
Kerr, S. P., Kerr, W. R., & Xu, T. (2018). Personality Traits of Entrepreneurs: A Review of
       Recent Literature. Foundations and Trends® in Entrepreneurship, 14(3), 279­356.
       https://doi.org/10.1561/0300000080
Kerr, W. R. (2008). Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion. The
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 518­537.
Kerr, W. R. (2010). Breakthrough inventions and migrating clusters of innovation. Journal of
       Urban Economics, 67(1), 46­60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.09.006
Kerr, W. R., & Kominers, S. D. (2014). Agglomerative Forces and Cluster Shapes. The Review
       of Economics and Statistics, 97(4), 877­899. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00471
                                               79
Kerr, W. R., Lerner, J., & Schoar, A. (2011). The consequences of entrepreneurial finance:
       Evidence from angel financings. The Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 20­55.
Kerr, W. R., & Lincoln, W. F. (2010). The Supply Side of Innovation: H1B Visa Reforms and
       U.S. Ethnic Invention. Journal of Labor Economics, 28(3), 473­508.
       https://doi.org/10.1086/651934
Kerr, W. R., & Nanda, R. (2009). Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing
       constraints, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, 94(1), 124­149.
Kerr, W. R., Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014). Entrepreneurship as Experimentation.
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25­48. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.3.25
Kerr, W. R., & Robert-Nicoud, F. (2020). Tech Clusters. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
       34(3), 50­76.
Khosla, P. (2018). Wait time for permanent residency and the retention of immigrant doctoral
       recipients in the US. Economic Analysis and Policy, 57, 33­43.
Kihlstrom, R. E., & Laffont, J.-J. (1979). A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm
       Formation Based on Risk Aversion. Journal of Political Economy, 87(4), 719­7488.
       https://doi.org/10.1086/260790
Kim, J. D. (2020). Startup Acquisitions as a Hiring Strategy: Worker Choice and Turnover.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3252784
Kirzner, I. M. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An
       Austrian approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1), 60­85.
Kiyotaki, N., & Moore, J. (1997). Credit Cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 211­248.
       https://doi.org/10.1086/262072
Klepper, Steven. (1996). Entry, exit, growth, and innovation over the product life cycle. The
      American Economic Review, 562­583.
Klepper, Steven. (2007). Disagreements, Spinoffs, and the Evolution of Detroit as the Capital of
      the U.S. Automobile Industry. Management Science, 53(4), 616­631.
      https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0683
Klepper, Steven. (2010). The origin and growth of industry clusters: The making of Silicon
      Valley and Detroit. Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1), 15­32.
Klepper, Steven, & Graddy, E. (1990). The Evolution of New Industries and the Determinants of
      Market Structure. The RAND Journal of Economics, 21(1), 27­44.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/2555491
Klepper, Steven, & Sleeper, S. (2005). Entry by spinoffs. Management Science, 51(8), 1291­
      1306.
Klette, T. J., & Kortum, S. (2004). Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation. Journal of
        Political Economy, 112(5), 986­1018.


                                               80
Klyver, K., & Terjesen, S. (2007). Entrepreneurial network composition: An analysis across
       venture development stage and gender. Women in Management Review, 22(8), 682­688.
       https://doi.org/10.1108/09649420710836344
Knight, F. H. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Courier Corporation.
Kortum, S., & Lerner, J. (2000). Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation. The
      Rand Journal of Economics, 31(4), 674­692.
Kortum, Samuel, & Lerner, J. (2000). Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
      Innovation. The RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4), 674­692. JSTOR.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/2696354
Koza, M. P., & Lewin, A. Y. (1998). The Co-Evolution of Strategic Alliances. Organization
      Science, 9(3), 255­264. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.9.3.255
Krishnan, K., & Wang, P. (2018). The Cost of Financing Education: Can Student Debt Hinder
       Entrepreneurship? Management Science, 65(10), 4522­4554.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2017.2995
Krugman, P. R. (1991). Geography and Trade. MIT Press.
Kulchina, E., & Gjerløv-Juel, P. (2019). Entrepreneur--A Jockey or a Horse Owner? (SSRN
       Scholarly Paper ID 3441997). Social Science Research Network.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3441997
Kwon, S., Lowry, M., & Qian, Y. (2019). Mutual Fund Investments in Private Firms (SSRN
      Scholarly Paper ID 2941203). Social Science Research Network.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2941203
Lach, S., & Schankerman, M. (2008). Incentives and invention in universities. The RAND
       Journal of Economics, 39(2), 403­433.
Lafontaine, F., & Shaw, K. (2016). Serial Entrepreneurship: Learning by Doing? Journal of
       Labor Economics, 34(S2), S217­S254. https://doi.org/10.1086/683820
Lamoreaux, N. R., Levenstein, M., & Sokoloff, K. L. (2006). Mobilizing Venture Capital during
      the Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920. Capitalism and Society,
      1(3), 1­61.
Lanahan, L., & Feldman, M. P. (2018). Approximating exogenous variation in R&D: Evidence
      from the Kentucky and North Carolina SBIR State Match programs. Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 100(4), 740­752.
Landier, A., & Thesmar, D. (2009). Financial Contracting with Optimistic Entrepreneurs. The
       Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 117­150. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhn065
Lane, P. R., & Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2008). The drivers of financial globalization. American
       Economic Review, 98(2), 327­332.
Lazear, E. P. (1986). Salaries and Piece Rates. The Journal of Business, 59(3), 405­431. JSTOR.


                                               81
Lazear, E. P. (2004). Balanced Skills and Entrepreneurship. The American Economic Review,
       94(2), 208­211. JSTOR.
Lazear, E. P. (2005). Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4), 649­680.
       https://doi.org/10.1086/491605
Lee, J., & Parlour, C. A. (2019). Consumers as Financiers: Crowdfunding, Initial Coin Offerings
        and Consumer Surplus. 33.
Lee, S., & Persson, P. (2016). Financing from Family and Friends. The Review of Financial
        Studies, 29(9), 2341­2386. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw031
Leland, H. E., & Pyle, D. H. (1977). Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and
       Financial Intermediation. The Journal of Finance, 32(2), 371­387. JSTOR.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2326770
Lentz, R., & Mortensen, D. T. (2008). An empirical model of growth through product
       innovation. Econometrica, 76(6), 1317­1373.
Lerner, J, & Malmendier, U. (2013). With a Little Help from My (Random) Friends: Success and
       Failure in Post-Business School Entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies, hht024.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hht024
Lerner, Josh. (1995). Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms. The Journal of
       Finance, 50(1), 301­318. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1995.tb05175.x
Lerner, Josh. (1997). An Empirical Exploration of a Technology Race. The RAND Journal of
       Economics, 28(2), 228­247. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/2555803
Lerner, Josh. (2000). The government as venture capitalist: The long-run impact of the SBIR
       program. The Journal of Private Equity, 3(2), 55­78.
Lerner, Josh. (2009). Boulevard of broken dreams: Why public efforts to boost entrepreneurship
       and venture capital have failed­and what to do about it. Princeton University Press.
Lerner, Josh. (2013). The Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Innovation Policy and Entrepreneurship.
       Innovation Policy and the Economy, 13(1), 61­82. https://doi.org/10.1086/668239
Lerner, Josh. (2020). Government Incentives for Entrepreneurship (Working Paper No. 26884;
       Working Paper Series). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w26884
Lerner, Josh, & Malmendier, U. (2013). With a Little Help from My (Random) Friends: Success
       and Failure in Post-Business School Entrepreneurship. The Review of Financial Studies,
       26(10), 2411­2452. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hht024
Lerner, Josh, & Nanda, R. (2020). Venture Capital's Role in Financing Innovation: What We
       Know and How Much We Still Need to Learn. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34(3),
       237­261. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.34.3.237




                                               82
Lerner, Josh, Schoar, A., Sokolinski, S., & Wilson, K. (2018). The Globalization of Angel
       Investments: Evidence Across Countries. Journal of Financial Economics.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2017.05.012
Levine, R., & Rubinstein, Y. (2017). Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do
       They Earn More? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2), 963­1018.
Liang, J., Wang, H., & Lazear, E. P. (2018). Demographics and Entrepreneurship. Journal of
       Political Economy, 126(S1), S140­S196. https://doi.org/10.1086/698750
Liebeskind, J. P., Oliver, A. L., Zucker, L., & Brewer, M. (1996). Social networks, Learning, and
       Flexibility: Sourcing Scientific Knowledge in New Biotechnology Firms. Organization
       Science, 7(4), 428­443. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.7.4.428
Lindquist, M. J., Sol, J., & Van Praag, M. (2015). Why Do Entrepreneurial Parents Have
      Entrepreneurial Children? Journal of Labor Economics, 33(2), 269­296. JSTOR.
      https://doi.org/10.1086/678493
Lindsey, L. (2008). Blurring Firm Boundaries: The Role of Venture Capital in Strategic
       Alliances. The Journal of Finance, 63(3), 1137­1168. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
       6261.2008.01354.x
Lindsey, L., & Stein, L. C. D. (2019). Angels, Entrepreneurship, and Employment Dynamics:
       Evidence from Investor Accreditation Rules (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2939994). Social
       Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2939994
Link, A. N., & Scott, J. T. (2007). The economics of university research parks. Oxford Review of
       Economic Policy, 23(4), 661­674. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grm030
Link, A. N., & Scott, J. T. (2010). Government as entrepreneur: Evaluating the
       commercialization success of SBIR projects. Research Policy, 39(5), 589­601.
Ljungqvist, A., & Richardson, M. (2003). The cash flow, return and risk characteristics of
      private equity (No. w9454). National Bureau of Economic Research.
      https://doi.org/10.3386/w9454
Lockett, A., & Wright, M. (2005). Resources, capabilities, risk capital and the creation of
       university spin-out companies. Research Policy, 34(7), 1043­1057.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2005.05.006
Lucas, R. E. (1978). On the Size Distribution of Business Firms. The Bell Journal of Economics,
       9(2), 508­523. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/3003596
Lyandres, E., Palazzo, B., & Rabetti, D. (2019). Do Tokens Behave like Securities? An Anatomy
      of Initial Coin Offerings (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3287583). Social Science Research
      Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3287583
Lyons, E., & Zhang, L. (2017). The Impact of Entrepreneurship Programs on Minorities.
       American Economic Review, 107(5), 303­307. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20171008
Malmendier, U., & Tate, G. (2005). CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment. The
     Journal of Finance, 60(6), 2661­2700. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2005.00813.x
                                                83
Manso, G. (2016). Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship. The Review of
      Financial Studies, 29(9), 2319­2340. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw019
Marx, M., Gans, J. S., & Hsu, D. H. (2014). Dynamic Commercialization Strategies for
      Disruptive Technologies: Evidence from the Speech Recognition Industry. Management
      Science, 60(12), 3103­3123. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.2035
Marx, M., & Hsu, D. H. (2015). Strategic switchbacks: Dynamic commercialization strategies
      for technology entrepreneurs. Research Policy, 44(10), 1815­1826.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.06.016
Masulis, R. W., & Nahata, R. (2009). Financial contracting with strategic investors: Evidence
       from corporate venture capital backed IPOs. Financial Contracting: Theory and
       Evidence, 18(4), 599­631. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2009.06.001
McFowland III, E., Somanchi, S., & Neill, D. B. (2018). Efficient Discovery of Heterogeneous
     Treatment Effects in Randomized Experiments via Anomalous Pattern Detection.
     ArXiv:1803.09159 [Econ, Stat] . http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09159
McKenzie, D. (2017). How Effective Are Active Labor Market Policies in Developing
     Countries? A Critical Review of Recent Evidence. The World Bank Research Observer,
     32(2), 127­154. https://doi.org/10.1093/wbro/lkx001
Meager, N., Bates, P., & Cowling, M. (2003). An Evaluation of Business Start-Up Support for
      Young People. National Institute Economic Review, 186(1), 59­72.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/002795010300100111
Michelacci, C., & Silva, O. (2007). Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs? Review of Economics
      and Statistics, 89(4), 615­633. https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.89.4.615
Miller, R. A. (1984). Job Matching and Occupational Choice. Journal of Political Economy,
        92(6), 1086­1120. https://doi.org/10.1086/261276
Mollick, E., & Nanda, R. (2015). Wisdom or Madness? Comparing Crowds with Expert
       Evaluation in Funding the Arts. Management Science, 62(6), 1533­1553.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2207
Mollick, E. R. (2013). Swept Away by the Crowd? Crowdfunding, Venture Capital, and the
       Selection of Entrepreneurs (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2239204). Social Science
       Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2239204
Monte, A. D., & Scalera, D. (2001). The Life Duration of Small Firms Born Within a Start-up
       Programme: Evidence from Italy. Regional Studies, 35(1), 11­21.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/00343400120025646
Moore, G., & Davis, K. (2004). Learning the Silicon Valley way. In Building high-tech clusters:
      Silicon Valley and beyond (pp. 7­39). Oxford University Press.
Moretti, E. (2019). The effect of high-tech clusters on the productivity of top inventors. National
       Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                 84
Moretti, E., & Thulin, P. (2013). Local multipliers and human capital in the United States and
       Sweden. Industrial and Corporate Change, 22(1), 339­362.
Moser, P., Voena, A., & Waldinger, F. (2014). German Jewish Émigrés and US Invention.
       American Economic Review, 104(10), 3222­3255.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.10.3222
Moskowitz, T. J., & Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2002). The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A
     Private Equity Premium Puzzle? The American Economic Review, 92(4), 745­778.
Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N., & Ziedonis, A. A. (2001). The growth of patenting
     and licensing by U.S. universities: An assessment of the effects of the Bayh­Dole act of
     1980. Research Policy, 30(1), 99­119. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00100-6
Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E., & Silverman, B. S. (1996). Strategic alliances and interfirm
     knowledge transfer. Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2), 77­91.
     https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250171108
Murphy, K. M., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1991). The Allocation of Talent: Implications for
      Growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), 503­530.
      https://doi.org/10.2307/2937945
Nahata, R. (2008). Venture capital reputation and investment performance. Journal of Financial
       Economics, 90(2), 127­151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2007.11.008
Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2016a). Financing Entrepreneurial Experimentation. Innovation
       Policy and the Economy, 16(1), 1­23. https://doi.org/10.1086/684983
Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2016b). Financing Risk and Innovation. Management Science,
       63(4), 901­918. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2350
Nanda, R., & Sorensen, J. (2009). Workplace Peers and Entrepreneurship (SSRN Scholarly
       Paper ID 1084874). Social Science Research Network.
       https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1084874
National Venture Capital Association (NCVA). (2020). NVCA Yearbook.
       https://nvca.org/research/nvca-yearbook/
Navis, C., & Glynn, M. A. (2010). How New Market Categories Emerge: Temporal Dynamics of
       Legitimacy, Identity, and Entrepreneurship in Satellite Radio, 1990­2005. Administrative
       Science Quarterly, 55(3), 439­471. https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.2010.55.3.439
Neumark, D. (2018). Experimental Research on Labor Market Discrimination. Journal of
     Economic Literature, 56(3), 799­866. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20161309
Neumark, D., & Kolko, J. (2010). Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence from California's
     enterprise zone program. Journal of Urban Economics, 68(1), 1­19.
Ng, W., & Stuart, T. (2019). Acquihired: Retained or Turned Over?
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3461723


                                               85
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men
       Compete Too Much? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067­1101.
       https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.3.1067
O'Brien, J. P., Folta, T. B., & Johnson, D. R. (2003). A real options perspective on
      entrepreneurial entry in the face of uncertainty. Managerial and Decision Economics,
      24(8), 515­533. https://doi.org/10.1002/mde.1115
Pekkala Kerr, S., & Kerr, W. (2020). Immigrant entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from the
       survey of business owners 2007 & 2012. Research Policy, 49(3), 103918.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103918
Pfeiffer, F., & Reize, F. (2000). Business start-ups by the unemployed--An econometric analysis
        based on firm data. Labour Economics, 7(5), 629­663. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-
        5371(00)00016-6
Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W., Smith-Doerr, L., & OwenSmith, J. (1999). Network Position and
       Firm Performance: Organizational Returns to Collaboration in the Biotechnology
       Industry.
Powell, W. W., White, D. R., Koput, K. W., & OwenSmith, J. (2005). Network Dynamics and
       Field Evolution: The Growth of Interorganizational Collaboration in the Life Sciences.
       American Journal of Sociology, 110(4), 1132­1205. https://doi.org/10.1086/421508
PricewaterhouseCoopers. (2020). PwC MoneyTree Report. PwC.
       https://www.pwc.com/us/en/industries/technology/moneytree.html
Proto, E., & Rustichini, A. (2014). Cooperation and Personality (Warick Economic Research
        Papers No. 2068-2018­1912). https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.270238
Puri, M., & Robinson, D. T. (2013). The Economic Psychology of Entrepreneurship and Family
       Business. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2), 423­444.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/jems.12013
Puri, M., & Zarutskie, R. (2012). On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and Non-
       Venture-Capital-Financed Firms. The Journal of Finance, 67(6), 2247­2293.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2012.01786.x
Reinganum, J. F. (1983). Uncertain Innovation and the Persistence of Monopoly. The American
      Economic Review, 73(4), 741­748. JSTOR.
Renzulli, L. A., Aldrich, H., & Moody, J. (2000). Family Matters: Gender, Networks, and
       Entrepreneurial Outcomes*. Social Forces, 79(2), 523­546.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/79.2.523
Reynolds, P. D., & Curtin, R. T. (2008). Business creation in the United States: Panel study of
      entrepreneurial dynamics II initial assessment (Vol. 16). Now Publishers Inc.
Ries, E. (2011). The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to
       Create Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business.


                                               86
Roach, M., & Sauermann, H. (2015). Founder or Joiner? The Role of Preferences and Context in
       Shaping Different Entrepreneurial Interests. Management Science, 61(9), 2160­2184.
       https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.2100
Robb, A., Consulting, M., & Rafael, S. (2012). Access to Capital among Young Firms, Minority-
      owned Firms, Women-owned Firms, and High-tech Firms. 41.
Robb, A. M., & Robinson, D. T. (2014). The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms. The
      Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 153­179. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhs072
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5,
      Part 2), S71­S102. https://doi.org/10.1086/261725
Rosenberg, N. (1982). Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge University
      Press.
Rothaermel, F. T., & Thursby, M. (2005a). Incubator firm failure or graduation?: The role of
       university linkages. Research Policy, 34(7), 1076­1090.
Rothaermel, F. T., & Thursby, M. (2005b). University­incubator firm knowledge flows:
       Assessing their impact on incubator firm performance. Research Policy, 34(3), 305­320.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2004.11.006
Ruef, M. (2010). The Entrepreneurial Group: Social Identities, Relations, and Collective Action.
       Princeton University Press.
Ruef, M., Aldrich, H. E., & Carter, N. M. (2003). The Structure of Founding Teams: Homophily,
       Strong Ties, and Isolation among U.S. Entrepreneurs. American Sociological Review,
       68(2), 195­222. JSTOR. https://doi.org/10.2307/1519766
Sahlman, W. A. (1990). The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. Journal
      of Financial Economics, 27(2), 473­521. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(90)90065-8
Salant, S. W. (1984). Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of Monopoly: Comment. The
        American Economic Review, 74(1), 247­250.
Samila, S., & Sorenson, O. (2011). Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. The
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 338­349.
Samila, S., & Sorenson, O. (2017). Community and Capital in Entrepreneurship and Economic
       Growth. American Sociological Review, 82(4), 770­795.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417711699
Sampat, B. N., & Mowery, D. C. (2004). Universities in national innovation systems.
      https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/43161
Sauermann, H. (2018). Fire in the Belly? Employee Motives and Innovative Performance in
      Startups versus Established Firms. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 12(4), 423­454.
Saxenian, A. (1994). Regional Networks: Industrial Adaptation in Silicon Valley and Route 128.
Saxenian, A. L. (1996). Regional advantage: Culture and competition in Silicon Valley and
       Route 128. Harvard University Press.
                                             87
Schilling, M. A., & Phelps, C. C. (2007). Interfirm Collaboration Networks: The Impact of
        Large-Scale Network Structure on Firm Innovation. Management Science, 53(7), 1113­
        1126. JSTOR.
Schmalz, M. C., Sraer, D. A., & Thesmar, D. (2017). Housing collateral and entrepreneurship.
      The Journal of Finance, 72(1), 99­132.
Schoar, A. (2010). The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship.
       Innovation Policy and the Economy, 10, 57­81. https://doi.org/10.1086/605853
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Routledge.
Scott, E. L., Shu, P., & Lubynsky, R. M. (2019). Entrepreneurial Uncertainty and Expert
        Evaluation: An Empirical Analysis. Management Science, mnsc.2018.3244.
        https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3244
Shrivastava, M., & Tamvada, J. P. (2011). Entrepreneurial Teams, Optimal Team Size, and
       Founder Exits. 34.
Sloan, A. P. (1963). My Years with General Motors. Doubleday/Currency.
Soper, S., Day, M., & Goldman, H. (2020, 03). Behind Amazon's HQ2 Fiasco: Jeff Bezos Was
       Jealous of Elon Musk. Bloomberg.Com. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-
       02-03/amazon-s-hq2-fiasco-was-driven-by-bezos-envy-of-elon-musk
Sørensen, J. B. (2007). Bureaucracy and Entrepreneurship: Workplace Effects on Entrepreneurial
       Entry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 52(3), 387­412.
       https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.52.3.387
Sørensen, M. (2007). How Smart Is Smart Money? A Two-Sided Matching Model of Venture
       Capital. The Journal of Finance, 62(6), 2725­2762.
Sorenson, O., & Audia, P. G. (2000). The Social Structure of Entrepreneurial Activity:
       Geographic Concentration of Footwear Production in the United States, 1940­1989.
       American Journal of Sociology, 106(2), 424­462. https://doi.org/10.1086/316962
Sorenson, O., & Stuart, T. E. (2001). Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution of
       Venture Capital Investments. American Journal of Sociology, 106(6), 1546­1588.
       https://doi.org/10.1086/321301
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, J. C. (1990). A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
       Management. Strategic Management Journal, 17­27.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2001). Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and
       managers: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 145­153.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.86.1.145
Stiglitz, J. E., & Weiss, A. (1981). Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information. The
        American Economic Review, 71(3), 393­410. JSTOR.
Stock, K., Wong, V., & 2015. (2015, February 2). Chipotle: The Definitive Oral History.
       Bloomberg.Com. http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-chipotle-oral-history/

                                               88
Storper, M., & Venables, A. J. (2004). Buzz: Face-to-face contact and the urban economy.
       Journal of Economic Geography, 4(4), 351­370. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnlecg/lbh027
Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
       collaboration, licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6), 285­305.
Tian, X. (2011a). The Role of Venture Capital Syndication in Value Creation for Entrepreneurial
       Firms. Review of Finance, 16(1), 245­283. https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfr019
Tian, X. (2011b). The causes and consequences of venture capital stage financing. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 101(1), 132­159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.02.011
Tian, X., Udell, G. F., & Yu, X. (2016). Disciplining delegated monitors: When venture
       capitalists fail to prevent fraud by their IPO firms. Journal of Accounting and Economics,
       61(2), 526­544. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2015.09.004
Tian, X., & Wang, T. Y. (2011). Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Innovation. The Review of
       Financial Studies, 27(1), 211­255. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr130
Tian, X., & Xu, J. (2020). Do place-based policies promote local innovation and
       entrepreneurship?
Tu, T., Anh, D., & Thu, T. (2018). Exploring Factors Influencing the Success of Crowdfunding
        Campaigns of Startups in Vietnam. Accounting and Finance Research, 7, 19.
        https://doi.org/10.5430/afr.v7n2p19
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social Structure and Competition in Interfirm Networks: The Paradox of
       Embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1), 35­67. JSTOR.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2393808
Vedres, B., & Stark, D. (2010). Structural Folds: Generative Disruption in Overlapping Groups.
       American Journal of Sociology, 115(4), 1150­1190. https://doi.org/10.1086/649497
Venugopal, B., & Yerramilli, V. (2019). Outside Directors at Early-Stage Startups (SSRN
      Scholarly Paper ID 3320010). Social Science Research Network.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3320010
Vereshchagina, G., & Hopenhayn, H. A. (2009). Risk Taking by Entrepreneurs. American
      Economic Review, 99(5), 1808­1830. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.5.1808
Wadensjö, E., & Andersson, P. (2007). Do the unemployed become successful entrepreneurs?
     International Journal of Manpower, 28(7), 604­626.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/01437720710830070
Wallsten, S. J. (2000). The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private R&D: The
       case of the Small Business Innovation Research program. The RAND Journal of
       Economics, 82­100.
Walsh, J. P., Cohen, W. M., & Cho, C. (2007). Where excludability matters: Material versus
       intellectual property in academic biomedical research. Research Policy, 36(8), 1184­
       1203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.04.006

                                                89
Wang, X. (2018). Catering innovation: Entrepreneurship and the acquisition market. Kenan
      Institute of Private Enterprise Research Paper, 18­27.
Wasserman, N. (2003). Founder-CEO Succession and the Paradox of Entrepreneurial Success.
      Organization Science, 14(2), 149­172. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.14.2.149.14995
Wasserman, N. (2017). The throne vs. The kingdom: Founder control and value creation in
      startups. Strategic Management Journal, 38(2), 255­277.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2478
Weitzman, M. L. (1998). Recombinant Growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2),
      331­360. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555595
Wellington, A. J. (2001). Health Insurance Coverage and Entrepreneurship. Contemporary
       Economic Policy, 19(4), 465­478. https://doi.org/10.1093/cep/19.4.465
Winter, S. (1984). Schumpeterian competition in alternative technological regimes. Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, 5(3­4), 287­320.
Wong, A., Bhatia, M., & Freeman, Z. (2009). Angel finance: The other venture capital. Strategic
      Change, 18(78), 221­230. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsc.849
Wong, A. Y. (2006). Angel Finance: The Other Venture Capital (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
      941228). Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.941228
Yohn, D. L. (2014, March 14). How Chipotle Changed American Fast Food Forever. Fast
      Company. https://www.fastcompany.com/3027647/how-chipotle-changed-american-fast-
      food-forever
Yu, S. (2019). How do accelerators impact the performance of high-technology ventures?
        Management Science.
Zhao, B., & Ziedonis, R. (2020). State governments as financiers of technology startups:
       Evidence from Michigan's R&D loan program. Research Policy, 49(4), 103926.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.103926
Zhao, H., & Seibert, S. E. (2006). The big five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status:
       A meta-analytical review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2), 259.
Zhao, H., Seibert, S. E., & Lumpkin, G. T. (2010). The relationship of personality to
       entrepreneurial intentions and performance: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
       Management, 36(2), 381­404.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R., & Brewer, M. B. (1998). Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth
       of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises. The American Economic Review, 88(1), 290­306.




                                               90
