                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON LABOR AND CAPITAL REALLOCATION

                                     Christoph Albert
                                       Paula Bustos
                                     Jacopo Ponticelli

                                    Working Paper 28995
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28995


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 2021




We received valuable comments from Dante Amengual, Chris Udry, Seema Jayachandran, Sean
Higgins and seminar participants at Northwestern University and CEMFI. We are extremely
grateful to Ana Paula Cunha for sharing the SPI data for Brazil. Matheus Sampaio provided
excellent research assistance. This project has received funding from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program
(grant agreement no. 716388) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christoph Albert, Paula Bustos, and Jacopo Ponticelli. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Climate Change on Labor and Capital Reallocation
Christoph Albert, Paula Bustos, and Jacopo Ponticelli
NBER Working Paper No. 28995
July 2021
JEL No. J61,O1,O16,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the effects of climate change on labor and capital reallocation across regions, sectors
and firms. We use newly digitized administrative reports on extreme weather events occurred in
Brazil during the last two decades and a meteorological measure of excess dryness relative to
historical averages to estimate the effects of droughts in the local economy of affected areas, on
the magnitude of the labor and capital flows they generate and on factor allocation in destination
regions. We document two main results. In the short run, local economies insure themselves
against negative weather shocks via financial integration with other regions. However, in the long
run, affected regions experience capital outflows driven by a reduction in loans, consistent with a
permanent decrease in investment opportunities. Second, we find that abnormal dryness affects
the structure of both the local economy and the economy of areas connected via migrant
networks. Directly affected areas experience a sharp reduction in population and employment,
concentrated in agriculture and services. While local manufacturing absorbs some of the
displaced workers, these regions experience large out-migration flows. Regions receiving climate
migrants expand employment in agriculture and services, but not in manufacturing. Using social
security data, we provide evidence that labor market frictions direct migrants to firms connected
to migrant social networks, which are mostly outside the manufacturing sector. This has
implications for the composition of economic activity and the firm size distribution in destination
regions.

Christoph Albert                                 Jacopo Ponticelli
Centro de Estudios Monetarios y Financieros      Kellogg School of Management
Casado del Alisal 5, 28014 Madrid                Northwestern University
Spain                                            2211 Campus Drive
christoph.albert@cemfi.es                        Evanston, IL 60208
                                                 and NBER
Paula Bustos                                     jacopo.ponticelli@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Centro de Estudios Monetarios y Financieros
Casado del Alisal 5, 28014 Madrid
Spain
paula.bustos@cemfi.es
I   Introduction

    The speed of observed climate change is one of the major challenges of our time. As
average temperatures rise in many regions around the globe, the frequency and intensity
of extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods, is expected to increase (Hsiang
and Kopp, 2018). Developing economies are particularly exposed to these events because
they tend to be located in tropical areas and a significant share of their population is still
employed in agriculture (Mani et al., 2018). Empirical evidence shows that increases in
temperature and extreme weather events have negative effects on local economic activity
and can generate migration away from affected areas (Dell et al., 2014). However, we lack
a clear understanding of how the process of reallocation of economic activity away from
areas affected by climate change can mitigate its effects. In particular, there is scarce
empirical evidence on the effects of factor reallocation originated by climate change on
destination regions.
    In this paper, we use new data on extreme weather events that occurred in Brazil
during the last two decades to estimate their effects on the local economy of the affected
areas, on the magnitude and direction of labor and capital movements that they generate,
and on the allocation of factors across sectors and firms in destination regions.
    To measure extreme weather events, such as droughts, we digitized administrative data
from the National System of Civil Protection in Brazil (Sistema Nacional de Prote¸  cao e De-
fesa Civil - SINPDEC), which records every reported natural disaster at the municipality-
level. These data are based on requests of aid from the federal government and, thus,
might be subject to reporting bias. To overcome this concern, we use a meteorological
measure of droughts, the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI).
This index measures the moisture deficit in a given location relative to its 100 year average
and is based on local precipitation and temperature data. It is used by climatologists to
predict droughts, including those caused by climate change (Vicente-Serrano et al., 2010).
Indeed, we find that this index is a strong predictor of the drought events reported in the
SINPDEC data. The SPEI also shows an increase in abnormally dry conditions across
Brazilian regions during the last twenty years relative to historical averages, consistent
with the increase in average temperatures. We complement these data with information
from the Population Census, which records the municipality of origin of all internal mi-
grants in Brazil; social security data from the Annual Social Information System (RAIS),
which permits to track workers across regions, sectors and firms; and balance sheet data
from all bank branches in Brazil (ESTBAN), which permits to track capital flows across
regions.
    First, we document that regions subject to dry meteorological conditions in a given
year experience a sharp reduction in agricultural output but receive capital inflows: local
bank deposits contract, while bank loans expand. Funds are partly drawn from areas


                                              2
connected to affected regions through bank branch networks, which experience capital
outflows. This suggests that local economies are able to partially insure themselves against
negative weather shocks by being financially integrated with other regions. However, when
we analyze the impact of a full decade of unusually dry meteorological conditions, we find
that affected regions experience capital outflows, driven by a reduction in loans to these
areas. More specifically, a region experiencing unusual dryness during a decade (defined as
an increase in average decadal dryness of about 0.5 of a standard deviation relative to its
100 year mean), suffers a 13.3 percent decline in lending originated by local branches. This
is consistent with the idea that a full decade of unusually dry meteorological conditions
has (or is perceived to have) permanent negative effects on local productivity.
    Second, we find that areas with a higher incidence of droughts during the decade 2000-
2010 experienced a sharp reduction in population and agricultural employment. This led
to a change in the structure of the local economy, where manufacturing employment
expanded while the service sector contracted. These findings suggest that the fall in agri-
cultural productivity reduced the demand for local non-traded goods such as services,
while it generated an expansion in local traded goods such as manufacturing by reducing
the price of labor. However, not all displaced workers were absorbed locally: we docu-
ment large out-migration flows from both rural and urban areas affected by droughts. In
particular, a region experiencing unusual dryness during a decade (defined as an increase
in average decadal dryness of 0.5 of a standard deviation relative to its 100 year mean),
suffers a population loss of 5.7 percent.
    Next, we track the destination of climate migrants. For this purpose, we use the fact
that workers who migrate are more likely to relocate towards regions where they have
social networks, measured by historical migration links. Then, we construct a measure of
indirect exposure of each destination to droughts by summing the droughts that occurred
in each potential origin, weighted by the share of all migrants in that destination who came
from that particular origin in previous waves of the decadal Population Census. We find
that regions receiving climate migrants expand employment in agriculture and services,
but not in manufacturing. In particular, a region where 10 percent of historical migrants
came from areas affected by unusual dryness during the present decade, experiences an
increase in agricultural employment of 0.85 percent and a reduction in manufacturing
employment of 0.53 percent.
    This finding might be driven by the fact that climate migrants lack the skills required
for employment in manufacturing in urban areas. In this case, the absence of migrant
reallocation into manufacturing would reflect an optimal allocation of labor at destination.
Alternatively, this finding could also be driven by the fact that migrants' social networks
are disconnected from manufacturing firms at destination. This asymmetry in labor
market frictions across sectors would result in labor misallocation. We turn to explore
these explanations next.


                                             3
    To shed some light on the assignment process of climate migrants to jobs at destination,
we use the social security data to bring the analysis to the firm-level. For each firm, we
construct a measure of exposure to climate migrants. First, we measure whether a firm is
connected to regions experiencing droughts through social networks by the baseline share
of workers in the firm coming from origins with high exposure to droughts. We find that
workers from drought areas tend to reallocate towards firms which already had a large
share of migrants from those origins. This implies that climate migrants do not amount
to a symmetric increase in labor supply for all firms. Instead, labor market frictions
direct migrants to connected firms. This has important implications for the composition
of economic activity in destination regions.
    First, we document that the manufacturing sector is the least connected to drought
areas through past migrant networks: only 2 percent of its workers come from those areas
compared to 4 percent in services and 6 percent in agriculture. This might reflect the
fact that manufacturing is geographically concentrated due to agglomeration economies.
Second, in a given destination, the estimated elasticity of worker inflows from connected
origins experiencing droughts are three times larger for firms in the agricultural sector than
for firms in manufacturing. This implies that even in the presence of referral networks,
manufacturing firms are less prone to employ workers coming from drought areas. This
might be due to the fact that manufacturing firms require specialized skills that are
sourced in thick local labor markets. Indeed, we find that migrants from drought areas
have lower levels of education and earnings than comparable workers at destination.1
Third, we find that the estimated elasticity of worker inflows from connected origins
experiencing droughts is twice as large for small than for large firms. Hence, climate
migrants affect the shape of the firm-size distribution, increasing the weight of small
firms, which tend to pay lower wages and display lower productivity.2
    Let us emphasize that a higher incidence of droughts in some locations can have effects
in other locations through several channels other than migration flows. For example,
goods trade can generate demand or supply linkages across regions. Similarly, droughts
can generate capital flows across regions, as we discussed above. If regions with larger
labor market integration are also more linked through goods or capital markets, then
our measure of labor market integration, namely migrant networks, could capture these
other channels. We address this concern by exploiting the fact that we can track workers
across regions and firms in the social security data. This permits to absorb aggregate firm
growth at each destination municipality, which controls for any general equilibrium effects
of droughts in connected areas through labor, product and capital market linkages. In
   1
     In contrast, migrants from areas with average weather tend to have a similar level of education as
comparable workers at destination.
   2
     For a survey of the evidence on the large-firm wage premium see Oi and Idson (1999). Theories of
firm predict that this premium should capture, at least in part, differences in productivity (Lucas, 1978;
Melitz, 2003).


                                                    4
addition, we can compare worker flows from drought origins with worker flows from other
areas at the firm-level in each destination. This permits to separate the labor market
effects of droughts on connected firms from other effects taking place through the goods
or capital markets. This is because product demand or capital supply linkages affecting
firm growth should affect labor demand from all origins. In particular, we check whether
our estimated elasticity of firm labor flows from drought origins is affected by the inclusion
of firm fixed effects. We find that this elasticity increases by 50 percent when we control
for firm-fixed effects, suggesting that the positive effects of labor market linkages on the
level of employment might be partly reduced by negative effects of goods market linkages.
This would be the case if firms more connected to a particular origin through migrant
networks are also more connected through commercial networks and suffer from a lower
demand for their products or lower supply (higher prices) for their inputs.
     When we control for both destination municipality and firm fixed effects to absorb the
capital and goods market channels, our estimates indicate that a firm in agriculture with
average connection to areas highly affected by droughts experience a 7 percent larger flow
of workers from such regions when the number of droughts at origin increases by 2.62 ­
the difference between the average number of droughts in the top quartile and the rest of
the distribution ­ in the 2006-2010 period. This effect is about three times larger than
the one observed for firms in manufacturing (2.3 percent), while the effect on firms in
services is 1.2 percent.
     This paper attempts to contribute to the literature measuring the potential effects
of climate change on economic outcomes. There is a rich empirical literature showing
that weather shocks have negative effects on local economic activity and can generate
migration away from affected areas (Jayachandran, 2006; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009;
Desch^ enes and Greenstone, 2007; Dell et al., 2012; Hornbeck, 2012). We contribute to
this literature by providing direct empirical evidence on the spillover effects of these local
shocks into other locations integrated through labor and capital markets. We expect
that our estimates can also be informative for the recent quantitative trade and spatial
models studying the effects of climate change on productivity and the spatial allocation
of population and economic activity (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2015; Costinot et al.,
2016; Balboni, 2019; Conte et al., 2020).


II   Climate Change and Droughts in Brazil

   Earth's average surface air temperature has increased by about 1 °C since 1900, with
over half of the increase occurring since the mid-1970s. As climate has warmed over re-
cent years, a new pattern of more frequent and more intense weather events has emerged
across the world. Recent attribution studies show that the warming climate made several
recent extreme weather events more severe and more likely to happen (Schiermeier, 2018).


                                              5
Warming increases the likelihood of extremely hot days and nights, favours increased at-
mospheric moisture that may result in more frequent heavy rainfall and snowfall, and
leads to evaporation that can exacerbate droughts (National Academies of Sciences, En-
gineering, and Medicine, 2016).
    Temperature increases have been steeper in tropical countries such as Brazil. Figure I
use data from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, which shows
that the average temperature in Brazil has been steadily increasing since 1920, from 22.5
to 24°C, with an acceleration in the trend since 1980. At the same time, an increase
in the frequency and duration of droughts has been documented in Brazil, especially in
the 2011-2017 period (Cunha et al., 2019). Many factors contribute to any individual
extreme weather event making it challenging to attribute any particular extreme event
to human-caused climate change. Still, as climate change makes these events more likely,
understanding the economic effects of extreme weather events can be informative about
the potential effects of climate change.
    We measure extreme weather events in Brazil using two different data sources. First,
we digitized data from the National System of Civil Protection in Brazil or SINPDEC
(Sistema Nacional de Prote¸  cao e Defesa Civil). The SINPDEC data is based on reports
filed by municipal authorities to the federal government when a natural disaster occurs.
The objective of these reports is to provide the central government with an initial as-
sessment of the damages and thus obtain financial and logistical support. As a result,
this data allows to observe reported climatic disasters such as droughts and floods at
the municipality level at a monthly frequency. Figure II displays the data for the period
2000-2018, where a marked increase in the number of reported droughts is observed after
2012. Figure III shows the geographical distribution of reported droughts across Brazil
in the 2000-2010 period (panel a) and 2011-2018 period (panel b).
    As the SINPDEC data could suffer from reporting biases across municipalities or
time, we also use a climatological measure of dryness, the Standardized Precipitation and
Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI), which is used by climate scientists to predict droughts
(Vicente-Serrano et al., 2010). This index compares the amount of precipitation in a given
area with its evapotranspiration needs, which are a function of temperature. As a result, it
is considered superior to indices that only use information on rainfall to predict droughts
caused by climate change. Dubrovsky et al. (2009) and Vicente-Serrano et al. (2010) show
that the effects of warming temperatures on droughts predicted by global climate models
can be clearly seen in the SPEI, whereas indices based only on precipitation data such
as the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) do not reflect expected changes in drought
conditions.
    Figure IV shows the time series of monthly SPEI in Brazil between 1905 to 2018.3
  3
   In this Figure as in the rest of the empirical analysis we use the SPEI-12, the version of SPEI
computed at a 12 months time scale.


                                                6
The index captures deviation in dryness relative to the average observed during the whole
1905-2018 period. A value of SPEI equal to -1 can be interpreted as the difference between
rain and potential evapotranspiration needs being one standard deviation lower than the
historical average for a given locality during that period.4 The figure shows an increase
in the incidence of droughts since 2012, confirming the upward trend in reports seen in
Figure II. Figure III shows the geographical distribution of SPEI across Brazil in the
2000-2010 period (panel c) and 2011-2018 period (panel d).
    To investigate the extent to which reported droughts coincide in terms of timing with
dryness measured by the SPEI, we perform an event-study analysis by regressing the
SPEI on twelve leads and twelve lags of reported droughts using a monthly panel at the
municipality level. More specifically, we estimate the following equation:

                                                   12
                             SP EIjm =  +                   k droughtk
                                                                     jm + jm ,                           (1)
                                                k=-12


where j indexes municipalities, m indexes calendar months, and k indexes months relative
to a reported drought in the SINPDEC data. The variable droughtk    jm is a dummy equal
to 1 if municipality j is k months away from a reported drought in the SINPDEC data,
which we set at k = 0. For this analysis we focus on the period between the 12 months
prior and the 12 months after a drought is reported.
    Figure V plots the coefficients k . As shown, the deviation of SPEI from its mean is
the lowest in the month a drought is reported (around 0.7 below its mean). The figure
also shows that dry weather is registered well ahead of the month a drought is reported,
starting to be significantly below the mean around four months earlier. This suggests
that the incidence of dry weather over several months is what usually triggers a report.
Furthermore, the SPEI continues to be low during several months after the report, still
being around 0.4 below the mean six months after a drought event is reported.


III     Empirical Analysis

    In this section, we study the effects of reported droughts and unusually dry meteoro-
logical conditions as captured by the SPEI on economic outcomes. First, we analyze the
effect of local contemporaneous weather shocks on local agricultural output. Second, we
study the effects of both contemporaneous droughts and a full decade of unusually dry
meteorological conditions on deposits and loans by local bank branches. Next, we track
the destination of capital flows originated by droughts through the bank branch network.
Third, we study the effects of droughts on labor flows across regions and sectors using
   4
    Potential evapotranspiration (PET) is defined as the evaporation from an extended surface of a short
green crop which fully shades the ground, exerts little or negligible resistance to the flow of water, and is
always well supplied with water.


                                                        7
data from the population Census. Finally, we track formal worker flows across regions,
sectors, and firms using social security data from RAIS.

III.A     Agricultural Production

III.A.1    Specification

   We begin by estimating the effects of reported droughts and excess dryness as captured
by SPEI on agricultural outcomes at the yearly level with the following specification:

                      yot = o + t + 1 Dryness + Controlsot × t + uot ,                                 (2)

where o indexes municipalities, and Dryness is either the number of droughts reported
in SINPDEC or SPEI. To ease the comparison between the specifications with reported
droughts and SPEI, we henceforth always use the latter multiplied with -1, so that an
increase in either measure is associated with higher dryness. We will interchangeably refer
to SPEI ×(-1) as "excess dryness".
     The vector of controls includes the share of adults living in rural areas in 1991, the
geographical distance to the coast (both interacted with year dummies) and the number
of floods reported in the SINPDEC dataset.5 To study the impact of dryness on agri-
cultural production, we consider the following outcome variables: log area planted, log
area harvested, and the log value of agricultural production. The outcome variables are
sourced from the Agricultural Production Survey (PAM).6 We run the regression first on
a sample including the time period 2000-2010, which corresponds to the years we consider
in our subsequent empirical analysis based on Census data. We then also consider the
sample comprising the time period 2011-2018. As can be seen in Figure IV, this is a
period of much more severe dryness in Brazil, which we are able to include in our analysis
using social security data up to 2018 in Section III.E.1.

III.A.2    Results

   The estimates of 1 for each of the two sub-periods are presented in Table II. Using
reported droughts as the regressor in Panel A and considering the period 2000-2010 in
the first three columns, we find no significant effect on the area planted but a significant
negative effect on the area harvested: an additional reported drought is associated with a
decrease by 4.1 percent. The value of the agricultural production falls even by 9.2 percent,
more than twice as much as the harvested area. Consistent with the much higher severity
   5
     Since borders of municipalities changed over time, in this paper we use AMCs (minimum comparable
areas) as our unit of observation. AMCs are defined by the Brazilian Statistical Institute as the smallest
areas that are comparable over time. In what follows, we use the term municipalities to refer to AMCs.
   6
     PAM Survey is carried out by the Brazilian Statistical Institute (IBGE) at yearly frequency. It covers
the 31 major temporary crops and the 33 major permanent crops farmed in Brazil.



                                                    8
of droughts in the second period, we find more negative effects and also a significant
decrease in the area planted of almost 6 percent when considering the 2011-2018 sample
in the final three columns. The losses in harvested area and production value are 8.8 and
13.5 percent, respectively.
    In Panel B, we estimate equation (2) using SPEI as a measure of dryness. We find that
an increase in excess dryness by one standard deviation (i.e. an increase in the SPEI×(-1)
by 1) decreases the area planted by 1.6 percent and the area harvested by 2.7 percent
during 2000-2010. Consistent with the results in Panel A, the effect on the production
value is around twice as large as the effect on the harvested area (5.2 percent). During the
2011-2018, the negative impact of dryness is again much stronger for all three outcome
variables, with the loss of harvested area being 7 percent and the loss of production value
being 7.4 percent.
    Overall, these estimates suggest that higher dryness, both when reported and measured
using weather data, is associated with sizable output losses in the agricultural sector. This
holds true during both periods we consider, with the negative impact of dryness being
significantly stronger during the 2010s.

III.B     Capital Reallocation

III.B.1   Specification

    In this section, we study the impact of climate change on capital reallocation. For
this analysis, we use data on bank deposits, loans and assets from the Central Bank of
Brazil's ESTBAN dataset, which reports balance sheet information at branch level for all
commercial banks operating in the country at the yearly level.
    We begin by estimating a yearly regression as the one described in equation (2). We
use this specification to study the contemporaneous effects of dryness conditions on local
deposits, loans and capital outflows. We define the latter for each municipality as the
difference between total deposits and total loans, normalized by assets.
    We also investigate the indirect effects on regions linked to those affected by drought
events or excess dryness via bank branch networks. To this end, we construct a measure of
municipality-level exposure to dryness in connected regions based on Bustos et al. (2020).
This measure is constructed in two steps. First, we define the degree of exposure of each
bank to drought events or excess dryness based on the geographical structure of its bank
branch network as follows:

                          BankExposurebt =         bo T Ao Drynessot .                    (3)
                                             oOb

    The weights bo are the share of national deposits of bank b coming from origin mu-
nicipality o in the baseline year 2000, Ob is the set of origin municipalities in which bank b


                                              9
was present at baseline, and T Ao is the share of land employed by the agricultural sector
in the origin o.7 Next, we define the municipality-level exposure to drought events or
excess dryness via bank branch networks as follows:



                    M unicipalityExposuredt =               wbd BankExposurebt ,                 (4)
                                                      bBd


where the weights wbd capture the lending market share of bank b in destination mu-
nicipality d and are constructed as the value of loans issued by branches of bank b in
municipality d divided by the total value of loans issued by branches of all banks oper-
ating in municipality d (whose set we indicate with Bd ) in the baseline year 2000. The
weighting should capture the total exposure of destination municipality d to any shock
to funds in origin municipalities connected through bank networks. To investigate the
indirect effects of climate change, we therefore include the yearly measure of municipality
exposure described in (4) into the specification described in equation (2).
    Finally, we study the long-term effects of direct and indirect exposure to drought
events or excess dryness by estimating a specification like the one described in equation
(6), and focus on decadal changes in deposits, loans and capital outflows between 2000
and 2010 as outcomes.

III.B.2   Results

    We start by documenting the contemporaneous effects of droughts and excess dryness
conditions on capital outcomes. The results are reported in Table III. As in section III.A,
dryness is measured as number of reported drought events in a given year in Panel A, and
as the yearly average of SPEI-12 multiplied with -1 in Panel B.
    To quantify the coefficients, we inspect the distribution of reported droughts and SPEI
across municipalities, and compute the predicted percentage change in capital outcomes
when a municipality moves from the median value in the distribution to an extreme value,
for which we take the 90th percentile. In the distribution of reported droughts per year,
the median municipality had no droughts, while the municipality at the 90th percentile
reported 1 drought. Similarly, a move from the median to the 90th percentile of the
SPEI-12 ×(-1) implies an increase in the excess dryness index of 0.93, which corresponds
to about one standard deviation higher dryness relative to the historical average for a
given municipality.
    In column (1) we focus on the direct effects on local deposits. We find that municipal-
ities with one reported drought experienced a 1.2 percent decline in local bank deposits
relative to municipalities with no reported droughts. We find a similar effect in Panel B,
  7
    Data on agricultural land at municipality level is from the 1996 Agricultural Census. We use this
weight to capture the exposure of the local economy to climate events.


                                                 10
where the coefficient on SPEI-12 ×(-1) indicates that a standard deviation increase in
excess dryness corresponds to a decline in local deposits of about 0.5 percent. The result
on deposits is consistent with individuals in areas directly affected by droughts or excess
dryness using their savings to cope with the negative impact on climate shocks.
    In column (2) we study the effects on loans originated by local branches. As shown,
an increase in reported droughts is associated with a decline in loans (1.7 percent), while
an increase in extreme dryness is associated with an increase in loans originated by local
branches of about 1.4 percent. Variation in reported droughts is likely to also capture
variation in federal transfers received from the central government. These directed trans-
fers are designed to help local communities absorb the negative impact of climate shocks,
reducing the need for individuals and firms to borrow when negatively impacted by cli-
mate events. On the other hand, the SPEI-12 measure captures to what extent a region
is experiencing a period of abnormal dryness, irrespective of whether local officials decide
to file a request for financial support to the federal government. As such, we interpret
the positive coefficient on SPEI-12 as capturing the role of financial markets to allow
risk sharing and consumption smoothing for individuals and firms hit by negative climate
shocks.
    In column (3), we focus on capital outflows, captured by the difference between de-
posits and loans and normalized by the value of assets. A positive value of capital outflows
implies that a given municipality is a net exporter of capital in the formal banking net-
work, while a negative value implies that local lending is financed with capital imported
from other regions. We find a negative and significant effect of excess dryness on capital
outflows, which indicates that regions experiencing abnormally dry conditions tend to be
net importers of capital via the banking sector. The magnitude of the coefficient indicates
that municipalities with one standard deviation higher excess dryness experienced, on av-
erage, a 1.6 percentage points larger inflow of capital as a share of assets of local bank
branches. The coefficient on reported droughts is negative but not significant, potentially
due to the effect of transfers described above.
    Finally, we add to our specification the indirect effect of droughts and excess dryness
in regions connected via the bank network using the measure described in equation (4).
We find that regions connected via the bank network to areas experiencing excess dryness
episodes tend to be net exporters of capital. In particular, a region whose indirect exposure
to excess dryness via the bank network increases from the median to the 90th percentile
(an increase of 0.07 in municipality exposure) experiences capital outflows of about 0.3
percentage points of assets of its local bank branches. Overall, our results at the yearly
level indicate that regions directly affected by climate shocks import capital to allow local
individuals and firms to cope with such shocks, while regions connected via the bank
network export capital to provide the funds necessary for this risk sharing activity.



                                             11
   In the remainder of this section, we investigate the long-run effects of droughts and
excess dryness on capital outcomes by running the following regression:



                     ydr,2000-2010 =1 Drynessdr,2001-2010 + r + Xdr + dr ,                               (5)

    where r denotes macro-region fixed effects and Xdr is a set of controls for munici-
pality characteristics. These include the share of population living in rural areas, income
per capita, literacy rate, population density as well as the changes in soy and maize
productivity.8
    Table IV reports the results using as dependent variables the changes in deposits,
loans and capital outflows between 2000 and 2010. We start by discussing the effects on
deposits. As shown, we find that areas with higher incidence of droughts or with higher
excess dryness over the 2000-2010 decade relative to their historical averages experience a
decline in bank deposits, which is however not statistically significant at standard levels.
    Next, in column (2), we focus on the long-run effects on lending. Our main result
is that areas with higher excess dryness over the 2000-2010 decade experienced a larger
and significant decline in loans originated by local banks. This result, coupled with the
results presented in Table III, gives new insights on the role of the banking sector in
capital reallocation due to climate change. Our findings indicate that, in the short run,
the local financial system favors risk sharing in areas affected by climate shocks with the
support of connected areas. However, over the long run, the evidence indicates that the
financial system redirects credit destined to finance investment outside of areas affected by
abnormal climate. In particular, the magnitude of the coefficient in column (2) of Panel
B indicates that a municipality whose average excess dryness in the 2000-2010 period
increases from the median level to the 90th percentile (an increase of 0.45 in the index)
experienced a 13.3 percent decline in lending originated by local bank branches.
    The results in column (3) confirm this intuition, showing that in the long run areas
experiencing abnormal dryness over the 2000-2010 decade also experienced larger capital
outflows. The magnitude of the coefficient indicates that the direct effect of excess dryness
for a municipality moving from the median to the 90th percentile of SPEI-12×(-1) is a
2.4 percentage points increase in capital outflows as a share of assets. In column (3) we
also include the indirect effect of being connected with abnormally dry areas via the bank
network. As shown, in the long run, regions connected to those directly affected by ab-
normally dry climate experience larger capital outflows. The magnitude of the coefficient
indicates that a movement from the median to the 90th percentile of municipality-level
exposure increases capital outflows by about 3.8 percent of assets. Notice that, in the long
   8
   We use changes in soy and maize potential yields from Bustos et al. (2016) to control for the differential
impact of new technologies introduced in Brazilian agriculture during the period under study.



                                                     12
run, connected regions might be negatively affected by abnormally dry climate at origin
due to an overall decline in local capital supply. Such decline in capital can result from
an out-migration of workers (which we document below in section III.C), and a general
decline in long-run investment opportunities in the region.

III.C     Labor Reallocation across Regions and Sectors

III.C.1    Specification

    As a next step, we turn to Census data to analyze the impact of drought events
on the reallocation of labor across regions and sectors. As in section III.B, we aim to
capture two types of effects. First, due to the local impact of exceptionally dry weather
on agricultural productivity, which potentially also affects other sectors through general
equilibrium effects, droughts directly affect labor. We estimate this direct effect by using
the average yearly number of reported local droughts during 2001-2010 or the average
excess dryness as regressors.
    Second, when a spatial reallocation of factors occurs, those regions that are not directly
affected by dryness but destinations or origins of factors that move might also experience
changes in their overall amount of labor. We refer to this mechanism as the indirect effect.
To capture this effect for labor flows, we construct a measure of exposure of municipalities
to droughts through migration links. For this, we assume that destinations that received
a higher share of migrants (out of all migrants) from certain origins in the past (i.e.
before the drought period) are more likely to receive migrants from these origins when
droughts occur there than those destinations that had previously received a lower share of
migrants from them. Thus, we employ the well-documented network channel, according
to which migrants tend to choose destinations that were previously chosen by migrants
from their same origin region (Altonji and Card, 1991; Card, 2001). The Brazilian Census
allows use to construct internal migration flows based on a question asking repondents for
their municipality of residence five years prior to the Census year. Thus, using the 2000
Census, we calculate bilateral migration flows between each pair of municipalities during
the period 1995-2000.9 We then construct the exposure to dryness via migration links as

                        Exposured,2001-2010 =             od Drynesso,2001-2010 ,
                                                    o=d


with
                                                M1995-2000,od
                                        od =                  ,
                                                   Md,2000
where o denotes the origin municipality, d the destination municipality, M1995-2000,od the
   9
    Note that since the Census question refers to the place of residence five years ago but not the previous
place of residence, these migration flows also include those individuals that moved more than once during
the last five years and therefore potentially not directly from origin to destination.


                                                    13
size of the migrant flow from o to d between 1995 and 2000, and Md,2000 the total number
of persons that migrated during this period to d.
    Having created the measures for direct effects and indirect effects, we run the following
regression:

   ydr,2000-2010 =1 Drynessdr,2001-2010 +2 Exposuredr,2001-2010 +r + Xdr + dr ,            (6)
                          Direct effect            Indirect effect


    where Xdr is the same set of controls for municipality characteristics as in Equation
(5). As a first set of dependent variables, we use either the 2000-2010 log change in total
working age population (18-64) or employment (total and per sector) in municipality d.
As a second set of outcomes, we use municipalities' migration rates. In particular, we
consider the net migration rate, calculated as the difference between overall inflows and
outflows of individuals, which are the sums of the 2005-2010 bilateral migration flows,
relative to 2010 population:

                          inf lowsd,2005-2010 - outf lowsd,2005-2010
                                       populationd,2010

   Further, we also use in-migration and out-migration rates separately as dependent
variables.

III.C.2   Results

    Table V shows the regressions results of estimating (6) with the log change in popula-
tion as the dependent variable. The first column presents the coefficients of a simplified
specification including only the direct effect at origin and without controls apart from
macro-region fixed effects. In the second and third column, we add the controls for mu-
nicipality characteristics and the indirect effect through exposure, respectively. In the
final two columns, we split the sample into primarily rural or urban municipalities ac-
cording to whether the share of population living in rural areas is below or above the
median.
    Both when using reported droughts in Panel A or excess dryness in Panel B, we obtain
a significant negative effect of dryness on population in all specifications in the first three
columns. Controlling for municipality characteristics reduces the effect somewhat, in
particular for reported droughts, while including exposure greatly increases it. Reported
droughts have a larger negative effect on population in urban regions, while effects do not
differ much between rural and urban regions when using excess dryness.
    Looking at the indirect effects, we find an increase in population with higher exposure
to dryness via previous migration links, and this effect is stronger in urban regions. We
view this as confirmation for the importance of separately capturing direct and indirect


                                              14
effects, which are highly correlated due to the spatial clustering of weather shocks, im-
plying that dry areas are more likely to be connected through migration links to other
dry areas. Thus, the estimate of the direct population effect is biased upwards when
considering local dryness only, if connected regions are more likely to receive migrants.
    In order to quantitatively interpret the direct population effects implied by these
regressions at the decadal level, we compute the population effect of going from the median
to the 90th percentile implied by the coefficient in column (3) as -0.0391 × 0.7 = -0.027.
Thus, a municipality at the 90th percentile of reported droughts loses 2.7 percent of its
population over ten years relative to a municipality at the median of the distribution
(meaning zero reported droughts). A move from the median to the 90th percentile of the
SPEI ×(-1) implies an increase by 0.44. While this seems a rather small number given
that the measure reached values above 2 during 2001-2010, note that such extreme values
are smoothed through taking ten year averages. A value of 0.44 implies that dryness
measured by the SPEI is on average almost half a standard deviation above its long-run
mean over 120 consecutive months. Such a deviation certainly implies an exceptional
period of dryness. The predicted population decline in a region experiencing such a
period, which we obtain from the estimate in column (3) of Panel B, is 5.7 percent.
    To quantify the indirect effect, we assume that 10 percent of the migrants that a
municipality received during 1995-2000 come from origins that moved from the median
to the 90th percentile of the distribution of our dryness measures. Therefore, the indirect
effect on population implied by the coefficient in column (3) is 0.0599 × 0.07 = 0.0042 for
droughts and 0.113 × 0.044 = 0.0050 for excess dryness.
    In Table VI, we run the full specification with the change in total employment as the
dependent variable and again obtain negative direct effects of reported droughts or excess
dryness and positive indirect effects via exposure through migration links. The direct
employment effect including all sectors shown in column (1) is quantitatively similar to
that we obtained for population in Panel A. In Panel B, both the direct and indirect
effects are somewhat smaller than in the comparable specification in column (3) of Table
V. Moving from the 50th to the 90th percentile of excess dryness implies a decrease in
employment of 3.9 percent, while the indirect effect due to 10 percent of migrant origins
experiencing such an increase is predicted to increase employment by around 0.4 percent.
    Columns (2)-(5) show the estimated effects on employment in the agricultural, man-
ufacturing, service and the residual "other "sectors (which includes the public sector,
construction, extractive industry and utilities). In line with the negative impact on agri-
cultural productivity we documented above, we find that agriculture is most negatively
affected by dry weather. Interestingly, also the service and other sectors, which produce
mostly non-tradable goods, see their employment decline, while the effect on manufac-
turing is zero in Panel A and slightly positive in Panel B. Looking at the indirect effects,
we see that the three sectors with employment declines due to the direct effect are those


                                            15
that expand their employment when the indirect exposure to droughts via previous migra-
tion links increases. Hence, these findings strongly suggest that dry weather shocks lead
to a reallocation of labor from affected to not directly affected (but connected) regions
through migration of workers primarily in agriculture and non-tradable sectors. Further,
in directly affected regions, some released workers are absorbed by an expansion of the
manufacturing sector. Figure VI illustrates the results by sector shown in columns (2)-
(5) of Panel B using bars that indicate the size of the effects computed with the above
described quantification method. Moving from the 50th to the 90th percentile in excess
dryness leads to a fall in agricultural employment by almost 11 percent and an increase in
manufacturing employment by more than 8 percent. The indirect effect implies that agri-
cultural employment expands by 0.85 percent, while manufacturing employment contracts
by 0.53 percent.
    Finally, to provide additional evidence on the extent to which internal migration is the
driver of labor reallocation across regions, in Table VII we use the above described 2005-
2010 migration rates as dependent variables. Consistent with the results on population
and employment, we find negative effects of dry weather on the net migration rate in
column (1). Columns (2) and (3) investigate whether the changes in net migration are
driven by lower inflows or higher outflows and suggest that both the in-migration rate falls
and the out-migration rates increases, although the effect on the latter is not significant
when using reported droughts. The last two columns show that reported droughts decrease
net migration rates more strongly in urban areas, while excess dryness decreases them by
a similar amount in rural and urban areas. Again in line with the population results, the
exposure measure has a positive effect on the net migration rate, which is entirely driven
by higher inflows, as outflows are unaffected in Panel A and slightly positively affected in
Panel B. This finding is to be expected, if exposed municipalities expand their population
and employment through receiving migrants and these incoming migrants themselves
crowd out some present workers, leading to positive effects on both in- and out-migration
rates. Confirming the findings for population in Table V, the positive effect on the net
migration rate is stronger in urban municipalities.
    Figure VII visualizes the quantitative effects for the specification in Panel B with either
the net migration rate (upper plots), in-migration rate (middle plots) or out-migration
rate (bottom plots) as the dependent variable, using the full, the rural and the urban
sample. The decomposition in inflows and outflows for the rural and urban subsamples
suggests that both rural and urban municipalities receive inflows of migrants due to the
indirect effect. However, in the rural subsample, these inflows are counteracted by outflows
(amounting to two thirds of the inflows), leading to an insignificant overall effect on the
net migration rate as seen in the top right plot. This might be because job opportunities
are more scarce in rural regions, due to which they are less able to accommodate incoming
workers without crowding out present workers into other regions.


                                              16
   Overall, an increase in excess dryness from the median to the 90th percentile implies a
decline in the net migration rate of 1.78 percentage points. Thus, around one third of the
population decline of 5.7 percent can be explained by the observed migration patterns.

III.D     Migrant Selection and Labor Market Outcomes at Destination

III.D.1   Specification

    In this section, we turn to the Census micro data in order to document differences
in the selection and labor market outcomes of workers that have migrated from another
region during the previous five years, depending on whether their origin was affected by
dryness. Thus, our aim is to provide descriptive evidence on how outcomes of climate
migrants differ from those of "voluntary" migrants and non-migrants in the destination.
For this purpose, we use a sample of male workers aged 18 to 64 from the 2010 Census
and run the following regression:

  yiod,2010 = d + 1 M igrantiod + 2 M igrantiod × Drynessio,2001-2010 + Ageiod + uiod ,
                                                                                     (7)

where o and d are the municipalities of residence in 2005 and in 2010 of individual i,
respectively, M igrantiod is a dummy indicating o = d and Drynessio,2001-2010 is the
average number of reported droughts or excess dryness in municipality o between 2001
and 2010. Thus, the base individual in this regression is a non-migrant in municipality
of residence d. The vector Ageiod includes both age and age squared. As outcomes we
consider a dummy indicating whether an individual completed high school, a dummy for
being employed and the log of total income.
    With the inclusion of destination municipality fixed effects d , the interpretation of
the coefficients of interest is as follows: 1 indicates the difference in the outcome between
a migrant from a region without droughts or a region with the long-term average SPEI
and a worker (of the same age) in the destination municipality, while 2 indicates how this
relative outcome of a migrant differs depending on the dryness in his origin municipality
during the decade of the 2000s.
    Furthermore, we are also interested in the different selection and relative outcomes of
voluntary and climate migrants compared to the population in their origin. To capture
these differentials, instead of destination fixed effects d , we include origin fixed effects
o (which coincide with d for non-migrants) in equation (7). Hence, 1 and 2 capture
the differences in the outcomes of migrants relative to the population that stayed in the
origin municipality.




                                             17
III.D.2   Results

    Table VIII presents the regression results. The first three columns show the estimates
with destination fixed effects, while the final three columns show those with origin fixed
effects. Note that since around 50 percent of municipalities report zero droughts, the coef-
ficient 1 in Panel A indicates the average relative outcome of migrants from municipalities
in the "less dry" half of the distribution. On the other hand, when using the continuous
SPEI in Panel B, 1 indicates the relative outcome of migrants from municipalities with
average weather in terms of dryness.
    Looking at the first column of Panel A, we find that migrants from non-drought
areas are positively selected in terms of education relative to the destination population.
However, the more droughts there are reported in a migrant's origin, the lower is the
predicted difference in the probability of having completed high school. While a migrant
from a non-drought origin on average has a 4.8 percentage points higher probability of
being a high school graduate than a non-migrant at the destination, a migrant from a
municipality at the 90th percentile of average droughts (0.7 droughts per year) is predicted
to have a 7.8 percentage points lower probability (0.0483 - 0.181 × 0.7).
    Also when using the SPEI in Panel B, we find a significant lower probability of com-
pleting high school for migrants from dryer origins. To compare the effects obtained in
Panel B with those in Panel A in quantitative terms, we predict first the average rel-
ative outcome of migrants from origins in the "less dry" half of the distribution. The
average SPEI ×(-1) in this half is -0.438 and thus the predicted average effect for mi-
grants from these origins is 0.00132 + (-0.438 × -0.0943) = 0.043. Hence, the difference
in the probability of high school graduation for a migrant from an average "wet" origin
is very similar to that found in Panel A. Similarly, we can calculate the difference for
a migrant who comes from a region at the 90th percentile of the SPEI distribution as
0.00132 + (0.445 × -0.0943) = -0.041, which is somewhat smaller effect than the -0.078
found with reported droughts, but still sizable. Hence, we find consistent evidence of
climate migrants being negatively selected in terms of education relative to individuals of
a similar age in destination regions.
    The estimates in column (2) suggest that migrants generally tend to have a higher
probability of being employed and that this probability is even higher for migrants from
dryer origins. However, climate migrants tend to have a lower total income than other
migrants as can be seen in column (3). While migrants from municipalities without
droughts earn almost 20 percent more than non-migrants at the destination on average,
coming from a municipality at the 90th percentile of droughts implies a 1.73 percent lower
income. Similarly, we find in Panel B that coming from a dryer area reduces the relative
income.
    When inspecting the coefficients of the interaction term in the specification with origin


                                             18
fixed effects, we find that coefficients switch signs in columns (4) and (6). This implies
that despite doing worse than other migrants and non-migrants at the destination, those
that come from dryer regions have a higher probability of having completed high school
and tend to earn more than non-migrants at their origin. Especially the income effect is
sizable, with a migrant from a region with 0.7 droughts per year earning on average 48
percent more than a non-migrant that stayed in that region.
    Thus, our main conclusion from this exercise is that despite having a higher probability
of being employed, climate migrants are negatively selected in terms of education relative
to other migrants and non-migrants in their destination region and accordingly earn lower
incomes. However, migrants from dryer regions tend to have a higher education level and
also fare much better in terms of income relative to those that remained in their origin
municipality.

III.E     Labor Reallocation at Firm-level

III.E.1   Specification

    In section III.C, we documented the effect of climate shocks on regions indirectly
exposed to such shocks via the formal banking network and the migration network. One
potential concern is whether this type of analysis allows to identify the effect of climate
shocks on destination economies via labor and capital reallocation. This is because, for
example, regions more exposed to droughts at origin via the migration network might
also be more connected to those origin regions via other channels, such as trade links. To
the extent that trade networks and migrant networks overlap, it is hard to consider the
estimated coefficients on the indirect effects documented in section III.C as the sole effect
of a specific channel.
    To deal with this challenge, we bring our analysis of the effect of climate change on
labor reallocation to the firm level. To measure workers' flows across locations and firms
we use social security data from the Annual Social Information System (RAIS). RAIS is
an employer-employee dataset that provides individual information on all formal workers
employed in Brazil, including the municipality in which they work and the sector of their
employer.10 Workers have unique identifiers that allow us to follow them over time across
locations and firms.
    We start by constructing a firm-level measure of exposure to past migration from
different origins within Brazil. Our approach is similar to the one used to compute the
  10
    Employers are required by law to provide detailed worker information to the Ministry of Labor. See
Decree n. 76.900, December 23rd 1975. Failure to report can result in fines. RAIS is used by the Brazilian
Ministry of Labor to identify workers entitled to unemployment benefits (Seguro Desemprego ) and federal
wage supplement program (Abono Salarial ). For the analysis in this paper we restrict to firms with at
least 5 employees. Following previous literature, we focus on workers employed at the end of year and,
for workers with multiple jobs, focus on the one with the highest salary, so that each individual appears
only one in each year (Bustos et al., 2020; Dix-Carneiro and Kovak, 2017; Helpman et al., 2017).


                                                   19
measures of municipality exposure described in section III.C. As a first step, we construct
weights capturing the degree of labor market integration between each municipality in
Brazil and a given firm. To compute these weights, we use past migration flows as follows:

                                                      Li(d),t ,od
                                         oi(d),t =                                                      (8)
                                                        Li(d),t
    Where oi(d),t is the share of workers employed in the baseline year t in firm i whose
last observable move was from origin municipality o to the destination municipality d, the
one where the employer is located in year t . When mapping equation (8) to the data, we
construct past workers' movements using the period 1998 to 2005, and define our baseline
year t = 2005.11
    Next, we use the oi(d) weights to predict future worker flows between origin mu-
nicipality o and destination firm i(d). The rationale is similar to the municipality-level
regressions presented in section III.C. At the firm level, it implies that migrant workers
moving from a given origin o tend to follow employment trajectories similar to those of
previous migrants from their same origin region. This could be, for example, because
firms at destination hire new workers using referrals from current employees, and current
employees are more likely to know or vouch for individuals from their same region.
    Crucially for our purposes, constructing a measure of exposure to migrant flows at the
firm level allows us to exploit variation across firms that operate in the same destination
municipality. This allows us to control for any unobservable common shock in the desti-
nation labor market, and therefore to identify the effect of climate shocks on destination
regions that are solely due to labor reallocation, as follows:


                 Loi(d),2006-2010
                                  =  o +  d + 1              oi(d),2005
                      Loi(d)
                                                         Exposure to migrants
                                    + 2 oi(d),2005 × #droughtso,2006-2010 +oi(d)                        (9)
                                                Exposure to droughts via migrants


    The outcome variable in equation (9) is the flow of migrants to firm i from a given
origin o. More precisely, it is the number of migrant workers that moved from origin
municipality o to firm i(d) (where o = d) between 2006 and 2010, normalized by the
total number of workers of firm i(d) observed on average in the same period. This flow
can be regressed on a measure of the baseline exposure of firm i(d) to migrants from a
given region, and an interaction of such exposure with climate shocks that occurred in the
origin between 2006 and 2010. Since the unit of observation is an origin municipality-firm
  11
    We also present an alternative specification that focuses on the period 2010-2017. In that specification
we construct past workers' movements using the period 1998 to 2010 and define our baseline year t =
2010.



                                                    20
relationship, we can augment equation (9) with both origin and destination fixed effects.
    Estimating equation (9) is computationally intensive as it requires to work with a
dataset in which each firm is matched with all the potential origins of migrant workers.12
Thus, we estimate a simplified version of equation (9) in which we aggregate all potential
origin municipalities in two groups: origins with high exposure to climate change shocks
during the 2006-2010 period, and those without. We define as origin with high exposure
to climate change shocks the municipalities above the 75th percentile of total number of
reported droughts, or below the 25th percentile of SPEI-12 (a lower SPEI-12 indicates
higher dryness). Regions in the top quartile of the drought distribution experienced, on
average, 2.62 more droughts in the five years between 2006 and 2010 than regions in the
bottom three quartiles (which on average experienced 0.02 droughts in the same period).
Regions in the bottom quartile of SPEI-12 were, on average, 0.76 of a standard deviation
drier than those in the rest of the distribution in the same years.
    We estimate the following equation:


              Loi(d),2006-2010
                               = i + 1(#droughts > p75)o + d + 1 oi(d),2005
                   Loi(d)
                               + 2 oi(d),2005 × 1(#droughts > p75)o + oi(d)                         (10)

     Since equation (10) uses variation at origin municipality-firm level, it also allows us to
control for firm fixed effects (i ). This specification effectively absorbs any heterogeneity
in firm-level shocks, so that the coefficient of interest 2 captures within firm-variation in
migrant workers' flows from regions that are heterogeneously affected by climate change.13
In all specifications we cluster standard errors at the destination municipality level to
account for spatial correlation of the error terms across firms operating in the same region.

III.E.2   Results

    Before discussing our main results, we present some stylized facts on firm connections
to regions exposed to climate change. In particular, we study how such composition varies
across firms operating in different sectors and for firms of different size. We compute
the degree of firm connections to certain regions by taking the average of the interaction
between the weights capturing the share of migrant workers from each origin and a dummy
capturing regions more exposed to climate change in the 2006-2010 period. In practice,
this corresponds to the average of oi(d),2005 × 1(#droughts > p75)o and oi(d),2005 ×
1(SPEI-12 < p25)o across firms in a given sector or firms in a given size category.
  12
     There are about 720,000 firms with at least 5 employees operating in 2005 in the RAIS dataset and
4260 potential origin municipalities.
  13
     Since we aggregate origins in two groups, the dummy 1(#droughts > p75)o in equation (10) effectively
captures the origin fixed effect of equation (9).



                                                   21
    Figure VIII reports the results by sector. The first finding is that firms in agriculture
tend to be more connected to climate change regions via their network of migrant workers.
This finding is robust to using droughts (Panel a) or the excess dryness index (Panel b)
to capture exposure to climate change. The magnitudes reported in Panel b indicate that
the average firm in agriculture has, at baseline, 8 percent of workers coming from regions
with excess dryness, about four times more than firms in the manufacturing sector. We
get a similar finding when weighting firms by size, as shown in the light gray bars. In
particular, among the four main sectors used in our analysis, agriculture and services
show the highest connection to areas affected by climate change, while manufacturing
and other sectors (a residual category mostly composed by public employees) have the
lowest connections, potentially because they are more likely to source their employees
locally.
    In Figure IX we report the same statistics but splitting firms by size. As shown,
differences in the intensity of connections to regions more exposed to climate change are
less stark across the firm size distribution. Panel b of Figure VIII, for example, shows
that micro, medium and large firms all have about 3 percent of their workers coming from
regions with excess dryness.14
    Next, in Table IX, we report the results of estimating equation (10). The objective of
this analysis is to study whether climate change in origin regions explains workers' flows to
destination firms. To this end, we compare firms in the same destination municipality, and
study whether those initially more connected to climate change regions also experience
larger inflows of workers from those regions. Similarly to the results at municipality level
presented in section III.C, Table IX reports results for two definitions of exposure to
climate change at origin, one based on reported number of droughts in Panel A, and the
second based on the extreme dryness index SPEI-12 in Panel B. In all specifications, we
weight observations by firm size.
    Let us start by discussing the estimates in Panel A. In column (1), we estimate a
version of equation (10) with origin fixed effects, destination municipality fixed effects
and our measure of exposure to migrants from a given region as explanatory variables.15
The estimated coefficient 1 indicates that, in the 2006-2010 period, firms receive larger
flows of migrant workers from regions with which they were initially more connected.
The magnitude of the coefficient indicates that a firm with a 10 percent higher initial
connection to a certain region will increase the flow of workers from that region by about
6 percent of the firm labor force. This magnitude describes the increase in flows relative
to other firms operating in the same destination municipality.
    In column (2), we include the interaction term between connection to a certain origin
  14
     We define as micro firms those with less than 10 employee, as medium firms those with between 10
and 49 employees, and as large firms those with at least 50 employees.
  15
     As explained in the previous section, we aggregate origins in two groups. Thus, the dummy
1(#droughts > p75)o effectively captures the origin fixed effect.


                                                 22
region and a dummy capturing high exposure to climate change of that origin measured
by the number of droughts. The point estimates of both 1 and 2 are positive and statis-
tically significant. The estimated coefficient 2 indicates that workers flows to destination
firms are relatively larger from regions that experience a larger increase in droughts during
the 2006-2010 period.
    Even within a given destination municipality, firms more connected to climate change
areas via past migrant flows might be more connected to those areas also via trade net-
works or financial links. If that is the case, then the coefficient 2 cannot be interpreted
as capturing the effect of climate change on firms via labor reallocation. Thus, in column
(3), we estimate equation (10) including firm fixed effects. This specification absorbs any
firm-level differences in exposure to climate change areas via other channels, such as trade
or capital. We find that, when fully accounting for firm-level differences, the estimated
coefficient 2 remains positive and increases in magnitude, which indicates that other
firm-level connections with climate change areas ­ such as trade linkages ­ tend to have
a negative effect on firm growth.
    In columns (4)-(6) we split our sample by sector. As shown, the differential increase
in worker flows from areas more exposed to climate change is larger for firms in the
agricultural sector than for those in the manufacturing and services sector. In addition, as
discussed above and reported in Figure VIII, agricultural firms tend to be on average more
connected to affected areas via their past workers' flows. Our estimates indicate that a firm
in agriculture with average connection to areas highly affected by droughts experiences a
7 percent larger flow of workers from such regions when the number of droughts at origin
increases by 2.62 ­ the difference between the average number of droughts in the top
quartile and the rest of the distribution ­ in the 2006-2010 period. This effect is about
three times larger than the one observed for firms in manufacturing (2.3 percent), while
the effect on firms in services is 1.2 percent.
    Next, in columns (7)-(9), we split our sample by firm size. We find that smaller firms
tend to have larger elasticities of workers' flows from climate change exposed regions to
shocks in those regions. In particular, firms with less then 10 employees (micro firms)
with average connection to areas highly affected by droughts experience a 3.3 percent
larger flow of workers from such regions when the number of droughts at origin increases
by 2.62 in the 2006-2010 period. This elasticity is 2.4 percent for medium sized firms,
and 1.6 percent for large firms. One reason for this differential increase by firm size is
that smaller firms are more likely to use referrals from current employees in their hiring
decisions.
    Panel B of Table IX estimates a version of equation (10) in which we define as regions
with high exposure to climate change the municipalities below the 25th percentile of SPEI-
12, where a lower SPEI-12 indicates higher dryness relative to historical average. This
measure of dryness only depends on climatic characteristics and it is therefore immune


                                             23
to reporting bias in droughts. Overall, the results are similar, both qualitatively and
quantitavely, to those reported in Panel A. In particular, we find larger effects of climate
change at origin on worker flows to agricultural firms (2.2 percent) than to manufacturing
and service firms (0.7 and 0.8 percent).16 In terms of firm size, we find that the effect on
flows to micro and medium firms (1.3 percent and 1.1 percent respectively) is about twice
as large as that to large firms (0.7 percent).
    To sum up, the results in Table IX indicate that worker flows to destination firms
are relatively larger from regions that experienced a larger number of droughts or higher
dryness relative to historical averages. They also indicate that these effects considerably
differ in magnitude across firms operating in different sectors and firms of different size.
In particular, the estimated elasticities of workers flows are three times larger for firms in
the agricultural sector than for firms in the manufacturing sector, and twice as large for
small firms than for large firms.
    We believe that these results have two main implications. First, they are consistent
with the existence of frictions driving the allocation of workers in the Brazilian labor
market. They show that workers' trajectories tend to follow pre-existing connections
with their place of origin, and that the impact of these pre-existing connections on flows
is larger for small firms. Small firms tend to be characterized by lower skill intensity
and lower average wages ­ firm characteristics that in the literature have been associated
with lower productivity.17 This implies that climate-driven worker flows are not allocated
efficiently. Second, the results indicate that labor reallocation driven by climate change
can retard the structural transformation process in destination regions. Displaced workers
tend to be absorbed at a higher rate in agriculture than in manufacturing. Existing
research has shown that labor productivity is lower in agriculture than in the rest of the
economy (Caselli 2005, Restuccia et al. 2008, Lagakos and Waugh 2013), and that the
manufacturing sector is characterized by economies of scale and knowledge spillovers that
can lead to higher long-run growth (Krugman 1987, Lucas 1988, Matsuyama 1992).
    Finally, we replicate the analysis of worker flows for the years 2011 to 2017. This
analysis uses 2010 as baseline year and measures firm exposure to different origins using
flows between 1998 and 2010. The results of this analysis are reported in Table X. Overall,
the main results are consistent with those reported in Table IX. However, we find smaller
differences in elasticities of worker flows across sectors and across the firm size distribution
relative to the previous decade. One potential explanation for these smaller differences is
  16
      These quantifications use the logic as for Panel A. For example, the estimate in column (4) of Panel B
indicates that a firm in agriculture with average connection to areas highly exposed to excess dryness as
captured by SPEI-12 experience a 2.2 percent larger flow of workers from such regions when the dryness
is 0.76 of a standard deviation larger at origin in the 2006-2010 period. 0.76 is the difference between
average dryness in the bottom quartile and the rest of the distribution.
   17
      See Lucas (1978); Melitz (2003) for classic models of the firm in which more productive firms tend
to be larger. Empirically, see Syverson (2004) for a discussion of the correlation between firm size and
quantity based measures of total factor productivity.


                                                    24
that labor market frictions have declined in Brazil relative to the previous decade.


IV    Concluding Remarks

    We study the effects of climate change on labor and capital reallocation across regions,
sectors and firms. In particular, we use a measure of unusual dryness in a location defined
as its moisture deficit relative to its 100 year average, which is based on local precipitation
and temperature data, the SPEI index. We show that this index is a strong predictor for
extreme droughts that occurred in Brazil during the last two decades, as reported to the
National System of Civil Protection in Brazil (SINPDEC).
    We document two main results. In the short run, local economies insure themselves
against negative weather shocks via financial integration with other regions. However,
in the long run, affected regions experience capital outflows, driven by a reduction in
loans, consistent with a permanent decrease in investment opportunities. Second, we find
that abnormal dryness affects the structure of both the local economy and the economy
of areas connected via migrant networks. Directly affected areas experience a sharp re-
duction in population and employment, concentrated in agriculture and services. While
local manufacturing absorbs part of the displaced workers, these regions experience large
out-migration. Regions receiving climate migrants expand employment in agriculture
and services, but not in manufacturing. Using social security data, we provide evidence
that labor market frictions direct migrants to firms connected to migrants' social net-
works, which are mostly disconnected from manufacturing firms at destination. This
force generates deindustrialization and increases the weight of small firms in the firm size
distribution in destination regions.




                                              25
References
Altonji, J. and D. Card (1991). The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
  of Less-Skilled Natives. in John Abowd and Richard Freeman (eds.), Immigration,
  Trade, and the Labor Market, University of Chicago Press.
Balboni, C. (2019). In harm's way? infrastructure investments and the persistence of
  coastal cities. Working Paper .
Bustos, P., B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli (2016). Agricultural productivity and struc-
  tural transformation: Evidence from brazil. American Economic Review 106 (6), 1320­
  65.
Bustos, P., G. Garber, and J. Ponticelli (2020). "Capital accumulation and structural
  transformation". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2), 1037­1094.
Card, D. (2001). Immigrant inflows, native outflows and the local labor market impacts
  of higher immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19.
Caselli, F. (2005). Chapter 9 Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences. Volume
  1, Part A of Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 679 ­ 741. Elsevier.
Conte, B., K. Desmet, D. Nagy, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2020). Local sectoral specializa-
  tion in a warming world. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and C. Smith (2016). Evolving comparative advantage and
  the impact of climate change in agricultural markets: Evidence from 1.7 million fields
  around the world. Journal of Political Economy 124 (1), 205­248.
Cunha, A. P., M. Zeri, K. Deusdar´ a Leal, L. Costa, L. A. Cuartas, J. A. Marengo,
 J. Tomasella, R. M. Vieira, A. A. Barbosa, C. Cunningham, et al. (2019). Extreme
 drought events over brazil from 2011 to 2019. Atmosphere 10 (11), 642.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2012). Temperature shocks and economic
  growth: Evidence from the last half century. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 4 (3), 66­95.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2014). What do we learn from the weather? the
  new climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740­98.
Desch^enes, O. and M. Greenstone (2007). The economic impacts of climate change:
  evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather. American Eco-
  nomic Review 97 (1), 354­385.
Desmet, K. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2015). On the spatial economic impact of global
  warming. Journal of Urban Economics 88, 16­37.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2017). "Trade liberalization and regional dynamics".
  American Economic Review 107 (10), 2908­46.
Dubrovsky, M., M. D. Svoboda, M. Trnka, M. J. Hayes, D. A. Wilhite, Z. Zalud, and
 P. Hlavinka (2009). Application of relative drought indices in assessing climate-change
 impacts on drought conditions in czechia. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 96 (1),
 155­171.

                                           26
Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M.-A. Muendler, and S. J. Redding (2017). Trade and inequal-
  ity: From theory to estimation. The Review of Economic Studies 84 (1), 357­405.

Hornbeck, R. (2012). The enduring impact of the american dust bowl: Short-and long-
  run adjustments to environmental catastrophe. American Economic Review 102 (4),
  1477­1507.

Hsiang, S. and R. E. Kopp (2018). An economist's guide to climate change science.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 3­32.

Jayachandran, S. (2006). Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in
  Developing Countries. Journal of Political Economy 114 (3), 538­575.

Krugman, P. (1987). The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive
  Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale
  Economies. Journal of Development Economics 27 (1-2), 41­55.

Lagakos, D. and M. E. Waugh (2013). Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Pro-
  ductivity Differences. American Economic Review 103 (2), 948­80.

Lucas, R. (1978). "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms". The Bell Journal of
  Economics 9 (2), 508­523.

Lucas, R. (1988). On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary
  Economics .

Mani, M., S. Bandyopadhyay, S. Chonabayashi, A. Markandya, and T. Mosier (2018).
 South Asia's hotspots: The impact of temperature and precipitation changes on living
 standards. The World Bank.

Matsuyama, K. (1992). A Simple Model of Sectoral Adjustment. The Review of Economic
 Studies , 375­388.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695­1725.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2016). Attribution of extreme
  weather events in the context of climate change. National Academies Press.

Oi, W. Y. and T. L. Idson (1999). Firm size and wages. Handbook of labor economics 3,
  2165­2214.

Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008). Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity:
  A Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (2), 234 ­
  250.

Schiermeier, Q. (2018). Droughts, heatwaves and floods: How to tell when climate change
  is to blame. Nature 560 (7717), 20­23.

Schlenker, W. and M. J. Roberts (2009). Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
  damages to us crop yields under climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of sciences 106 (37), 15594­15598.



                                          27
Syverson, C. (2004). Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of
  Political Economy 112 (6), 1181­1222.

Vicente-Serrano, S. M., S. Beguer´
                                 ia, and J. I. L´
                                                opez-Moreno (2010). A multiscalar drought
  index sensitive to global warming: the standardized precipitation evapotranspiration
  index. Journal of climate 23 (7), 1696­1718.




                                           28
Figures

             Figure I: Average temperature in Brazil since 1920




Source: Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, available at https://lr1.uea.ac.
uk/cru/data.


        Figure II: Reported Natural Disasters By Year: 2000-2018




Source: Sistema Nacional de Prote¸
                                 cao e Defesa Civil - SINPDEC




                                            29
 Figure III: Geographical distribution of reported droughts and SPEI


                                       Reported droughts
                  (a) 2000-2010                                  (b) 2011-2018




                                             SPEI
                  (c) 2000-2010                                  (d) 2011-2018




Notes: The upper two maps show the average number of reported droughts per year during
the indicated time period. The lower two maps show the average SPEI multiplied by -1 during
the indicated time period.




                                            30
           Figure IV: Average monthly SPEI for Brazil since 1902




Source: Vicente-Serrano et al. (2010), available at https://spei.csic.es/database.html




                      Figure V: SPEI around drought events




Notes: The figures shows the coefficients of a regression of the SPEI on a constant and 12 leads
and 12 lags of a dummy indicating a reported drought, using monthly data at the municipality
level from 2000 to 2018.




                                              31
           Figure VI: Effects of SPEI on Change in Employment


                 (a) Direct effect                                (b) Indirect effect




Notes: The plot on the left shows the percentage change in employment predicted in a mu-
nicipality moving from the median to the 90th percentile of the distribution of the average
SPEI×(-1) during 2001-2010, which implies an increase by 0.44. The plot on the right shows
the effect when 10% of the origins of migrants received during 1995-2000 move from the median
to the 90th percentile of the distribution of the average SPEI×(-1). The predictions are based
on the estimates in Panel B of Table VI.




                                             32
                Figure VII: Effects of SPEI on Migration Flows


                  (a) Direct effect                                 (b) Indirect effect
                                              Net flows




                                               Inflows




                                              Outflows




Notes: The plots on the left show the percentage point change in the 2005-2010 net-, in-
or out-migration rate of a municipality moving from the median to the 90th percentile of the
distribution of the average SPEI×(-1) during 2001-2010, which implies an increase by 0.44. The
plots on the right show the effects when 10% of the origins of migrants received during 1995-2000
move from the median to the 90th percentile of the distribution of the average SPEI×(-1). The
predictions are based on the estimates in Panel B of Table VII.


                                               33
Figure VIII: Firm Exposure to Climate Shocks via Past Workers' Flows
                             - by Sector


    (a) Initial connections to drought areas        (b) Initial connections to dry areas




Figure IX: Firm Exposure to Climate Shocks via Past Workers' Flows -
                               by Size


    (a) Initial connections to drought areas        (b) Initial connections to dry areas




                                               34
Tables

     Table I: Number of reported droughts and excess dryness index
                          (SPEI-12), 2000-2010

                                        (1)          (2)                (3)        (4)        (5)
  VARIABLES                          # droughts 1(drought> 0)        # droughts # droughts # droughts

  SPEI-12                             -0.0703***      -0.0601***
                                       (0.00311)       (0.00251)
  # months with SPEI-12<=-1                                           0.0126***
                                                                      (0.000844)
  # months with SPEI-12<=-1.5                                                        0.0137***
                                                                                     (0.00123)
  # months with SPEI-12<=-2                                                                        0.0233***
                                                                                                   (0.00209)

  Observations                          46,794          46,794          46,794        46,794         46,794
  R-squared                             0.495            0.529          0.492          0.490         0.490
  Year and AMC FE                         y                y              y              y             y
  RuralShare1991 x year FE                y                y              y              y             y
  Dist Coast x year FE                    y                y              y              y             y
  Macro-region x year FE                  y                y              y              y             y
  First Stage F-stat                     513              578            224            124           124
  Notes: First stage F-stat is the Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic. Standard errors are clustered at the AMC
 level. A control for the number of reported floods is included in all columns.




                                                      35
                                       Table II: Effects of droughts on agricultural outcomes


     Panel A: Reported droughts
                                           (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)               (5)                         (6)
                                    log area planted   log area harvested    log value production log area planted log area harvested         log value production
      VARIABLES                        2000-2010           2000-2010              2000-2010          2011-2018         2011-2018                   2011-2018

      # Droughts                        0.000702           -0.0411***             -0.0923***            -0.0593***          -0.0879***              -0.135***
                                        (0.00460)           (0.00597)              (0.00714)             (0.00637)           (0.00821)              (0.00917)

      Observations                       46,228               46,224                46,224                33,599              33,549                 33,548
      R-squared                           0.960               0.949                 0.943                  0.952               0.937                 0.943
      Year and AMC FE                       y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y
      RuralShare1991 x year FE              y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y
      Dist Coast x year FE                  y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y

     Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                           (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)               (5)                         (6)
36




                                    log area planted   log area harvested    log value production log area planted log area harvested         log value production
      VARIABLES                        2000-2010           2000-2010              2000-2010          2011-2018         2011-2018                   2011-2018

      SPEI-12 ×(-1)                    -0.0158***          -0.0274***             -0.0524***            -0.0467***          -0.0699***             -0.0741***
                                        (0.00294)           (0.00321)              (0.00380)             (0.00304)           (0.00354)              (0.00358)

      Observations                       46,228               46,224                46,224                33,599              33,549                 33,548
      R-squared                           0.960               0.949                 0.943                  0.952               0.937                 0.943
      Year and AMC FE                       y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y
      RuralShare1991 x year FE              y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y
      Dist Coast x year FE                  y                   y                     y                      y                   y                     y
      Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the AMC level. A control for the number of reported floods is included in all columns. Data are at the yearly level and
     range from 2000 to 2010.
   Table III: Direct and Indirect effects on capital outcomes, yearly
                                2000-2010



Panel A: Reported droughts
                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)
 VARIABLES                                                     log deposits    log loans    K outflows K outflows

 # Droughts                                                     -0.0124***     -0.0168**     -0.00275       -0.00539
                                                                 (0.00388)     (0.00694)    (0.00426)      (0.00436)
 Indirect exposure to droughts via bank networks x(-1))                                                    0.355***
                                                                                                             (0.109)

 Observations                                                     33,380        33,380        33,380        33,380
 R-squared                                                        0.984          0.970        0.813          0.813
 Year and AMC FE                                                    y              y            y              y
 Rural91 x year FE                                                  y              y            y              y
 DistCoast x year FE                                                y              y            y              y
 Macro x year FE                                                    y              y            y              y

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)
 VARIABLES                                                      log deposits    log loans   K outflows K outflows

 SPEI-12 ×(-1)                                                   -0.00541*     0.0148***    -0.0161***     -0.0178***
                                                                 (0.00281)     (0.00470)     (0.00284)      (0.00294)
 Indirect exposure to SPEI-12 ×(-1) via bank networks                                                       0.0465**
                                                                                                             (0.0235)

 Observations                                                      33,380        33,380        33,380        33,380
 R-squared                                                         0.984         0.970         0.814         0.814
 Year and AMC FE                                                     y             y             y             y
 Rural91 x year FE                                                   y             y             y             y
 DistCoast x year FE                                                 y             y             y             y
 Macro x year FE                                                     y             y             y             y
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. A control for the number of reported floods is included
in all columns.




                                                         37
         Table IV: Capital outcomes, decadal changes 2000-2010


Panel A: Reported droughts
                                                                   (1)          (2)        (3)
                                                                log deposits  log loans K outflows
 VARIABLES

 # Droughts                                                         -0.0441         0.0165       -0.0817**
                                                                   (0.0403)        (0.0681)       (0.0367)
 Indirect exposure to droughts via bank networks x(-1))                                            0.114
                                                                                                  (0.0736)

 Observations                                                       2,799            2,799         2,795
 R-squared                                                          0.168            0.146         0.060
 Macro FE                                                             y                y             y
 Controls                                                             y                y             y

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                                                   (1)          (2)                 (3)
                                                                log deposits  log loans          K outflows
 VARIABLES

 SPEI-12 ×(-1)                                                      -0.0534        -0.295***       0.0530*
                                                                   (0.0360)         (0.0580)      (0.0314)
 Indirect exposure to SPEI-12 ×(-1) via bank networks                                             2.228***
                                                                                                   (0.347)

 Observations                                                       2,799            2,799          2,795
 R-squared                                                          0.168            0.155          0.081
 Macro FE                                                             y                y              y
 Controls                                                             y                y              y
 Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The set of additional controls at the municipality
level includes the share of population living in rural areas, log income per capita, literacy rate, population
density and changes in soy and maize potential yields.




                                                     38
                    Table V: Change in Population: 2000-2010


Panel A: Reported droughts
                                               (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
                                              log Pop
 VARIABLES                                      all            all           all         rural        urban

 # Droughts                                  -0.0401*** -0.0135*         -0.0391***      -0.0171 -0.0688***
                                              (0.00629) (0.00698)         (0.0110)      (0.0140)  (0.0176)
 Indirect exposure to droughts x(-1))                                    0.0599***       0.0148   0.156***
                                                                          (0.0194)      (0.0243)  (0.0325)

 Observations                                   4,254         4,249         4,248        2,126         2,122
 R-squared                                      0.110         0.176         0.178        0.220         0.147
 mean Y                                          .159         .159          .159          .145         .173
 Macro-region FE                                   y            y             y             y            y
 Controls                                          n            y             y             y            y

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                               (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
                                              log Pop
 VARIABLES                                      all              all           all         rural       urban

 SPEI-12 ×(-1)                      -0.0645*** -0.0595*** -0.130***                     -0.119***    -0.144***
                                     (0.00683)  (0.00701)  (0.0185)                      (0.0282)     (0.0240)
 Indirect exposure to SPEI-12 ×(-1)                       0.113***                      0.0731**      0.151***
                                                           (0.0253)                      (0.0365)     (0.0344)

 Observations                                   4,254          4,249         4,248        2,126         2,122
 R-squared                                      0.122          0.190         0.194        0.238         0.159
 mean Y                                          .159          .159           .159        .145          .173
 Macro-region FE                                   y             y              y           y             y
 Controls                                          n             y              y           y             y
 Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The set of additional controls at the municipal-
ity level includes the share of population living in rural areas, log income per capita, literacy rate, population
density and changes in soy and maize potential yields.




                                                        39
                     Table VI: Change in Employment: 2000-2010


Panel A: Reported droughts
                                              (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)
                                              log L
 VARIABLES                                    all        agriculture     manufacturing     services      other

 # Droughts                                 -0.0414**     -0.0664**           0.0286       -0.0420* -0.0569**
                                             (0.0164)      (0.0273)         (0.0533)       (0.0226) (0.0230)
 Indirect exposure to droughts x(-1))       0.100***       0.188***          -0.0466       0.190***   0.0649
                                             (0.0294)      (0.0500)         (0.0985)       (0.0405) (0.0424)

 Observations                                 4,248           4,248          4,241           4,248       4,248
 R-squared                                    0.128           0.058          0.080           0.082       0.043
 mean Y                                        .185           .003            .247            .293       .302
 Macro-region FE                                 y              y               y               y          y
 Controls                                        y              y               y               y          y

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)
                                               log L
 VARIABLES                                     all         agriculture    manufacturing      services       other

 SPEI-12 ×(-1)                      -0.0885***              -0.247***        0.188**        -0.130***     -0.100***
                                     (0.0236)                (0.0427)        (0.0794)        (0.0328)      (0.0334)
 Indirect exposure to SPEI-12 ×(-1) 0.0894***                0.193***          -0.120       0.122***       0.140***
                                     (0.0334)                (0.0594)         (0.116)        (0.0466)      (0.0466)

 Observations                                  4,248           4,248           4,241           4,248        4,248
 R-squared                                     0.130           0.070           0.083           0.080        0.044
 mean Y                                         .185            .003           .247             .293         .302
 Macro-region FE                                  y               y              y                y            y
 Controls                                         y               y              y                y            y
 Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The set of additional controls at the municipality
level includes the share of population living in rural areas, log income per capita, literacy rate, population density
and changes in soy and maize potential yields.




                                                         40
                Table VII: Migration Flows between 2005-2010


Panel A: Reported droughts
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                              Net           In           Out          Net          Net
 VARIABLES                                    all           all          all         rural        urban

 # Droughts                               -0.0253***    -0.0226***      0.00274   -0.0123**     -0.0406***
                                           (0.00420)     (0.00288)    (0.00307)   (0.00502)      (0.00747)
 Indirect exposure to droughts x(-1))      0.0186**      0.0125**      -0.00612   0.0210**       0.0284**
                                           (0.00792)     (0.00571)    (0.00582)   (0.00976)       (0.0139)

 Observations                                4,248         4,248        4,248       2,128         2,120
 R-squared                                   0.212         0.290        0.166       0.210         0.148
 Macro-region FE                               y             y            y           y             y
 Controls                                      y             y            y           y             y

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
                                              Net           In           Out           Net           Net
 VARIABLES                                    all           all          all          rural         urban

 SPEI-12 ×(-1)                      -0.0405*** -0.0182*** 0.0222***                -0.0410***    -0.0445***
                                     (0.00731)  (0.00618) (0.00464)                 (0.00868)     (0.0120)
 Indirect exposure to SPEI-12 ×(-1) 0.0223**    0.0342***  0.0119*                    0.0110      0.0357**
                                      (0.0103)  (0.00854) (0.00676)                  (0.0115)     (0.0181)

 Observations                                4,248         4,248         4,248        2,128         2,120
 R-squared                                   0.221         0.285         0.207        0.234         0.150
 Macro-region FE                               y             y             y            y             y
 Controls                                      y             y             y            y             y
 Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The set of additional controls at the municipality
level includes the share of population living in rural areas, log income per capita, literacy rate, population
density and changes in soy and maize potential yields.




                                                     41
                      Table VIII: Individual level regressions


Panel A: Reported droughts
                               (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)             (5)          (6)
 VARIABLES                   HS grad        Empl       log Income   HS grad          Empl      log Income

 Migrant              0.0483*** 0.0119***              0.193***     0.0234*** 0.0168***         0.192***
                      (0.00278) (0.00261)              (0.00865)    (0.00776) (0.00342)         (0.0227)
 Migrant × # Droughts -0.181*** 0.0689***              -0.274***     0.0257** 0.182***          0.418***
                       (0.0211) (0.00477)               (0.0379)     (0.0118) (0.00981)         (0.0167)

 Observations               5,243,677    6,273,292     4,607,486    5,243,677   6,273,292      4,607,486
 R-squared                    0.095        0.103         0.255        0.095       0.099          0.249
 Fixed effects               destin.      destin.       destin.       origin      origin         origin

Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                   (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)
 VARIABLES                       HS grad        Empl        log Income   HS grad        Empl       log Income

 Migrant                   0.00132  0.0307***               0.123***     0.0292*** 0.0591***        0.289***
                          (0.00601) (0.00250)               (0.00910)    (0.00655) (0.00435)        (0.0226)
 Migrant × SPEI-12 ×(-1) -0.0943*** 0.0397***               -0.139***      0.0101  0.0754***        0.178***
                           (0.0126) (0.00445)                (0.0261)     (0.0105) (0.00640)        (0.0189)

 Observations                   5,243,677     6,273,292     4,607,486    5,243,677    6,273,292    4,607,486
 R-squared                        0.094         0.103         0.254        0.095        0.098        0.248
 Fixed effects                   destin.       destin.       destin.       origin       origin       origin
 Notes: Data come from the Brazilian Census 2010 and include male individuals aged 18-64. M igrant is an
indicator for having resided in a different municipality in 2005. Droughts and SPEI-12×(-1) refer to the origin
municipality of migrants. Standard errors clustered at destination municipality are reported in parenthesis.




                                                       42
                           Table IX: Workers' Flows to Firms Exposed to Climate Change, 2006-2010

                                                                             Panel A: Reported droughts
                                                                 (1)             (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                            Loi(d)2006-2010
      VARIABLES                                                  Lavgi
                                                                 all              all        all        agri    manuf     services    micro    medium       large

      firm connection to origin × 1(#droughts> p75)                            0.257***   0.388***    0.638*** 0.466*** 0.226***     0.714*** 0.463*** 0.315***
                                                                               (0.0395)   (0.0527)    (0.0763) (0.0781) (0.0686)      (0.0297) (0.0307) (0.0646)
      firm connection to origin                              0.642***          0.397***   0.462***    0.476*** 0.406*** 0.446***     0.319*** 0.418*** 0.492***
                                                             (0.0149)          (0.0154)   (0.0144)    (0.0449) (0.0210) (0.0171)     (0.00981) (0.0101) (0.0177)

      Observations                                           1,415,758   1,415,758 1,415,758 67,756             248,742   983,990    477,882    711,412    223,762
      R-squared                                                0.267       0.393     0.683      0.649            0.673     0.708      0.627      0.647      0.696
      mean Y                                                     .13         .13       .13        .13             .13       .13        .13        .13        .13
      destination AMC FE                                          y           y         y          y               y         y          y          y          y
      origin FE                                                   y           y         y          y               y         y          y          y          y
43




      firm FE                                                     n           n         y          y               y         y          y          y          y
                                                                      Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                                                (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)
                                                           Loi(d)2006-2010
        VARIABLES                                               Lavgi
                                                                 all             all         all        agri    manuf     services   micro     medium      large

        firm connection to origin × 1(SPEI-12 < p25)                           0.209***   0.322***    0.486*** 0.369*** 0.350*** 0.657*** 0.444*** 0.255***
                                                                               (0.0375)   (0.0480)    (0.0798) (0.0738) (0.0484) (0.0494) (0.0351) (0.0545)
        firm connection to origin                            0.621***          0.424***   0.506***    0.561*** 0.436*** 0.502*** 0.388*** 0.479*** 0.529***
                                                             (0.0132)          (0.0156)   (0.0198)    (0.0470) (0.0213) (0.0285) (0.0174) (0.0167) (0.0224)

        Observations                                        1,415,758         1,415,758   1,415,758   67,756   248,742    983,990    478,006   711,306    223,730
        R-squared                                             0.257             0.356       0.663     0.612     0.662      0.675      0.561     0.610      0.683
        mean Y                                                 .13               .13         .13       .13       .13        .13        .13       .13        .13
        destination AMC FE                                      y                 y           y         y         y          y          y         y          y
        origin FE                                               y                 y           y         y         y          y          y         y          y
        firm FE                                                 n                 n           y         y         y          y          y         y          y
     Notes: Standard errors clustered at destination municipality reported in parenthesis.
                            Table X: Workers' Flows to Firms Exposed to Climate Change, 2011-2017

                                                                              Panel A: Reported droughts
                                                                 (1)              (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                            Loi(d)2006-2010
      VARIABLES                                                  Lavgi
                                                                 all              all         all       agri     manuf     services     micro      medium        large

      firm connection to origin × 1(#droughts> p75)                             0.423***   0.754***   0.746*** 0.877***   0.546***    0.928***     0.697***     0.666***
                                                                                (0.0772)    (0.120)   (0.0711) (0.0965)   (0.0828)     (0.0359)    (0.0397)      (0.142)
      firm connection to origin                              0.756***           0.414***   0.489***   0.482*** 0.401***   0.507***    0.341***     0.482***     0.530***
                                                             (0.0117)           (0.0139)   (0.0156)   (0.0440) (0.0187)   (0.0196)    (0.00957)    (0.0142)     (0.0198)

      Observations                                           2,265,438         2,265,438 2,265,438 103,258      331,586   1,654,030    863,664     1,106,858    290,524
      R-squared                                                0.295             0.432      0.699      0.695     0.701      0.719       0.676        0.673       0.710
      mean Y                                                    .158              .158       .158      .158       .158       .158        .158         .158        .158
      destination AMC FE                                          y                 y          y         y          y          y           y            y           y
      origin FE                                                   y                 y          y         y          y          y           y            y           y
44




      firm FE                                                     n                 n          y         y          y          y           y            y           y
                                                                             Panel B: Excess dryness index
                                                                (1)               (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)
                                                           Loi(d)2006-2010
        VARIABLES                                               Lavgi
                                                                 all              all        all        agri    manuf     services     micro      medium        large

        firm connection to origin × 1(SPEI-12 < p25)                           0.305***    0.474***   0.522*** 0.610***   0.481***    0.684***    0.552***     0.399***
                                                                               (0.0340)    (0.0426)   (0.0853) (0.0645)   (0.0486)    (0.0508)    (0.0462)     (0.0458)
        firm connection to origin                            0.712***          0.480***    0.592***   0.636*** 0.456***   0.617***    0.489***    0.610***     0.620***
                                                             (0.0110)          (0.0177)    (0.0275)   (0.0464) (0.0186)   (0.0378)    (0.0253)    (0.0250)     (0.0297)

        Observations                                        2,265,438          2,265,438 2,265,438    103,258   331,586   1,654,030   863,902     1,106,626    290,564
        R-squared                                             0.276              0.358     0.663       0.641     0.674      0.666      0.548        0.607       0.689
        mean Y                                                 .158               .158      .158        .158      .158       .158      .158          .158        .158
        destination AMC FE                                       y                  y         y           y         y          y         y             y           y
        origin FE                                                y                  y         y           y         y          y         y             y           y
        firm FE                                                  n                  n         y           y         y          y         y             y           y
     Notes: Standard errors clustered at destination municipality reported in parenthesis.
