                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MICRO RISKS AND PARETO IMPROVING POLICIES WITH LOW INTEREST RATES


                                     Mark A. Aguiar
                                     Manuel Amador
                                     Cristina Arellano

                                    Working Paper 28996
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28996


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mark A. Aguiar, Manuel Amador, and Cristina Arellano. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Micro Risks and Pareto Improving Policies with Low Interest Rates
Mark A. Aguiar, Manuel Amador, and Cristina Arellano
NBER Working Paper No. 28996
July 2021
JEL No. E6,H3

                                            ABSTRACT

We provide sufficient conditions for the feasibility of a Pareto-improving fiscal policy when the
risk-free interest rate on government bonds is below the growth rate (r<g). We do so in the class
of incomplete markets models pioneered by Bewley-Huggett-Aiyagari, but we allow for
an arbitrary amount of ex ante heterogeneity in terms of preferences and income risk. We
consider both the case of dynamic inefficiency as well as the more plausible case of dynamic
efficiency. The key condition is that seigniorage revenue raised by government bonds exceeds
the increase in the interest rate times the initial capital stock. The Pareto improving fiscal policies
weakly expand every agent's budget set at every point in time. The policies improve risk sharing
and potentially guide the economy to a more efficient level of capital. In simulations,
we find that the government must rely on moderate levels of debt issuance along the transition
to the new steady state.

Mark A. Aguiar                                     Cristina Arellano
Department of Economics                            Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Princeton University                               Research Department
Fisher Hall                                        90 Hennepin Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021                           Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER                                           arellano.cristina@gmail.com
maguiar@princeton.edu

Manuel Amador
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com
    Micro Risks and Pareto Improving Policies with
                  Low Interest Rates
        Mark Aguiar                       Manuel Amador                             Cristina Arellano
       Princeton University               University of Minnesota,           Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
            and NBER               Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
                                                 and NBER

                                                 June 28, 2021



                                                     Abstract


           We provide su cient conditions for the feasibility of a Pareto-improving scal policy
       when the risk-free interest rate on government bonds is below the growth rate ( < ). We do
       so in the class of incomplete markets models pioneered by Bewley-Hugge -Aiyagari, but we
       allow for an arbitrary amount of ex ante heterogeneity in terms of preferences and income
       risk. We consider both the case of dynamic ine ciency as well as the more plausible case
       of dynamic e ciency. e key condition is that seigniorage revenue raised by government
       bonds exceeds the increase in the interest rate times the initial capital stock.  e Pareto
       improving scal policies weakly expand every agent's budget set at every point in time. e
       policies improve risk sharing and potentially guide the economy to a more e cient level of
       capital. In simulations, we nd that the government must rely on moderate levels of debt
       issuance along the transition to the new steady state.



1      Introduction
In this paper we provide su cient conditions for a Pareto improvement when the risk-free inter-
est rate on government bonds is below the growth rate ( < ). We do so in the class of incomplete
markets models pioneered by Bewley-Hugge -Aiyagari, but we allow for an arbitrary amount of
ex ante heterogeneity in terms of preferences and income risk. We consider both the case of dy-
namic ine ciency as well as the more plausible case of dynamic e ciency. e paper augments
the classic dynamic ine ciency condition of Samuelson (1958) and Diamond (1965) by allowing
       e views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
neapolis or the Federal Reserve System. Contact information: maguiar@princeton.edu; amador.manuel@gmail.com;
arellano.cristina@gmail.com


                                                          1
for rich heterogeneity along dimensions other than age, including idiosyncratic income risk, and
considering scenarios in which the economy is dynamically e cient, due to a mark-up that drives
a wedge between the marginal product of capital and the risk-free interest rate. By looking at
Pareto improvements rather than maximizing a utilitarian social welfare function, the paper also
complements the important work of Aiyagari and McGra an (1998) and D´           avila, Hong, Krusell
and R´ ios-Rull (2012). It is the absence of cross-agent utility comparisons, or even within-person
but cross-time tradeo s in our implementation, that distinguishes our Pareto metric from the
more common utilitarian welfare measures.1
    We analyze scal policies where the instruments available to the government are public debt,
linear taxes/subsidies, and lump-sum transfers. We study policies that leave all a er-tax factor
prices (and pure pro ts, if there are any) weakly greater at all dates, and where there are no lump-
sum taxes. By weakly expanding the budget set of all agents at all dates, these policies necessarily
generate a Pareto improvement. We study when these Pareto-improving scal policies are feasible,
and consider versions that lead to both crowding out and crowding in of capital.
    We establish su cient conditions for the existence of these feasible Pareto-improving policies
that involve only the knowledge of the aggregate savings schedule (that is, total private savings
as a function of interest rates and government transfers) and technology (including the size of
a mark-up, if any). In particular, the short and long run elasticities of aggregate household sav-
ings play a crucial role in determining feasibility. We emphasize that the relevant elasticities
are the ones governing the aggregate savings schedule (and technology). One advantage of this
"macro" approach is that conditional on these aggregate elasticities, the nature and extent of the
underlying heterogeneity across individuals is not relevant for assessing feasibility.2
    We conduct the analysis in an environment that builds closely on the canonical model of
Aiyagari (1994), where precautionary savings motives reduce the equilibrium level of interest
rates.     e main restriction we impose on preferences is zero wealth e ect on labor supply, as
in the well known "GHH" preferences of Greenwood, Hercowitz and Hu man (1988), and omit
aggregate risk considerations.3
    To understand the role of the aggregate savings schedule, consider starting from a laissez-faire
equilibrium (zero debt, zero taxes, zero transfers) in which < , and consider a government that
issues some amount of debt  . All else equal, this will crowd out capital and increase the risk-
   1 Our focus on Pareto-improving policies rather than policies that maximize a utilitarian metric has an antecedent

in Werning (2007), who explores Pareto-e cient tax policies in a Mirrelesian environment.
   2   ere are of course disadvantages to this approach. For example, our approach rules out the use of lump sum
taxes (even if available) and as a result, the policy cannot exploit the link between private borrowing constraints
and government liquidity identi ed by Woodford (1990) and Aiyagari and McGra an (1998). ose policies however
would require information on the underlying heterogeneities, frictions and intertemporal trade-o s of agents in
addition to knowledge about the aggregate savings behavior.
   3 We also omit idiosyncratic return risk, as in the model of Angeletos (2007).




                                                         2
free rate, assuming that aggregate savings is increasing in . Factor prices respond to the policy,
with increases in the return to wealth and decreases in the wage. Our focus on scal policies that
keep all factor prices weakly greater calls for the government to o set the decline in wages. e
government has two approaches: it can subsidize wages to keep the a er tax wage from falling,
or it can subsidize the rental rate of capital to forestall the decline in capital. Which approach is
  scally cheaper depends on the dynamic e ciency of the economy. Taking the case in which the
economy is dynamically ine cient, the crowding out of capital increases income available for
consumption, as in Diamond (1965), making this the more e cient approach. e government
subsidizes wages to maintain equivalence between the ex post a er tax wage and that of the
original laissez-faire equilibrium. We show that the scal cost of this policy is bounded above
by  × 0 , where  is the change in the net interest rate and 0 is the initial capital stock
(in e ciency units with exogenous labor-augmenting productivity growth).4 is is the case in
the new steady state, and we show how a similar condition holds for the transition path. In the
new steady state, revenues are the seigniorage obtained from bond issuance, which in the case
of exogenous technological growth at rate , is ( - ) > 0. If this exceeds  × 0 , then a
Pareto improvement is feasible, as has increased and a er tax wages remain constant,5 making
all agents weakly be er o and those with positive assets strictly be er o .
     If we allow for product market mark-ups of su cient size such that the economy is dynam-
ically e cient, a more e cient scal policy is one that subsidizes the rental rate of capital and
avoids crowding out.       e rst scal policy we consider for this case subsidizes the rental rate
just enough to keep capital at the initial laissez faire level. is plan guarantees that output, as
well as untaxed wages and pro ts, are also unchanged. e su cient condition for the feasibil-
ity of a Pareto improving policy discussed above continues to su ce: the costs of this plan can
again be bounded by  × 0 , and the revenue remains ( - ) . While the trade o remains
identical in terms of the elements, the absence of crowding out makes it more di cult to achieve
a Pareto improvement. is follows from the fact that the additional debt needs to be completely
absorbed as new wealth (rather than replacing capital) by private households. All else equal, a
given amount of debt therefore demands a larger increase in the interest rate ( ), raising the
cost of the policy.
     Given that product market mark-ups depress capital in the laissez faire equilibrium, we also
consider the feasibility of Pareto improving scal policies that crowd in capital towards a more
e cient level. For this case, we construct scal policies that subsidize capital and tax labor and
pro ts, such that a er-tax wages and pro ts remain at the laissez faire levels. ese are feasible
   4 More precisely, the condition is    × ( 0 - ), where  0 is the loosest private household borrowing constraint.
To keep the notation streamlined in the introduction, we omit this term.
    5 Contrast this with the utilitarian metric of D´
                                                    avila et al. (2012), which requires that a change in relative factor
prices improved the lot of the poorest households relative to the richest.


                                                           3
Pareto-improving policies if the tax and seignorage revenue can cover the cost of the capital
subsidy. e su cient condition here incorporates the additional net revenue for the government,
which is  - ( + ) . We nd that this net revenue tends to be larger in the long-run than
in the short-run because of a lower savings elasticity to interest rates in the short-run; that is,
  overshoots along the transition. is property implies that along the transition debt issuance
allows the government to nance the Pareto improvement. Rather than the traditional crowding
out, the use of debt to engineer the transition to a higher level of capital makes debt and capital
investment complements rather than substitutes.
    In all cases we analyze, the Pareto improving scal policies weakly expand every agent's
budget set at every point in time. is avoids the trade o between young and old in the classic
over-lapping generations se ings. It also avoids the trade o between the poor and rich that is
the focus of the utilitarian metric common in the Bewley-Hugge -Aiyagari literature. e la er
can be motivated by an ex ante "behind the veil of ignorance" rationale, or, given ex ante homo-
geneity, by a "renewal" argument based on the fact that all agents eventually transit through all
states (see Aiyagari and McGra an (1998) for a related discussion). Given that income and wealth
di erences persist across generations (Che y, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014)), that some agents
have limited access to nancial markets (Braxton, Herkenho and Phillips (2020)), and agents
may value inter-temporal tradeo s di erently (Krusell and Smith (1998)), working through bud-
get sets is a robust exercise.    at said, the Pareto criterion is a high threshold, and as such, it
should not be viewed as a necessary condition for policy intervention. But certainly, the avail-
ability of a Pareto improvement provides a su cient condition for a government response. It is
in this spirit we provide su cient conditions for such a scenario.
    As in any model in which seigniorage (or a liquidity premium) plays an important scal role,
the willingness of private households to hold additional government bonds without a large in-
crease in the interest rate is key.    e empirical literature on whether and to what extent gov-
ernment borrowing increases the interest rate is challenged by identi cation concerns and has
produced numbers with no clear consensus.6 eory provides some guidance, which we discuss
below, but one must keep in mind that in heterogeneous agent models aggregate elasticities have a
complex relationship with individual preference parameters and idiosyncratic shocks. We there-
fore use simulations to assess the magnitude of the aggregate savings elasticity and the feasibility
of Pareto-improving scal policies.
    We present simulation results with Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences, and calibrate the dy-
namically e cient economy using the income process of Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) and
the historical data on - in the U.S. We nd scope for Pareto improving policies for a wide range
   6 See,
        for example, the survey papers by Bernheim (1987a) and Seater (1993) that examine the empirical evidence
and seem to draw opposing conclusions on Ricardian equivalence.



                                                       4
of debt policies and for policies with and without capital crowding in. Our baseline experiment
considers a Pareto improving scal policy plan that keeps capital as in the laissez faire economy
and slowly increases debt to the average in the data. Welfare gains arise because scal policy
improves risk sharing as households receive positive transfers, and their wealth increases due to
a higher return. Welfare gains are larger early in the transition re ecting the larger government
transfers nanced by debt issuance.
       e second scal policy plan we consider consists of the same debt path as the baseline, but
with capital increasing towards the Golden Rule where the marginal product of capital equals
the rate of depreciation. We nd that this scal plan is also Pareto improving and generates
even larger welfare gains to all households because here policy not only helps with risk sharing
but also with e cient supply expansions. Debt is an essential part of these scal policies, as it
provides the seigniorage revenue that is used for transfers to households and subsidies for capital
expansions. We do nd, however, that seigniorage revenue from bonds has limits and features a
La er Curve: more debt increases interest rates and therefore the relative cost for servicing the
debt. However, in our calibration, the upper bound on debt for Pareto improving scal policies is
about twice the level of output.
       is paper is part of a fast-growing recent literature exploring scal policy in environments
with persistently low risk-free interest rates. Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2020) use a sample of ad-
vance economies to document that - is o en negative and develop a model to study its implica-
tions for debt sustainability.7 Blanchard (2019)'s presidential address to the American Economics
Association gave a major stimulus to the question of debt sustainability under low interest rates.
Other recent papers are Basse o and Cui (2018), Reis (2020), Brunnermeier, Merkel and Sannikov
(2020), and Ball and Mankiw (2021). Our paper incorporates features of this previous work, such
as borrowing constraints and the potential role of markups in opening a wedge between the
interest rate and the marginal product of capital. However, our focus is on designing Pareto im-
proving scal policies in the presence of individual heterogeneity and incomplete markets, as in
the Bewely-Hugge -Aiyagari tradition, and the role played by < .
    Our work also contributes to the literature studying the e ects of scal policies in models
with heterogeneous agents. Heathcote (2005) shows the failure of Ricardian equivalence in this
class of models, as temporary tax cuts nanced with public debt tend to increase consumption
and output as they give households that are at the borrowing constraint extra resources that are
spent. Heathcote, Storesle en and Violante (2017) study optimal labor tax progressivity in this
environment and illustrate sharply the trade o between insurance and incentives motives in
response to the tax system. Dyrda and Pedroni (2020) study the optimal tax system in a quantita-
tive version of the idiosyncratic risk model. Also recently, Bhandari, Evans, Golosov and Sargent
  7 See   also Mauro and Zhou (2021) and Jord`
                                             a, Knoll, Kuvshinov, Schularick and Taylor (2019).


                                                         5
(2020) explore optimal scal and monetary policy within the context of the heterogeneous agent
model with nominal rigidities and aggregate shocks.8 All of these papers focus on a utilitarian
welfare criteria, and do not analyze the implications of < .
      e paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 lays out the environment; Section 3 provides the
su cient conditions for a Pareto improving scal policy; Section 3.4 discusses the aggregate
interest-elasticity of household savings; Section 4 provides numerical examples; and Section 5
concludes.


2      Environment
   e model hews closely to canonical environment of Aiyagari (1994). However, in many ways,
our environment is more general. We allow for permanent di erences in the income process or
preferences across households. e framework also allows for product market mark-ups, driving
a wedge between the marginal product of capital and the return on risk-free bonds. However, we
do impose one assumption on preferences; namely, there is no wealth e ect on labor supply. is
greatly simpli es tracing the impact of a change in interest rates on labor supply. In particular, the
wage is a su cient statistic for pinning down aggregate labor, regardless of other factor prices.9
    We suppress exogenous growth in the text, but show how the model extends in the usual
straight-forward way (given homothetic preferences) to growth in Appendix C. As a rule of
thumb, the key condition < 0 for an interest rate is replaced with the corresponding <
where denotes the constant exogenous growth rate of labor-augmenting productivity.


2.1     Households
   ere are a measure-one continuum of households. At time , each household, indexed by 
[0, 1], draws an idiosyncratic labor productivity  0. We do not impose that each household
faces the same stochastic process for idiosyncratic risk.    at is, some households may face a
permanently lower level of productivity or additional risk. We impose a cross-sectional indepen-
dence restriction below that rules out aggregate productivity risk.
     If the household provides  0 units of labor, it receives         in labor earnings,   is the
equilibrium wage rate per e ciency unit of labor. Without loss of generality, we assume labor
taxes are paid by the rm.
    8 See also Le Grand and Ragot (2020).
                                        Other recent papers that have studied the implications of transfers and gov-
ernment debt in heterogeneous agent models with price rigidities are Oh and Reis (2012) and Hagedorn, Manovskii
and Mitman (2019).
   9 However, as we will see below, the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is not important for the analysis, as the

policies that we explore maintain a constant a er-tax wage.



                                                         6
    A household may also receive pro t income. We model this as payment to entrepreneurial
talent, which, like labor productivity, is an endowment that may follow a stochastic process.
Let denote household 's return to entrepreneurial talent. De ne aggregate household pro t
income as  =             , and household    share as   / . Household faces a potentially
stochastic process for that determines its share of aggregate pro ts, with the restriction that
    [0, 1] and         = 1 for all .
    At the start of period , the household has units of nancial assets, which receive a risk-free
return (1 + ) in period . Le ing  0 denote lump sum transfers from the government, which
is uniform across , the household's budget constraint is:

                                    +    +1            +        + (1 + )         + ,

where is consumption in period .
     Households are subject to a (potentially idiosyncratic) borrowing constraint             for all
 . e fact that some households may have a tighter constraint than others captures the possi-
bility that access to nancial markets may be heterogeneous. Let  inf              denote the loosest
borrowing constraint faced by households.10
       e main restriction on preferences is the absence of a wealth e ect on labor supply, as in
the well known "GHH" preferences of Greenwood et al. (1988). In particular, let ( , )  -
  ( ) for some convex function . We write preferences recursively as          = ( , E +1 ), where
    is household 's value and E represents expectation over +1 , conditional on            = and
the household's stochastic process for productivity.        is notation nests both standard "CRRA"
utility as well as the recursive utility of Kreps and Porteus (1978) and Epstein and Zin (1989). We
incorporate the la er to explore the di erent roles of risk aversion and inter-temporal elasticity
of substitution in the feasibility of a Pareto improvement.
       e idiosyncratic state variables for an individual household are  ( , , ), and the aggregate
states are the (perfect foresight) sequences for factor prices { , }, aggregate pro ts { }, and
transfers { }. e household's problem can be wri en in levels as follows

                 ( , , )=          max           ( ( , ), E      +1 (   , , ))                                   (1)
                                , [0, ¯ ],  0

                                                subject to: +                +  + (1 + ) + .

    Note that as preferences can vary across households, we can accommodate distinct labor
  10 We assume below that the borrowing constraint is always above the natural borrowing limit. See Bhandari,
Evans, Golosov and Sargent (2017) and Heathcote (2005) for a discussion on the role of such ad-hoc limits in breaking
Ricardian equivalence.



                                                           7
supply elasticities, as well as hand-to-mouth households.11 In particular, the framework nests
the classic Aiyagari (1994) with inelastic labor supply.12
    Assuming an interior labor supply decision, household 's rst-order condition with respect
to labor is:

                                                     ( )=           .

     is implies a policy function        ( ), where the subscript captures the equilibrium wage at period
                                     ,
 .
    Similarly, we let , ( , , ) and , ( , , ) denote the optimal saving and consumption policy
functions respectively. e aggregate stock of savings chosen in period and carried into period
  + 1 is +1  , ( , , ) .
    We now state our independence assumption. Let z  { } [0,1] denote the state vector for
productivity across households at time .13 Let

                                                                        -1
                                    ( ,z )            ,   ( )   =            (   ) .

We make the assumption that      is independent of z .      is is a generalization of the typical
assumption that is common across households and that is i.i.d. across and .             e current
environment requires only that aggregate labor supply is independent of the distribution, which
is weaker than assuming that households are ex ante identical.14


2.2          Firms
   e representative rm has a constant-returns technology given by ( , ), where is capital and
  e ective units of labor. Firm's hire labor and rent capital in competitive markets at rates
and , respectively. Let and denote linear taxes on factor payments for labor and capital,
respectively.
    Firms may have market power in the product market. For simplicity, we assume that rms
charge a price that is a constant mark up over marginal cost. Let  1 be the ratio of price to
     11 To
        see the later, consider the case of an aggregator ( , ) =  ( ) for some household . is corresponds to a
household that does not value future consumption (it has a discount factor equal to 0). As a result, this household
does not save and consumes its entire disposable income every period.
  12   is can be achieved by se ing = 0. In this case, the labor supply decision is not interior and the corresponding
 rst order condition below does not hold.
  13 We use the word vector loosely, as { } is a continuum of random variable realizations indexed by  [0, 1].
  14 For example, households could belong to one of types, each with non-trivial measure.          en within a type we
can assume that the law of large numbers holds, and the aggregate is simply a weighted average across types.




                                                           8
marginal cost.    e representative rm's rst-order conditions are (suppressing in what follows):

                                           ( , ) = (1 +     )
                                           ( , ) = (1 +     )   .

Firm (pre-tax) pro ts are given by

                      ^ =     -1
                                     ( , ) = ( , ) - (1 +       )     - (1 +    )   .


Pro ts are taxed by the government at rate , so a er tax pro ts are  = (1 - .   )^ We can think
of the representative rm hiring a bundle of entrepreneurial talent that is in constant aggregate
supply at a er tax price .


2.3 Financial Intermediaries
Competitive intermediaries borrow from the households at rate , and, in turn, rent capital to
 rms at and invest in government bonds at rate . Capital depreciates at rate . Competition
in t he i ntermediary market ensures t he f ollowing equilibrium condition at all :

                                              =   =    - .

Given the rst equality, we drop the distinction between and in what follows. As noted in
the introduction, there is also no maturity mismatch on the intermediaries' balance sheet.


2.4 Government
  e government's policy consists of a sequence of taxes { ,              ,     }, as well as a sequence of
one-period debt issuances, { }.      e lump-sum transfers            are such that the sequential budget
constraint holds at all periods:

                             =         +          +   ^ +
                                                                +1   - (1 + )


2.5    Market Clearing
Given    and     and taxes, let   and solve the representative rm's rst-order conditions.
Market clearing in the nancial market requires      =   + . Market clearing in the labor
market requires = , where we recall that is aggregate e ciency units of labor supplied by
households. Finally, goods market clearing requires  , = ( , ) - +1 + (1 - ) . By

                                                  9
Walras law, one of the market clearing conditions is redundant given that the government and
household budget constraints are satis ed.

     De nition 1 (Equilibrium De nition). Given an initial distribution of household wealth and
     idiosyncratic shocks { 0, 0, 0 } [0,1] and a scal policy { , , , } 0 with initial debt 0 ,
     an equilibrium is a sequence of quantities { , , , } 0 , prices { , , } 0 , and trans-
     fers { } 0 such that      and     are consistent with household optimization given prices and
     transfers, and are consistent with rm optimization given prices and taxes, is the lump
     sum transfer necessary to satisfy the sequential government budget constraint, = + , and
       nancial, labor, and good markets clear.

   We de ne a stationary equilibrium to be an equilibrium in which all sequences are constant
over time.15


3       Pareto Improvements to a Laissez Faire Economy
We begin with a stationary equilibrium without a government. at is, let us consider the case
where      =     =     = 0 for all .   is will be the benchmark from which we will search for
Pareto improving policies and discuss the special role of < 0. Let ( 0, 0, 0 ) denote the wage,
interest rate, and (un-taxed) aggregate pro ts in the initial stationary equilibrium of the laissez
faire economy, and let ( 0, 0 = 0 ) denote the associated aggregate labor supply and capital
stock. Unless otherwise stated, we will assume 0 < 0 in what follows.


3.1         Pareto-Improving Fiscal Policies
   e thought experiment we consider is a government that, starting from this environment, un-
expectedly announces a new scal policy. Normalize = 0 to be the last period in which taxes
and maturing debt are zero.
     In period = 0, the government announces a sequence of debt issuances, taxes, and transfers
{ +1, , , , } 0 . We assume that factor taxes are zero in the initial period; that is, 0 = 0 =
 0 . As 0 is inherited from the laissez faire equilibrium, this implies 0 and 0 remain unchanged
in this initial period. Other than the announcement, the only action of the government in period
zero is the issuance of new bonds 1 due next period, the proceeds of which are lump-sum rebated
to households 0 = 1 . Subsequent to the announcement, there is perfect foresight.
    15 In
        the analysis that follows, we will assume that such an stationary equilibrium exists. Note that this may
require additional assumptions on the stochastic processes for labor productivity and the pro t share as well as on
their initial cross-sectional distribution. See Ac
                                                 ¸ikg¨
                                                     oz (2018), Light (2018), and Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions and Moll
(2021) for results on existence and uniqueness of stationary equilibria in Bewley models.


                                                        10
       e scal policy will potentially involve a new sequence of transfers and factor prices going
forward. We focus on policies that keep the wage stable at 0 and aggregate a er-tax pro ts at
0 .     is ensures that no agent experiences a decline in labor or pro t income at each and
idiosyncratic state ( , ).
    In period zero, each household re-optimizes its consumption-saving policy to incorporate a
new sequence of interest rates and transfers, { , } 0 , with 0 given, as well as the original
( 0, 0 ). Starting from the laissez faire stationary equilibrium in period 0, let A +1 ({ , } 0 )
denote the aggregate household saving in period generated by the new household policy.
    Asset market clearing imposes a restriction on the possible combinations of transfers, capital,
debt issuances, and interest rates. We formalize this restriction in the following de nition:

  De nition 2. A sequence { , , , } =0 constitutes an "admissible sequence" if for all
    1:
                              A ({ , }  =0 ) =  + ,

  { 0, 0 } represent the initial laissez-faire stationary equilibrium outcomes,          0   = 0, and there
  exists a <  such that  for all  1.

    Note that we have imposed that the debt sequence has a nite upper bound, . is is to rule
out Ponzi schemes by the government.       e following result establishes properties of admissi-
ble sequences that are su cient for the feasibility of Pareto-improving scal policies relative to
laissez faire:

  Proposition 1. If there is an admissible sequence { , ,              ,   }=0 such that for all  0:

    (i)        0;

    (ii)    -( - 0 ) ;

   (iii) and

                    +1   - (1 + )   -      ( 0,      0)   - ( ,   0)   -( 0+ )    0   +( + ) ,          (2)


  with either (i) or (ii) strict for at least one    0, then there exists a feasible scal policy that
  implements a Pareto improvement.

   We establish the result in three steps, providing some expository remarks as we proceed. We
 rst describe the set of tax instruments used by the government, then compute the tax revenue,
and nally establish the result.


                                                     11
   For step one, in order for the government to keep the household wage constant, it must tax/-
subsidize the rm's labor input such that:

                                                            ( , 0)
                                                                   =              0.
                                                          (1 + )

Note that, due to the GHH preferences, keeping a er-tax wages constant at 0 ensures the ag-
gregate labor supply remains at its initial level 0 . Moreover, if the issuance of debt crowds out
capital ( < 0 ), this involves a labor subsidy < 0, given that ( 0, 0 ) = 0 .
   Similarly, the government taxes/subsidizes pro ts so that:

                              = (1 -         )^ = (1 -                 )( - 1) ( ,              0 )/        = 0

    Finally, the government must ensure that the representative rm's choice of capital is consis-
tent with the risk-free interest rate:

                                      ( ,    0)   = (1 +           )         = (1 +         ) ( + ).

       e total government revenue (before transfers) of this tax policy is given by:

            Revenue =        0   0   +            +       ^
                                                          
                      = (1 + ) 0         0+ (1 + )                     - (1 -          )^ -         0   0   -       + ^
                           ( , 0)        0+     ( ,           0)                                                 ( - 1) ( ,   0)
                      =                                                 - 0 -           0   0   -            +

                      = ( ,      0)   - 0 -           0   0   -         ,

where the third line uses: (1 - )^ = 0 ; the rm's rst-order condition for labor and capital;
and ^ = ( - 1) / . e last line follows from Euler's theorem. We can then use = + and
0 = ( 0, 0 ) - 0 0 - 0 0 to obtain:

                        Revenue = ( ,             0)      - ( 0,            0)   -( + )             +( 0+ )        0.              (3)

    A convenient feature of this result is that the costs of a policy are pinned down by the ag-
gregate capital stock and the interest rate. No additional information is needed, despite the po-
tentially complicated nature of policies necessary to keep all factor prices and pro ts weakly
increasing.16
  16 Partof this tractability rests on the representative rm assumption. is allows us to track how the marginal
product of labor changes in response to a policy using just the knowledge of aggregates. If there were a distribution
of rms with heterogeneous capital-labor ratios, we would need to track the entire distribution's response to policy


                                                                   12
    Note that if     < 0 , equation (3) implies that revenue is necessarily negative. To see this,
strict concavity of implies ( 0, 0 ) - ( , 0 ) > ( 0, 0 )( 0 - ). From the rm's rst-order
condition in the laissez faire equilibrium, we have ( 0, 0 ) = ( 0 + )  0 + , and hence (as
    < 0 ), ( 0, 0 ) - ( , 0 ) > ( 0 + )( 0 - ). is implies that the value in (3) is strictly less
than ( 0 - )  0.
    Equation (2) follows from equation (3) and the government's budget constraint.         e right-
hand side is the negative of equation (3). Bringing that to the other side, we have that bond
issuances plus tax revenues minus lump-sum transfers must be non-negative.            e inequality
re ects that we allow the government to dispose of any surplus.
    Finally, we verify that the new equilibrium is a Pareto improvement. By construction, house-
hold wage and pro t income remain the same as in laissez faire in every and idiosyncratic state.
   e fact that the return to nancial wealth weakly increases makes every saver at time be er
o . However, those with negative positions (debt) are worse o . e fact that  -( - 0 )
ensures that lump-sum transfers are large enough to make debtors weakly be er o , and strictly
if > . From the household's perspective, resources are weakly greater at every and at every
idiosyncratic state, and strictly greater for at least one household as there exists a such that
   > 0 or       > 0.     is establishes that the scal policy results in a Pareto improvement and
concludes the proof of the proposition.
        e following result provides a simpler su cient condition for equation (2) to hold:

   Claim 1. If ( , 0 ) - ( 0, 0 )  ( -                      0)   and transfers are minimized    = -( - 0 ) ,
   then a su cient condition for (2) to hold is:

                                      +1   - (1 + )          ( - 0 )(      0    - ),                     (4)

   for all  1.

   Proof.   e premise and equation (3) implies that we have a lower bound on tax revenue:

                               Revenue = ( ,     0)   - ( 0,      0)   -( + )     +( 0+ )   0

                                         ( + )(        -    0)   -( + )     +( 0+ )    0

                                        = -( - 0 )     0.


   Substituting into (2) and se ing   = -( - 0 ) yields equation (4).

      e condition ( , 0 ) - ( 0, 0 )  ( - 0 ) holds immediately in two useful benchmarks.
One is zero crowding out of capital, so that = 0 . e second is when ( , 0 ) = , that is,
in order to compute the labor subsidy necessary to keep wages constant.



                                                            13
capital is undistorted relative to the risk free rate faced by households, and the inequality holds
by concavity of in .
    To provide intuition for Proposition 1 and Claim 1, and to more fully characterize the nature
of the policies, we consider two alternative environments in turn. e rst environment assumes
the economy is competitive (so that = 1). In the second environment, rms charge a markup,
which may be large enough so that the economy is dynamically e cient. We will consider Pareto-
improving policies tailored to each of these cases.


3.2         e Competitive Benchmark
Consider rst the case where rms are competitive, = 1, and pro ts are zero.                e fact that
    = ( 0 + ) < implies that the economy is dynamically ine cient. Suppose the government
issues additional bonds. At a given level of capital, in order to induce households to hold more
assets, the equilibrium interest rate must increase  0 , assuming that aggregate savings is
increasing in .17 e higher induces additional savings and crowds out capital. is is bene cial
at the margin given the dynamic ine ciency. is implies           < 0, i.e., labor is subsidized, and
represents the primary scal cost of the policy.
    Suppose the policy sets = 0, so that capital is undistorted relative to the risk-free rate. We
consider a broader set of policies a er providing some intuition for this case. From Claim 1, the
cost of the labor subsidy is bounded by ( - 0 ) 0 = ( - 0 ) 0 , which is the change in payments
to capital. If this is large, then the share of revenue paid by rms to labor falls signi cantly
and the subsidy to labor must be large ( << 0). Another interpretation is obtained by le ing
   = ( ) denote the factor price frontier in the competitive laissez faire equilibrium (so that
and correspond to the associated factor marginal products). We have            / = - , and so the
change in wages is approximately   - 0  . is is the amount the government must make
up through subsidy.
    Let denote the new stationary equilibrium. In the limit as  , the feasibility condition
becomes:

                                         -         (      - 0 )(   0   - ).                                     (5)

  e "seigniorage" revenue ( < 0) from bonds must be large enough to o set the movement along
the factor price frontier as well the compensation to borrowers.
    Figure 1 depicts the trade-o in the canonical capital market equilibrium diagram from Aiya-
  17 More  precisely, the interest rate must increase at some point along the path and converge to lim  > 0 . To
rule out alternative cases which trade-o lower interest rates along the transition against higher long-run rates, we
include  0 as a condition for all in Proposition 1.



                                                        14
gari (1994). e underlying calibration is provided in Section 4, but the qualitative features are
fairly general. At each interest rate on the vertical axis , the associated rental rate of capital is
     = + . Holding labor supply = 0 constant, the downward sloping red line traces out a
capital demand equation from the rm's rst-order condition ( , 0 ) = . is is the relevant
capital demand curve for the case of = 0.
     Similarly, at each candidate , denotes the aggregate steady-state saving of household when
the wage is xed at 0 . ese two curves intersect at the laisssez faire equilibrium interest rate 0 .
Note that in this parameterization, 0 < 0, which is the case of interest. e quantities re ected
on the horizontal axis are normalized by 0 = ( 0, 0 ).
        e distance between the capital demand equation and the household saving line is the amount
of government bonds as a share of laissez faire output.18
     In this example, = 0. e width of the gray rectangle is  / 0 = -           0
                                                                                   and its height is the
equilibrium interest rate at the new equilibrium, hence its area is -  / 0 . e red rectangle
has height - 0 , where 0 is the interest rate in the laissez faire equilibrium. Its width is 0 / 0 ,
where 0 is the capital stock in the laissez faire equilibrium. e area of this rectangle is ( -
 0 )  0 / 0 . From equation (5), if the area of the gray rectangle exceeds that of the red, then a
Pareto improvement is feasible.
        e inequality (5) is likely to be satis ed if consumers are willing to hold new debt without a
sharp increase in the interest rate. at is, if the response of savings to is large. e intuition is
that the return to capital cannot increase signi cantly for a small issuance of , as the increase in
the return to capital is the amount of subsidy necessary to keep the household's labor earnings
constant.
        e elasticity of the interest rate to government debt is a primary concern when discussing
the "crowding out" of capital. Here it is playing an additional role. Namely, even if capital were
inelastic, this elasticity ma ers because it speaks to the scal impact of debt issuance on the
subsidy to wages.
     On the capital demand side, from the rm's rst order condition we have / = -1/ .
If     is small in magnitude, then capital demand is very elastic and crowding out of capital will
be signi cant. is actually makes the feasibility condition easier to achieve. e intuition is the
same as in Diamond (1965). As < 0 and               = + , the return to capital net of depreciation is
negative. As aggregate consumption in the stationary equilibrium equals ( , )- , a reduction
in capital actually increases the resources available for consumption. is part of calculation will
change below when we consider a dynamically e cient equilibrium.
  18 At each point on the household saving line, there is an associated lump-sum transfer that satis es the govern-
ment's budget constraint. At each and implied = - , the upward sloping line solves the household's problem
for the associated transfer.



                                                        15
                                Figure 1: Fiscal Tradeo in the Steady State




     r




                                                                                            -r  Y
                                                                                                 B


                            K
                      r  Y0

                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                           Y
         r


                                                                               K0
                                                                               Y
                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                    Y


                                                                                    B
                                                                                    Y                K A
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                     Y Y


Note: is gure is a graphical depiction of the scal tradeo from equation (5). All elements are normalized by the
laissez faire stationary equilibrium output = 0 .         e downward sloping line / represents rm demand from
capital ( =      - ) and the upward sloping line / depicts aggregate household saving associated with the interest
rate and the laissez faire wage as well as the transfers generated by any scal surplus. e intersection is the initial
laissez faire stationary equilibrium. Fiscal costs are represented by   0 / , the area shaded in red, and seigniorage
revenue by -   / , the area shaded in gray. e part of seigniorage generated by displacing capital is to the le
of the verical line 0 / and is shaded a lighter color.        e remaining seigniorage represents additional household
saving.


    Note that there may be a broader set of scal policies that are feasible. Namely, those that
increase the crowding out of capital to make "room" for additional debt issuance at a given interest
rate.    is can be implemented by a positive         that depresses    given     = + . While the
additional seigniorage and revenue from           > 0 relax the scal constraints (and may bring the
economy closer to the golden rule), the lower capital stock requires a larger wage subsidy. ere
is thus a limit to feasibility of this additional crowding out.
    However, it is straightforward to show that if the economy is dynamically ine cient, the
government can always generate additional resources by crowding out capital to the golden rule


                                                         16
level      (that is, the value that solves            (      ,
                                                                      0)   = ):

   Claim 2. Consider the case where the laissez-faire stationary economy is dynamically inef-
    cient (that is, 0 < 0). en the sequence { , , , } with = 0 , = 0,                          =  and
      = 0 -  > 0 for all  1 and 0 = 0 is admissible. In addition, such sequence satis es the
   conditions (i), (ii) and (iii) of Proposition 1. And in particular, the inequality (2) is strict for all
      0; that is, the government raises strictly positive revenue in all periods without a ecting
   any household's utility.

   Proof.     at the sequence is admissible follows directly from the fact that { , } remain as in the stationary
   laissez-faire equilibrium, and thus     = 0 for all  0; + =           = 0 ; and is bounded.
   Conditions (i) and (ii) in Proposition 1 are satis ed. From the scal resource condition (2), we have for = 0 the
   government raises  0 -  in additional resources by issuing bonds. As 0 is xed, there are no scal costs
   in the initial period. For > 0 the scal resource condition (2) is:

                                                                                                       
                              - (1 + 0 ) + (             ,   0)   - ( 0,            0)   -( 0+ )          +( 0+ )    0
                                                                                          
                             = (      ,   0)   - ( 0,        0)   -           - 0(              + )+   0   +   0 0
                                                   
                             = (      ,   0)   -      - ( ( 0,             0)   -        0 ),


   where we use  + = 0 for the last equality. By de nition of the golden rule capital stock,  maximizes
    ( , ) - . Hence, the policy generates strictly positive resources for all  0. Such policy does not a ect any
   household's utility as all prices and incomes remain unchanged.

In terms of Figure 1, distorting capital at a given increases the width of the gray rectangle
without increase the cost.     e claim states the government can do this at the initial 0 , gener-
ating zero net costs.    e fact that this generates a surplus suggests that there is scope to raise
welfare by providing a public good, as long as the public good does not alter the household's
saving or labor-supply choices. e result extends the classic Samuelson-Diamond result to the
Aiyagari framework. As we will see, dynamic ine ciency is not a necessary condition for Pareto-
improving scal policies once we re-introduce mark-ups. However, the next result states that it
is necessary for the competitive case, at least for the class of policies considered by Proposition
1.
    Given the incompleteness of markets, a natural question is whether a Pareto-improving scal
policy is feasible even if 0 > 0. In the competitive benchmark, we can state that there are no
admissible sequences that satisfy Proposition 1 if the interest rate is positive in the steady state:

   Claim 3. Consider = 1. If              0    > 0, then there is no admissible sequence that satis es the
   conditions of Proposition 1.




                                                                      17
  Proof. Condition (iii) in Proposition 1 requires

                           +1   - (1 + )             + ( ,              0)   - ( 0,        0)   -( + )         +( 0+ )          0   -      0.

  If    = 1, we have     ( 0,    0)     = ( 0 + ). Concavity of                     implies

                                                     ( 0,          0)   - ( ,       0)      ( 0 + )(      0    -       ).

       us a necessary condition for condition (iii) is:

                                                         +1   - (1 + )              +( 0- )           -         0.

  Re-arranging:

                                                              +1   -                  + ( - 0)            +        .

  If   > 0 or      > 0 for some , the right-hand side is strictly positive at even if      = 0, implying a strictly
  positive increase in debt. A er this period, the right-hand side is always strictly positive as    0 > 0 and
      0, generating an explosive path of debt, violating the upper bound on debt required for an admissible
  sequence.

3.3      Mark-ups
We now turn to the case in which mark-ups drive a wedge between the marginal product of
capital and the return on bonds.       e presence of a mark-up per se is not important, only the
extent to which the economy my be dynamically ine cient. In particular, Claim 2 holds even if
  > 1.
    To provide some intuition of how a mark-up a ects the analysis, consider the same exercise as
in the previous sub-section. Speci cally, starting from a laissez faire stationary equilibrium, the
government embarks on a new sequence of scal policies that is a component of an admissible
sequence. Again, we start with the case of = 0, so that       = ( + ). e complication relative
to the competitive case is that with a mark-up, a Pareto improvement requires not only weak
increases in factor prices but also a weak increase in pro ts. at is,  0 so that (1 - )     ^ = 0 .
    Using the fact that  ^ = 0 /(1 - ) and = 0, equation (3) implies:


                                0       0   +            0 = ( ,                      0)   - ( 0,         0)   -            +       0    0,
                                                1-

Concavity implies ( 0,              0)       ( ,              0) +            ( ,      0 )( 0 -       ). Using the fact that                    ( ,   0)   =   ,
we have:

                                    0       0   +              0  ( - 1) (                        -       0)   - ( - 0)             0.
                                                    1-


                                                                                 18
  e rst term on the right-hand side is due to the mark-up. As < 0 it adds to the scal burden.
  e fall in leads to a fall in pro ts, which must be o set by subsidies in order to ensure a Pareto
improvement. Here, it makes the improvement harder to achieve if capital is elastic.
      e counter-part to condition (4) is now

                       +1   - (1 + )    -( - 1) (      -   0)   + ( - 0 )(   0   - ).

    For the steady-state comparison of Figure 1, we can think of losing part of the gray rectangle
over the  part of the horizontal axis if > 1. e mark-up implies some of the gray area is
used to compensate the decline in pro ts.
    As in the competitive case, dynamic ine ciency implies a return to crowding out capital.
   us, more revenue can be generated by se ing          > 0. In particular, Claim 2 required only
dynamic ine ciency, not = 1.
    Now suppose is large enough that ( + ) =              > , despite the fact that < 0.         is is
the case depicted in Figure 2. Relative to Figure 1, Figure 2 draws a distinction between capital
demanded by rms at each and the marginal product of capital.               at is, demand is the solid
downward sloping schedule de ned by the rm's rst-order condition, = ( , 0 )/ - , while
the dashed line is =        - . At the depicted laissez faire equilibrium,        - > 0, and hence
the economy is dynamically e cient. Crowding out of capital is costly, as resources available for
consumption decline with a decrease in .
    In the case of dynamic e ciency, a potentially cheaper path to a Pareto improvement utilizes
  scal policies that avoid crowding out capital. Speci cally, suppose the government subsidizes
the return from renting capital. at is, let 0 be the rental rate in the laissez faire equilibrium,
with 0 = 0 - . Let be the net interest rate on government bonds in the new equilibrium at
time . Let < 0 be a subsidy to capital such that rms pay 0 = (1 + )( + ), and households
receive  0 . As rms are paying the same a er-tax rental rate, then = 0 , and hence pro ts,
wages, and total output remain unchanged.
    From equation (3), the cost of this policy is -( - 0 ) 0 . e amount of seigniorage need is
thus given by equation (4). However, relative to the previous cases in which capital was crowded
out, will need to be greater for a given quantity of debt. In terms of Figure 2, the trade o is
now the horizontal region   0 relative to the gray region   =   , and  no longer
plays a role in the calculus.
    Given that the mark-up depresses the level of capital in the laissez faire equilibrium relative
to the rst-best, there may be scope for "crowding in" of capital. In particular, rather than using
government debt to increase the supply of safe assets, the government may also nd it bene cial
to induce additional investment. It can do so by subsidizing capital to the point that (1+ )( + ) <


                                                 19
                                Figure 2: Net Resource Cost with Markups




     r




                                                                             -r  Y
                                                                                  B


                            K
                      r  Y0                                                                              A
                                                                                                         Y


         r


                                                          K0
                                                          Y
                                                                         K                      FK - 
                                                                         Y




                                                                B
                                                                Y                                  K A
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                   Y Y

Note: is gure reproduces the asset demand and supply curves from Figure 1 for the case with a mark-up. e
dashed downward sloping line represents the marginal product of capital minus depreciation. e capital demand
curve / is distorted relative to this benchmark by the markup. In this example, policy holds capital at the initial
laissez faire capital sock.




                                                        20
                            Figure 3: Net Resource Cost with Crowding In




     r


                                                                   Y   - (rt +  )  K
                                                                   Y              Y




                           K
                     r  Y0                                                       -r   B
                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                      Y

         r


                                                        K0             KGR
                                                        Y               Y
                                                                  K                             FK - 
                                                                  Y




                                                              K
                                                              Y
                                                                         B
                                                                         Y                      K A
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                Y Y

Note: is gure reproduces the asset demand and supply curves from Figure 2 for the case in which policy crowds
in capital. e dashed downward sloping line represents the marginal product of capital minus depreciation. e
capital demand curve / is distorted relative to this benchmark by the markup. In this example, policy crowds in
capital to the "golden rule" level . e gain from crowding in of capital is the area between    - and the new
steady state .


 0 + . e additional capital raises pre-tax pro ts and wages. is begs the question of whether
the government can tax these la er factors, keeping the a er-tax return constant, and generate
su cient revenue to subsidize capital.
    In particular, suppose we take the extreme of zero revenue from seigniorage, so = 0 for all .
Instead, the government implements policy to increase the capital stock, > 0 . For simplicity
of exposition, let = 0 and = 0, so that any excess revenue is discarded.
    For this crowding-in policy to be an equilibrium, households must be willing to hold additional
wealth. at is, it must be part of an admissible sequence { , = 0, = 0, } 1 . Recall that
admissible sequences are generated by the household's problem, and re ect the mapping from
sequences { , } to aggregate wealth, , given ( 0, 0 ). e experiment sets = = 0 + 
for  1, where   - 0 .

                                                      21
   Associated with the admissible sequence are taxes such that ( , 0 ) = (1 + )( + ),
  ( , 0 ) = (1 + ) 0 , and (1 - ) ( , 0 ) = ( 0, 0 ), with    = 0 +  . From the proof of
Proposition 1, tax revenues are:

                                 ( ,    0)   - ( 0,   0)   -( + )        +( 0+ )    0.


Given that     =    = 0 in this experiment, feasibility requires this expression must be weakly
greater than zero. A positive mark-up implies that ( 0, 0 ) > ( 0 + ) 0 , so for small  ,
resources are increasing in for a given interest rate. For a small increase   0, revenues are
approximately

                                       ( 0,    0 )    - ( 0 + )         -      0,


where   - 0 and we set second-order terms to zero.19 e representative rm's rst order
condition in the laissez faire equilibrium implies ( 0, 0 ) = ( 0 + ). us, to a rst order and
assuming  > 0, a su cient condition for revenue to be weakly positive is

                                                      0   +           1
                                                                         .                                        (6)
                                                           0          -1

   e right-hand side is the inverse mark-up, and the le -hand side is the elasticity of aggregate
wealth to an increase in the gross return to capital, using the fact that = in this experiment.20
   is condition is easier to satisfy if the distortion of capital due to market power is large and if the
elasticity of wealth to the interest rate is large. For such a combination, to a rst order crowding
in of capital is a feasible Pareto improvement.
    Crowding in of capital allows the economy to (eventually) produce more e ciently, but fore-
goes the revenue generated by issuing bonds along the path. In the initial period, issuing bonds
generates more resources than devoting extra saving to capital, but in the steady state, the policy
of crowding in capital generates greater scal resources.
    Of course, policy does not have to be only debt or only crowding-in of capital. In fact, there is
a theoretical case for a combination of both. As noted, equation (6) is easier to satisfy the greater
the elasticity of private saving to the interest rate. In many se ings, the long-run elasticity is
greater than short-run elasticity, a property Paul Samuelson linked to the LeChatelier principle
original developed in chemistry. is property holds in the quantitative Aiyagari model explored
in Section 4. In the current context of inducing greater investment, this potentially implies an
  19 Note that we impose that  is of the same order as  , which implicitly assumes a continuous mapping from
the sequence of interest rates to the sequence of aggregate wealth.
  20 Keep in mind that aggregate wealth at time is a function of the entire sequence of interest rates. In this sense,

we use the term "elasticity" for the ratio ( / )  ( 0 + / 0 ) loosely.

                                                              22
over-shooting of the interest rate along the transition. A higher interest rate raises the scal cost
of capital subsidies. If the short-run elasticity is too small to satisfy (6), the government can issue
debt along the transition to nance the associated crowding-in scal policy. In the new stationary
equilibrium, the additional resources can then be used to service (if  > 0) or pay down the debt.
   us, along the transition, debt and additional capital become complements rather than substitutes
in engineering a Pareto improvement. We give an example of such a hybrid policy in Section 4.
    A graphical depiction of the steady state a er such a hybrid policy is given in Figure 3. e
novelty is the area between the curve labelled - and the new long-run interest. In particular,
recall that scal revenue before transfers in the new steady state is given by

                             (   ,        0)   - ( 0,   0)   -(      + )        +( 0+ )   0
                                  
                             =        (        - -      )     -            0.
                                  0


In Figure 3, the shaded area under the marginal product curve and above the new steady-state
  represents the rst term, while the rectangle   0 represents the nal term. e additional
shaded rectangle labelled -  represents seigniorage from debt issuance. Again, this depic-
tion refers to the stationary equilibrium and ignores the transition. Nevertheless, it graphically
highlights the scal resources gained by crowding in capital when        - > due to a markup
distortion.


3.4        e Elasticity of Aggregate Savings
   e robust conclusion from the above is that a Pareto improvement is facilitated by a very elastic
aggregate savings function with respect to the interest rate. Feasibility turns on this key statistic.
Unfortunately, there is li le clear cut empirical or theoretical guidance on the magnitude of this
elasticity.
    Testing the sensitivity of interest rates to changes in government debt or de cits was an active
area of empirical research in the 1980s and 1990s.21 Perhaps surprisingly, there are a number of
empirical studies that conclude the Ricardian equivalence benchmark of no change in the interest
rate is a reasonable description of the data. Nevertheless, there are other empirical estimates that
conclude otherwise, and our reading of this literature is that there is no clear consensus.
    In the Bewley-Hugge -Aiyagari literature there are a few theoretical results. For example,
for the case of CRRA utility, Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2015) show that as  , the household
saving function's sensitivity to the risk-free interest rate is increasing in the IES. A similar result
  21 See
       the surveys and associated references of Barth, Iden and Russek (1984); Bernheim (1987b); Barro (1989);
Elmendorf and Gregory Mankiw (1999); Gale and Orszag (2003); and Engen and Hubbard (2005).



                                                             23
is proved by Achdou et al. (2021). us the derivative with respect to is governed by the inter-
temporal elasticity of substitution (IES), with a larger IES indicates a more elastic response, at
least for the very wealthy.
    At the other end of the asset domain, Achdou et al. (2021) shows that, for those at the lowest
income realization and approaching the borrowing constraint, the sensitivity of savings to also
depends positively on the IES.
       ese results pertain to individual savings behavior at the extremes of the asset distribution.
To explore the elasticity of aggregate saving to the interest rate in a stationary equilibrium, and
how this elasticity varies with preference parameters, we turn to the a calibrated version of the
model. e quantitative model can also speak to whether the su cient conditions for a Pareto
improving policy are satis ed in a plausible calibration. is is the topic of the next section.


4     Simulations
In this section we present simulation results for various policy experiments. Our benchmark
focuses on the dynamically e cient economy with mark-ups. In this se ing, we explore policies
that leave capital unchanged as well as those that crowd in additional capital. For contrast, we
also brie y present a competitive economy that is dynamically ine cient.
       e simulated economies allow us to assess the scope for Pareto-improving scal policy in a
calibrated quantitative model as well as compute transition dynamics and welfare implications.
   e quantitative experiments will also underscore how government debt is used in implementing
Pareto-improving policies.


4.1     Parameter Settings
    e utility function we consider for households is of the Epstein-Zin form
                                                                       1-     1
                                              1-                 1- 1
                                  = {(1 - )        + (E           +1 )  -   } 1-

where is the discount factor, 1/ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution,        is the risk
aversion coe cient, and is the composite of consumption and labor

                                                        1/
                                              =     -        .

   e parameter controls the Frisch elasticity of the labor supply. We set some of the preference
parameters to conventional values in the literature and others as part of the calibration.     e
elasticities of substitution and of labor supply are set to the common parameters values of 1


                                                   24
and 0.2, respectively.    e discount factor and coe cient of risk aversion are set as part of the
calibration exercise described below. We set the borrowing constraint to zero for all households.
    An important part of the parametrization is the stochastic structure for idiosyncratic shocks.
We adopt the structure and estimates from Krueger et al. (2016) that use micro data on a er
tax labor earnings from the PSID. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks      contain a persistent and
transitory component and their process is as follows

                                             log     = ~ +
                                                   ~ =    ~   -1   +

with persistence and innovations of the persistent and transitory shocks ( , ), with associated
variances given by ( 2, 2 ). We set the three parameters controlling this process ( , 2, 2 ) to
.9695, .0384, and .0522 respectively to re ect the estimated earnings risk in Krueger et al. (2016)
for employed individuals. We discretize this process into 10 points based on Tauchen (1986).
    We take a parsimonious approach to allocating pro ts to households. In particular, we assume
a distinct class of entrepreneurs that are endowed with managerial talent and consume pro t dis-
tributions in a hand-to-mouth manner. While stark, this approach o ers a number of advantages.
First, it approximates that a signi cant share of entrepreneurial rents accrue to a small share of
the population. Second, under this assumption, they do not a ect factor prices, and so we can
solve the economy without taking a stand on the idiosyncratic details of the entrepreneurial class.
Finally, and related to the previous point, the analysis is invariant to the extent to which pro ts
are o set by xed costs versus representing pure rents.
        e technology speci cation is Cobb-Douglas, ( , ) =             1- . We use standard values

for the coe cient and for the depreciation rate of capital . e values are = 0.3 and = 0.1.
   e mark-up parameter is set to 1.4, which is within the estimates in Basu (2019).22
    We calibrate the discount factor and the coe cient of relative risk aversion by targeting a
capital-output ratio of 2.5, based on Aiyagari and McGra an (1998) and Krueger et al. (2016), and
an interest rate of -1.4%, which is the di erence between the average one year treasury rates and
average nominal GDP growth in the United States since 1962.23 While our focus is on Pareto-
improving policies relative to a laissez faire benchmark, the empirical moments are generated
from an economy with government debt. Hence, we simulate a stationary economy with a debt-
to-output ratio of 60%, which is the average value in the US since 1966, and choose preference
parameters to match moments from this economy to the data.              e resulting values are { =
  22 As noted above, some of this mark-up may represent    xed costs. e aggregate mark-up may also re ect smaller
mark-ups at di erent stages of production in a vertical supply chain, as in Ball and Mankiw (2021). In fact, 1.4 is
close to the number they use in their numerical exercises.
   23  is estimate is consistent with the ones in Blanchard (2019) and Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2020).


                                                         25
0.993, = 5.5}.
    We treat the economy with debt as being generated from a Pareto-improving scal policy
starting from the laissez faire benchmark. at is, in simulating the economy with government
debt during moment matching, we assume that tax policy is such that a er-tax wages and capital
are the same as if the economy had zero debt and zero taxes. We refer to this set of policies as
our baseline scal policy.

                             Table 1: Baseline and Laissez Faire Economies


                                                 Data     Baseline Policy    Laissez Faire
                        Aggregates
                        Public Debt (% output)     60                 60                 0
                        Interest Rates(%)         -1.4               -1.4             -1.7
                        Capital (rel. output)      2.5                2.6             2.6
                        Wealth Distribution
                        Q1 Wealth Share            -1                  1                   1
                        Q2 Wealth Share             1                  4                   4
                        Q3 Wealth Share             4                 11                  10
                        Q4 Wealth Share            13                 24                  23
                        Q5 Wealth Share            83                 61                  63



    Table 1 presents some moments in the steady states of our economy with baseline scal policy
and the laissez faire economy. e level of public debt, interest rates, and capital in the economy
with the baseline scal policy matches the data moments by construction.24            e table shows
that an increase in debt to output of 60% increases interest rates by 0.3%. We also present some
moments on the wealth distribution in the steady states, namely the wealth share of each asset
quintile, and compare it with data as reported in Krueger et al. (2016). Our model economies
generate skewed distributions of wealth, with a most of the wealth being held by the top quintile
of the distribution, although not quite as skewed as the data. Also in our model economies, a
small fraction of agents are at their borrowing constraint at any period, about 2%.


4.2    Transitions under Pareto-Improving Fiscal Policy
We now describe the transition as the government implements its Pareto-improving scal pol-
icy. e economy starts in the laissez-faire steady state and transitions to the steady state with
  scal policy. We perform two policy experiments, one in which capital is held constant and one
in which capital eventually reaches the Golden Rule level. Both of these experiment are under-
  24   e economy is dynamically e cient also by construction. To see this,      =     /    = 0.3/2.5 = 0.12, which is
greater than the depreciation rate of 0.10.


                                                         26
taken in our benchmark dynamically e cient economy. We postpone discussion of an economy
without mark-ups to the nal section.
      e two experiments con rm that Pareto-improving scal policies are feasible in a calibrated
model. In particular, the calibrated aggregate savings schedule is su ciently elastic to allow the
government to increase both debt and capital without resorting to lump sum taxation.

4.2.1   Baseline Fiscal Policy

We start with a policy plan that transitions from a laissez faire stationary equilibrium to a new
steady state with the baseline scal policy. In particular, the government takes the economy
from zero debt to a level of 60% of output, while keeping a er-tax wages and pro ts constant.
Our posited path of public debt is depicted at the top le panel of Figure 4; debt increases mono-
tonically until it reaches its steady state level of 60% of output. Also be construction, capital is
held xed at the laissez faire level, as depicted in the top middle panel of Figure 4. Given the pol-
icy of constant capital and wages, output and consumption (reported in the lower middle panel)
are not changing. is will be di erent in the subsequent experiment with capital crowding in.
    Given this path of debt and capital, we solve for the equilibrium interest rates path and
associated government transfers . e computational algorithm and other details are reported
in Appendix A.
       e top right panel of Figure 4 plots the path for government transfers and seigniorage rev-
enue from debt issuance +1 - (1 + ) , both relative to output. Transfers are larger on impact,
about 5% of output, remain positive throughout the transition, and se le to a small positive level
in the steady state, of about 0.1% of output.        e di erence between transfers and seigniorage
revenue is equal to the tax revenues, which is negative due to the capital subsidies.
       e bo om le panel in Figure 4 plots the path for the interest rate. Interest rates rise with
public debt to induce households to hold a greater stock of aggregate wealth. Note that interest
rates overshoot during the transition, which is the Le Chatelier principle at work; namely, the
short-run elasticity of assets to interest rates is lower than its long run level. e sharp spike in
interest rates makes the policy scally expensive, as exposited in Section 3. However, the cost is
more than o set by the funds raised directly by debt issuance as seen by the elevated transfers
early in the transition.
       e bo om right panel plots the dispersion of household consumption relative to the laissez-
faire dispersion. Consumption dispersion decreases by about 10% upon the introduction of the
  scal policy plan, as households with low assets and low productivity bene t from government
transfers to support their consumption. As transfers fall over time, consumption dispersion in-
creases, but remains about 2% below the one in the laissez-faire economy. e smaller long-run
consumption dispersion re ects that households on average hold a greater stock of precautionary

                                                27
savings given the elevated interest rate.

                          b/y0                                             k/y0                                   Transfers and bond revenue
      100                                              3.5

                                                       3.0                                                5
       80
                                                       2.5                                                4
       60                                              2.0
                                                                                                          3
 %




                                                                                                      %
                                                       1.5                                                                                T /y0
       40
                                                                                                          2                               b -(1+r )b
                                                       1.0                                                                                   y0

       20                                                                                                 1
                                                       0.5

        0                                              0.0                                                0
            0   20   40          60   80    100              0   20   40          60   80   100               0      20    40        60            80         100



                           r                                               c/c0                                      (log c) -  (log c0 )
                                                       5.0                                              0.0
     -1.3

                                                       2.5                                            -2.5
     -1.4

                                                                                                      -5.0
 %




                                                  %




                                                                                                  %
                                                       0.0
     -1.5

                                                                                                      -7.5
     -1.6                                             -2.5


                                                                                                      -10.0
     -1.7                                             -5.0
            0   20   40          60   80    100              0   20   40          60   80   100               0     20    40    60            80        100



                                           Figure 4: Baseline Fiscal Policy Transition

       e transition paths of positive transfers and higher interest rates imply that our baseline
  scal policy is Pareto improving. We now evaluate the magnitude of the welfare gains. Table 2
Column 1 reports welfare for various households upon the announcement of the policy. Welfare
is measured in consumption equivalence units relative to the laissez faire economy. Across the
distribution of households for assets and productivity ( , ), the economy with scal policy deliv-
ers higher welfare for every household. e table reports ve measures welfare gain: the mean
gain, the minimum gain, and the mean gains for the bo om ten percent of the asset distribution,
the 40-60th percentiles of the asset distribution, and the top 10 percent of the asset distribution.
   e mean welfare gains are computed by integrating over idiosyncratic states, conditional on
belonging to the respective asset bin, weighted by the invariant distribution of the laissez faire
economy.
       e mean welfare gain is 2.62% and the minimum gain is 2.09%. Looking across the wealth
distribution, welfare gains are greatest for the poorest households. While all households receive
the same transfer, the poorer households bene t relatively more in percentage terms. However,
gains are not monotonic in wealth. e top decile of asset holders experience a greater welfare
gain than those in the middle of the asset distribution.       is re ects the fact that the bene ts
of a higher interest rate are increasing in wealth. At some point in the distribution, this e ect
dominates the uniform transfer, generating a non-monotonicity in percentage welfare gain as a
function of initial wealth.
    We can also compute welfare gains comparing the new steady state to the laissez faire steady

                                                                       28
state, ignoring the transition. Welfare gains are more modest in the new steady state relative to
the gains enjoyed at = 0 due to the declining path of transfers. Nevertheless, all households are
be er o in the new steady state, with an average welfare gain of 1.8%.

                                    Table 2: Changes in Welfare


                                                   Policy Baseline   Policy Crowding-In
               Welfare Gains at Announcement (%)
                 Overall Mean                                 2.62                 5.16
                 Overall Minimum                              2.09                 4.48
                 Poor (  10 pct)                              3.57                 5.19
                 Middle Wealth ( 40-60 pct)                   2.30                 4.95
                 Rich ( >90 pct)                              2.82                 7.12



       e preceding established that a Pareto-improving scal policy targeting a long-run debt-
to-output level of 60% is feasible. is result re ects that a debt level of this magnitude can be
absorbed by households with only a modest increase in interest rates. is raises the question of
whether even higher levels of debt are feasible while still ensuring all agents are weakly be er
o .
    To answer this question, we revisit the logic of Figure 3. In particular, long-run seigniorage is
given by - , while the costs are captured by   0 . In Figure 5 we plot these two components
for stationary equilibria with di erent levels of debt to output. At each debt level, tax policy is
set to deliver laissez faire taxes and pro ts.
    Up until debt levels of roughly twice the level of output, seigniorage exceeds scal costs,
implying positive lump sum transfers to households. Beyond this level of debt, the increase in
interest rate makes weakly positive transfers infeasible. Note that these two curves intersect
while seigniorage is still increasing in debt, and eventually becomes close enough to zero that
seigniorage begins to decline in debt. e peak of this La er curve occurs at debt levels roughly
four times output. Feasible Pareto-improving levels of debt, however, are much lower than this
peak.
    While Figure 5 establishes only that the policy is feasible in the new steady state, the analysis
of transition dynamics in the baseline case above suggest that feasibility in the steady state is
the critical metric. Along the transition, the government is a net issuer of bonds. As long as the
revenue from the net issuances dominates any overshooting of the interest rate, feasibility rests
on long-run considerations.




                                                   29
                          0.03



                          0.02



                          0.01
                                                             -rb/y
                                                             (r - r0 )k0 /y
                          0.00
                                   0                2               4               6

                     Figure 5: Steady State Seigniorage and Tax Revenue across Debt



4.2.2    Fiscal Policy with Crowding In of Capital

We now consider a scal policy plan that engineers an increase in capital that reaches the Golden
Rule level in the new steady state. In particular, capital relative to output increases from 2.5 to
3.0.25 We assume that the government also pursues the same path of debt issuance as in the
previous experiment. Capital subsidies are set to ensure rms rent the targeted level of capital
given the prevailing interest rate, and labor and pro t taxes are set such that a er-tax wages and
pro ts remain constant. We nd that transfers are positive throughout, and hence the scal plan
is a feasible Pareto improvement.
    Figure 6 plots the variables of interest during this transition. e layout of the gure is the
same as Figure 4. Along the path, we normalize quantities by the initial laissez faire income,
keeping in mind that contemporaneous income is increasing with capital.
       e rst two panels of the gure's top row represent the posited path of debt and capital.
   e top right panel illustrates that government transfers are positive throughout the transition.
   ese transfers fall in the middle of the transition and increase towards the end of the transition.
Transfers increase towards the end because interest rates are declining and capital is increasing,
easing the scal burden.
    As in the baseline policy experiment, seigniorage revenue from borrowing falls during the
transition but se les at a lower level, due to the higher interest rates. As seen in the bo om le
panel of the gure, interest rates rise more with a scal policy that crowds in capital because
households need to be induced to hold the additional capital as well as debt.
       e bo om middle panel shows that aggregate consumption falls early in transition, as the
  25 Recall   that   =   / , and       = 0.10, and hence given   = 0.3 the Golden Rule is achieved at / = 3.0.


                                                            30
                          b/y0                                             k/y0                                Transfers and bond revenue
      100                                              3.5

                                                       3.0                                             5
       80
                                                       2.5                                             4
       60                                              2.0
                                                                                                       3
 %




                                                                                                  %
                                                       1.5                                                                             T /y0
       40
                                                                                                       2                               b -(1+r )b
                                                       1.0                                                                                y0

       20                                                                                              1
                                                       0.5

        0                                              0.0                                             0
            0   20   40          60    80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100            0      20    40        60            80         100



                           r                                               c/c0                                   (log c) -  (log c0 )
                                                       5.0                                             0
     -0.8
                                                       2.5                                            -2
     -1.0
                                                                                                      -4
 %




                                                  %




                                                                                                  %
     -1.2                                              0.0

                                                                                                      -6
     -1.4
                                                      -2.5
                                                                                                      -8
     -1.6
                                                      -5.0
            0   20   40          60    80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100            0     20    40    60            80        100



                                      Figure 6: Fiscal Policy Transition with Crowding In


economy increases investment in new capital, and se les above the laissez faire level in the new
steady state with higher capital.     e dispersion of household consumption, however, remains
uniformly below the level in the laissez-faire economy throughout the transition. As seen in
the bo om right panel, the standard deviation drops about 9%, and increases to about 4% lower.
   us, scal policy improves risk sharing because of larger transfers as well as a larger stock of
household wealth, which earns a higher rate of return.
       e second column of Table 2 reports the welfare gains for this experiment. Welfare increases
for all households both upon the scal policy announcement and also in the new steady state.
   e mean welfare gain is 5.16% and the minimum gain is 4.48%. In this case, scal policies bene t
the rich households more than poor households, with gains upon impact of 7.12% and 5.19%,
respectively. Nevertheless, as before, households in the middle of the wealth distribution gain
the least in percentage terms. e gains in this policy experiment are much larger than for the
baseline policy, because they not only re ect be er risk sharing but also a higher level of capital
and consumption in the long run.
       e crowding-in experiment assumed that the government issued debt in the same manner
as it did in our baseline policy. In the analysis of Section 3, we argued that debt issuance may
be useful along the transition to a higher capital stock, if the short-run elasticity of household
savings is signi cantly lower than the long-run elasticity. is con guration made debt issuance
a complement to capital accumulation. We can explore this property in greater depth using the
quantitative model.
    Speci cally, we study an alternative scal policy that implements the same path of capital as

                                                                       31
in our crowding-in experiment, but with zero debt issuance. e transition dynamics for this case
are presented in Figure 7.
       e top right panel of the gure shows that without public debt, the government needs to
lump-sum tax households early in the transition. e large increase in the interest rate necessary
to induce households to hold more wealth (the bo om le panel) implies large scal costs from
capital rental subsidies. In the transition with debt, the government could use debt issuance to
smooth this burden. Without debt, the government must lump sum tax, which implies some
households may be strictly worse o along the transition. ese losses are also re ected by the
higher standard deviation of consumption early in the transition, which is plo ed in the lower
right panel.
       is experiment suggests that public debt is an important tool in Pareto-improving capital
expansions. In this sense, government debt and capital expansions can be complements rather
than the traditional substitutes, providing a contrast with Diamond (1965).

                            b/y0                                            k/y0                                  Transfers and bond revenue
      100                                               3.5

                                                        3.0
       80                                                                                               0.0
                                                        2.5
       60                                               2.0
                                                                                                       -0.5
 %




                                                                                                   %
                                                        1.5                                                                               T /y0
       40
                                                                                                                                          b -(1+r )b
                                                        1.0                                                                                  y0
                                                                                                       -1.0
       20
                                                        0.5

        0                                               0.0                                            -1.5
            0     20   40          60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100              0      20    40        60            80         100



                             r                                              c/c0                                     (log c) -  (log c0 )
                                                        5.0
     -1.1
                                                                                                          1
     -1.2
                                                        2.5
     -1.3                                                                                                 0
 %




                                                   %




                                                                                                   %




     -1.4                                               0.0
                                                                                                        -1
     -1.5
                                                       -2.5
     -1.6                                                                                               -2

     -1.7                                              -5.0
            0     20   40          60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100              0     20    40    60            80        100



                        Figure 7: Fiscal Policy Transition with Crowding In and No Debt



4.3             Pareto Improvements in Dynamic Ine cient Economies
We now discuss the e ects of scal policies in the competitive economy that is dynamically
ine cient. e scal policy we analyze here consists of a time path for debt, labor subsidies, and
the resulting transfers for households. Recall that we design labor subsidies to guarantee that the
wage households receive with scal policy equals that in the laissez-faire economy. e path for
government debt is identical to the one considered in the baseline scal policy experiment, while

                                                                        32
capital adjusts freely with interest rates. Finally, the parameters of this economy are the same as
those we calibrated for the baseline policy, with the exception that mark-ups are zero.
    We nd that this scal policy plan in the competitive economy is also Pareto improving. As
in the baseline economy, scal policy in this case improves risk sharing because it delivers pos-
itive transfers and higher returns on households wealth. An additional force in the dynamically
ine cient economy is that government debt is also useful because it crowds out unproductive
capital.
    As shown in Appendix B, the transition dynamics share many features of the baseline econ-
omy: the standard deviation of consumption falls about 8% on impact and se les at about 1%
below the laissez faire, transfers are higher early in the transition than later in the transition, and
interest rates overshoot early in the transition. Capital to output in the laissez faire economy is
larger in the absence of mark-ups. Moreover, capital falls with scal policy because the increase
in interest rates crowds out capital. e decline in investment early in the transition boosts ag-
gregate consumption, which se les at a higher level than in the laissez faire economy because
lower capital increases consumption in the dynamically ine cient economy.                e scal policy
plan here also gives rise to signi cant welfare gains of 3.0 % on average upon the announcement
of the policy.


5    Conclusion
We provided su cient conditions for the feasibility of Pareto-improving scal policies when the
risk-free interest rate on government bonds is below the growth rate ( < ) in the Bewley-
Hugget-Aiyagari model.        e key condition is that seigniorage revenue raised by government
bonds exceeds the increase in the interest rate times the initial capital stock. As long as the
aggregate household savings schedule is su ciently elastic, such Pareto-improving policies are
feasible. In this sense, we have shown that feasibility of a Pareto improvement depends on an
aggregate elasticity, not on the ner details of idiosyncratic heterogeneity that underpin this
elasticity. In calibrated examples using U.S. data on household heterogeneity and historical data
on interest rates and growth rates, we nd scope for Pareto improving policies for a wide range
of debt and tax policies.
       e government uses seigniorage debt revenue to provide transfers to households and to
subsidize factor prices.     ese policies are welfare improving for all households because they
improve risk sharing and can give rise to bene cial supply expansions. We nd scope for Pareto
improving scal policies with and without capital crowding-in, and in both dynamically e cient
and ine cient economies. We nd that debt is a useful tool, specially for scal policies that
expand capital.

                                                  33
    Many governments around the world are rapidly expanding their public debt in the context
of low interest rates. Our analysis points to a force that increases the bene ts of such expansions.
   e analysis provided simple conditions for scal feasibility, complementing the typical dynamic
ine ciency condition of Samuelson (1958) and Diamond (1965). We have tried for analytical clar-
ity in an extension of the canonical Bewley environment, rather than a full edged quantitative
model for policy design in the current context. In particular, we have abstracted from aggregate
risk. Integrating the possibility that interest rates rise in response to aggregate shocks would cer-
tainly increase the scal costs of higher debt. e bene ts from increasing debt to improve risk
sharing and for supply expansions would then have to be balanced against the costs of having to
tax future generations to pay for the debt if interest rates rise.




                                                 34
References
Achdou, Yves, Jiequn Han, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll,
  "Income and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach," Review
  of Economic Studies, 2021.

Aiyagari, S. R., "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,"    e   arterly Journal of
  Economics, August 1994, 109 (3), 659­684.

Aiyagari, S.Rao and Ellen R. McGrattan, "      e optimum quantity of debt," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, October 1998, 42 (3), 447­469.

Angeletos, George-Marios, "Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate saving,"
 Review of Economic dynamics, 2007, 10 (1), 1­30.

Ball, Laurence M and N Gregory Mankiw, "Market Power in Neoclassical Growth Models,"
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 28538, 2021.

Barro, Robert, Modern business cycle theory, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1989.

Barth, James R., George Iden, and Frank S. Russek, "DO FEDERAL DEFICITS REALLY MAT-
  TER?," Contemporary Economic Policy, September 1984, 3 (1), 79­95.

Bassetto, Marco and Wei Cui, " e scal theory of the price level in a world of low interest
  rates," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2018, 89, 5­22.

Basu, Susanto, "Are price-cost markups rising in the United States? A discussion of the evi-
  dence," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2019, 33 (3), 3­22.

Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu, " e wealth distribution in Bewley
  economies with capital income risk," Journal of Economic eory, September 2015, 159, 489­
  515.

Bernheim, B Douglas, "Ricardian equivalence: An evaluation of theory and evidence," NBER
  macroeconomics annual, 1987, 2, 263­304.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of eory and Evidence," in
  "NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1987, Volume 2," e MIT Press, 1987, pp. 263­316.

Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and omas J. Sargent, "Public debt in
  economies with heterogeneous agents," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2017, 91, 39­51.

  , , , and omas Sargent, "Inequality, Business Cycles and Monetary-Fiscal- Policy," Uni-
  versity of Minnesota, 2020.

Blanchard, Olivier, "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, April 2019,
  109 (4), 1197­1229.




                                              35
Braxton, J Carter, Kyle F Herkenho , and Gordon M Phillips, "Can the unemployed bor-
  row? implications for public insurance," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search 2020.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, Sebastian A Merkel, and Yuliy Sannikov, "Debt as safe asset:
  Mining the bubble," Princeton University work in progress, 2020.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, "Where is the land of
 opportunity? e geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States," e arterly
 Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1553­1623.

D´
 avila, Julio, Jay H. Hong, Per Krusell, and Jos´
                                                e-V´      ios-Rull, "Constrained E ciency
                                                   ictor R´
 in the Neoclassical Growth Model With Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Shocks," Econometrica, 2012,
 80 (6), 2431­2467.

Diamond, Peter A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"      e American Economic
  Review, 1965, 55 (5), 1126­1150.

Dyrda, Sebastian and Marcelo Pedroni, "Optimal scal policy in a model with uninsurable
 idiosyncratic shocks," University of Toronto, 2020.

Elmendorf, Douglas W. and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Government debt," in J. B. Taylor and
  M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, Else-
  vier, 1999, chapter 25, pp. 1615­1669.

Engen, Eric M. and R. Glenn Hubbard, "Federal Government Debt and Interest Rates," in
  "NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Volume 19," MIT Press, April 2005, pp. 83­160.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior
  of Consumption and Asset Returns: A eoretical Framework," Econometrica, July 1989, 57 (4),
  937.

Gale, William G. and Peter R. Orszag, "Economic e ects of sustained budget de cits," National
 Tax Journal, September 2003, 56 (3), 487­502.

Grand, Franc ¸ois Le and Xavier Ragot, "Managing Inequality over Business Cycles: Optimal
  Policies with Heterogeneous Agents and Aggregate Shocks," SciencesPo Working Paper 2020.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Hu man, "Investment, Capacity Uti-
  lization, and the Real Business Cycle," e American Economic Review, 1988, 78 (3), 402­417.

Hagedorn, Marcus, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman, "           e scal multiplier," National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25571, 2019.

Heathcote, Jonathan, "Fiscal Policy with Heterogeneous Agents and Incomplete Markets,"      e
 Review of Economic Studies, 01 2005, 72 (1), 161­188.

  , Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L Violante, "Optimal tax progressivity: An analytical
  framework," e arterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1693­1754.

                                             36
Jord`   `
    a, Oscar,  Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Tay-
  lor, " e rate of return on everything, 1870­2015," e arterly Journal of Economics, 2019,
  134 (3), 1225­1298.

Kreps, David M. and Evan L. Porteus, "Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
  Choice eory," Econometrica, January 1978, 46 (1), 185.

Krueger, Dirk, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri, "Macroeconomics and Household Hetero-
  geneity," in "Handbook of Macroeconomics," Elsevier, 2016, pp. 843­921.

Krusell, Per and Anthony A Smith Jr, "Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroecon-
  omy," Journal of political Economy, 1998, 106 (5), 867­896.

Light, Bar, "Uniqueness of equilibrium in a Bewley­Aiyagari model," Economic         eory, Decem-
  ber 2018, 69 (2), 435­450.

Mauro, Paolo and Jing Zhou, "rg¡ 0: Can We Sleep More Soundly?," IMF Economic Review, 2021,
 69 (1).

Mehrotra, Neil and Dmitriy Sergeyev, "Debt Sustainability in a Low Interest Rate World,"
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper 2020.

Oh, Hyunseung and Ricardo Reis, "Targeted transfers and the scal response to the great
 recession," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59, S50­S64.
¨
Omer  T. Ac
          ¸ikg¨oz, "On the existence and uniqueness of stationary equilibrium in Bewley
  economies with production," Journal of Economic eory, January 2018, 173, 18­55.

Reis, Ricardo, " e constraint on Public Debt when r<g but g<m," London School of Economics
  Working Paper 2020.

Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social
  Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy, 1958, 66 (6), 467­482.

Seater, John J, "Ricardian equivalence," Journal of economic literature, 1993, 31 (1), 142­190.

Tauchen, George, "Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and vector autore-
  gressions," Economics le ers, 1986, 20 (2), 177­181.

           an, "Pareto E cient Income Taxation," MIT Working Paper 2007.
Werning, Iv´

Woodford, Michael, "Public Debt as Private Liquidity,"      e American Economic Review, 1990, 80
 (2), 382­388.




                                                37
Appendix A             Computational Algorithm
   is appendix describes the computational algorithm we use in solving the model. Our procedure
consists of two steps. We rst compute the initial and nal stationary equilibria. e initial one is
the laissez faire equilibrium and the nal one has scal policy. We then compute the transition of
this economy with shooting algorithms. We describe the algorithm for the dynamically e cient
economy with markups.

A.1     Stationary Equilibrium
Initial      e laissez faire initial stationary equilibrium is the standard Bewley-Hugget-Aiyagari
model. We compute it with a value function iteration over a savings grid, and solve for the equi-
librium wages and interest rates that clear markets.         e objects we record are prices { 0, 0 },
aggregate capital, labor, pro ts, and the limiting distribution of households over idiosyncratic
state { , }, namely { 0, 0, 0, 0 ( , )}. We denote the objects in the initial stationary equilib-
rium by 0.

Final      e nal stationary equilibrium is indexed by                           .

   1. We set a target levels for capital                and debt            .

   2. Choose scal policies { ,           } to keep wages and pro ts as in the initial equilibrium using

                                     (     ,       0)= (1 + ) 0
                                                   0 =(1 - )( - 1) (                       ,   0 )/


   3. Guess an equilibrium interest rate                    .

   4. We recover the initial implied           from

                                               (        ,       0)   = (1 +         )(   + )

   5. Use the government budget is a constraint to recover transfers                                       given our se ings and
      the guess for interest rates

                          = (    ,   0)   - ( 0,                 0)   -(    + )          +( 0+ )       0   +

   6. Solve households problem

                             ( , ;       ) = max                 ( ( , ),           ( , ;      ))
                                                    ,,

                                          subject to: +                             0    + (1 +       ) +

         · Gives value and savings policy functions ( , ; ), ( , ; ) and labor supply with-
           out wealth e ects ( ), and a household distribution  ( , ; )


                                                                     38
   7. Use the asset market clearing condition and rm's optimal capital condition to obtain a
      new guess on interest rates ~

                                      + ~ =             ( , ;    ) ( , )  ( , ;                 )

                                ( ~ ,   0)   = (1 +          )( ~ + )

   8. We go back to step 3, and repeat the procedure until ~ is close to the target capital level.

A.2    Transition
At time 0, the government announces a sequence of scal policies that implement a sequence of
capital and debt { , } =0 . We will assume that at period the economy is in the nal stationary
equilibrium.

   1. Choose scal policies { ,        } to keep wages and pro ts as in the initial equilibrium using

                                      ( ,    0)= (1 + ) 0
                                             0 =(1 - )( - 1) ( ,                     0 )/


   2. Guess sequence of interest rates { } =0

         · Recover the capital taxes given our target capital sequence and interest rate guess

                                                  ( ,    0)   = (1 +         )( + )

         · Recover transfers from government budget constraint using sequence of debt

                       = ( ,     0)   - ( 0,       0)   -( + )          +( 0+ )         0   +   +1   - (1 + )

   3. Solve households problem backwards

         · Start with period - 1 problem. Note that we have the value at period                                 from the
           stationary equilibrium

                                 ( , ) = max             ( ( , )+             +1 (   , ))
                                               ,,

                                         subject to: +                   0     + (1 + ) +

         · Store saving decision rules:       ( , ).

   4. Iterate forwards, update interest rates:          e resulting aggregate savings from Step 2 will not
      be equal to the targets.

         · Start with initial distribution 0 ( , ) and apply the decision rules from above.



                                                        39
                 · Use the asset market clearing condition to obtain the resulting capital sequence ~                                                                    +1


                                                        +1       + ~   +1   =              ( , ) ( , ) ( , )

                 · Use rm's optimal capital condition to obtain a candidate new sequence of interest
                   rates ~

                                                                   (~,           0)   = (1 +      )( ~ + )

                 · Update the sequence of interest rates such that                                      =                      + (1 - ) ~ , for a enuation
                   parameter = 0.5. Go back to step 2.

Check whether implementing these target levels of { , } =0 result in a Pareto improvement
{  0,  0} =0 . If not, we modify the target levels of capital and debt.


Appendix B                             Dynamic Ine cient Transition

                          b/y0                                              k/y0                                               Transfers and segniorage
       100                                               4
                                                                                                                           5
        80
                                                         3
                                                                                                                           4
        60
                                                                                                                           3
  %




                                                                                                                    %
                                                         2
        40                                                                                                                                              T /y0
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                        b -(1+r )b
                                                         1                                                                                                 y0
        20                                                                                                                 1

         0                                               0                                                                 0
             0     20    40       60   80   100              0     20       40        60     80   100                          0   20    40        60        80         100



                              r                                              c/c0                                          Consumption dispersion
                                                       5.0                                                                 0
     -1.50
                                                                                                            std dev (%)




     -1.55                                             2.5                                                                -2

     -1.60                                                                                                                -4
 %




                                                  %




                                                       0.0

     -1.65                                                                                                                -6
                                                      -2.5
     -1.70                                                                                                                -8
                                                      -5.0
             0     20    40       60   80   100              0     20       40        60     80   100                          0   20   40    60        80        100



                        Figure A.1: Fiscal Policy Transition in Dynamic Ine cient Economy



Appendix C                                  e Growth Economy
In this appendix, we show how the key expressions of Section 2 are modi ed by the presence
of exogenous labor-augmenting technological growth. e derivations are standard and are in-
cluded for completeness.


                                                                            40
    Assume technology is given by

                                                   = ( , (1 + )           ),

where  0 is the constant rate of growth of labor-augmenting technology. Le ing a tilde denote
variables divided by (1 + ) , constant returns implies:
                                         ~  (1 + )-            = ( ~ , ).

  e representative rm's rst-order conditions are (dropping subscripts):

                                                   ( ~ , ) = (1 +     )
                                                   ( ~ , ) = (1 +     )~.

We also have ~ = (1 - )( - 1) ( ~ , )/ .
   Given the absence of a wealth e ect on labor supply, we assume that the disutility of working
grows at rate as well (dropping and indicators):

                                              ( , ) = - (1 + ) ( ),

giving us
                                    ~ ( ~, )  (1 + )- ( , ) = ~ - ( ).
We also assume that the borrowing constraint is scaled by (1 + ) .
   We can write the household's problem as:

                           ( , , ) = max ( ( , ), (            +1 (   , , )))
                                        , ,
                                              s.t. +                  +  + (1 + ) +
                                                    (1 + ) +1 ,

where we have altered the last constraint to account for growth and                is a certainty equivalent
operator. e constraint set can be rewri en as

                                ~ + (1 + ) ~  ~            + ~ + (1 + ) ~ + ~
                                           ~  .

   us, if ( , , ) is feasible at time then ( ~, , ~ ) satis es the normalized constraint set, and vice
versa. Assuming is constant-returns in and , and is homogeneous of degree 1, if ( , , )
satis es the consumer's Bellman equation, then ~ ( ~, , )  (1 + )- ( , , ) satis es
                            ~ ( ~, , ) = max ( ~ ( ~, ), (1 + ) ( ~ +1 ( ~ , , ))),
                                          ~, , ~

subject to the normalized constraint set, and vice versa.26
  26 Forthe simulations, we use ( , ) = ((1 - ) 1- + 1- )1/(1- ) . In this case, we can de ne ~  (1 + )1- , and
write ( ~ , ) = ((1 - ~) ~ 1- + ~ 1- )1/(1- ) , where  (1 - )/(1 - ~). is is well de ned as long as ~  1. Growth
      ~


                                                          41
    Note that for an interior optimum for , the rst-order condition can be expressed:

                                                      ( ) = ~.

Hence, labor supply is constant as long as ~ remains constant.
     e government's budget constraint can be rewri en in normalized form:
                    ~ =       ~    +     ~ +      ~ /(1 -
                                                                ) + (1 + ) ~    +1   - (1 + ) ~ .

   Let ~        ~0 0 +       ~ + ~ 0 /(1 - ) denote normalized tax revenue before transfers
when keeping a er tax normalized wages and pro ts constant. Following the same steps as the
proof of Proposition 1, we have
                             ~ = (~,    0)   - ( ~ 0,   0)   - ( + ) ~ + ( 0 + ) ~0.

Condition (iii) of Proposition 1 (equation (2)) becomes:

            (1 + ) ~   +1   - (1 + ) ~ - ~  ( ~ 0,      0)   - (~,      0)   - ( 0 + ) ~0 + ( + ) ~ .

Condition (ii) becomes ~  -( - 0 )~ , and condition (i) remains unchanged. Note that in a
steady state (that is, relevant aggregates grow at rate ), Condition (iii) becomes

                 ( -        ) ~ - ~  ( ~ 0,      0)   - (~ ,     0)   - ( 0 + ) ~0 + ( + ) ~ .

Hence, debt increases government revenues in the steady state as long as > . Expressions in
Claims 1 and 2 are adjusted in a similar fashion to obtain normalized equivalents.




can be accommodated by rescaling the discount factor, as expected with homogeneous preferences.


                                                        42
