                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REPUTATION AND PARTIAL DEFAULT

                                       Manuel Amador
                                      Christopher Phelan

                                      Working Paper 28997
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28997


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




Thee views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Manuel Amador and Christopher Phelan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reputation and Partial Default
Manuel Amador and Christopher Phelan
NBER Working Paper No. 28997
July 2021
JEL No. F34,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper presents a continuous-time reputation model of sovereign debt allowing for
both varying levels of partial default and full default. In it, a government can be a non-
strategic commitment type, or a strategic opportunistic type, and a government's
reputation is its equilibrium Bayesian posterior of being the commitment type. Our equilibrium
has that for bond levels reachable by both types without defaulting, bigger partial defaults (or
bigger haircuts for bond holders) imply higher interest rates for subsequent bond issuances, as in
the data.


Manuel Amador
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com

Christopher Phelan
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
cphelan@umn.edu




Code is available at https://github.com/manuelamador/partial_default
                     Reputation and Partial Default
                         Manuel Amador                     Christopher Phelan

                                               June 28, 2021



                                                   Abstract

               is paper presents a continuous-time reputation model of sovereign debt allowing for
       both varying levels of partial default and full default. In it, a government can be a non-
       strategic commitment type, or a strategic opportunistic type, and a government's reputation
       is its equilibrium Bayesian posterior of being the commitment type. Our equilibrium has that
       for bond levels reachable by both types without defaulting, bigger partial defaults (or bigger
       haircuts for bond holders) imply higher interest rates for subsequent bond issuances, as in
       the data.



1      Introduction
Countries which when partially defaulting impose bigger haircuts on their bond holders face
bigger market consequences. In particular, the interest rates they face for future bond issuances
are higher.1 But it is far from clear that this should be the case. A er all, the bigger the haircut,
the be er debt position the defaulting country is in.
    Here, we propose a possible explanation: Bigger adverse consequences for bigger haircuts act
as an endogenous equilibrium incentive to make sovereign governments willing to mix between
di ering haircut levels.
    In our model, governments can have possible private "types" (in particular a strategic "op-
portunistic" type and a non-strategic "commitment" type). We assume the commitment type,
which by assumption never fully defaults, is sometimes stochastically forced to partially default
at varying haircut levels, while the opportunistic type can default at any level at any time. Our
       e views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.
    University of Minnesota, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and NBER.
    University of Minnesota, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and NBER.
   1 Cruces and Trebesch (2013) were the rst to point out this fact a er compiling a comprehensive dataset on

haircuts and bond prices for sovereign defaults. See also the subsequent work of Asonuma (2016).


                                                       1
equilibrium has the property that for bond levels reachable by the opportunistic type without
defaulting, bond prices are higher the higher the equilibrium probability a country's government
is the commitment type. Further, our equilibrium involves the opportunistic type mixing -- for
any positive length of time, it chooses a positive nite probability of defaulting at every possible
haircut level.
     For such mixing to be a best response for an opportunistic type, the equilibrium mixing prob-
abilities must imply that when a country imposes a bigger haircut on its lenders, its reputation
(the Bayesian posterior that it is the commitment type) falls further than if it had imposed a
smaller haircut. e intuition is that the bene t of a larger haircut is, of course, the wiping out of
more debt. But for the opportunistic type to then ever choose a smaller haircut, there has to be
a corresponding, and equal, cost to imposing a larger haircut. e cost imposed by equilibrium
is then this greater loss in reputation, and the corresponding greater increase in future interest
rates.
     Our model is similar to and based on the continuous time model of Amador and Phelan (forth-
coming), referred to now as A&P21. In that model, however, countries can only fully default (that
is, fully repudiate the debt ensuring no payments would ever be made to current bond holders).
Here, we also allow countries to partially default.
        ere are several papers that model reputational considerations in sovereign debt markets,
such as Cole, Dow and English (1995), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005), D'Erasmo (2011), Egorov and
Fabinger (2016), and Dovis (2019).2 e initial quantitative models of sovereign debt e ectively as-
sumed that there are no partial defaults (all defaults are full), and the sovereign can subsequently
re-enter nancial markets with a clean slate.3 is assumption has been relaxed by subsequent re-
search that has modelled the process of renegotiation between lenders and the sovereign.4 Aguiar,
Amador, Hopenhayn and Werning (2016), Dvorkin, S´        anchez, Sapriza and Yurdagul (2021), and
Mihalache (2020) study the role of the maturity structure plays in restructurings. e la er two
provide a quantitative analysis, but do not focus on the behavior of spreads a er default and re-
entering nancial markets. In her study of cyclical renegotiation outcomes, Sunder-Plassmann
(2018) is able to generate spreads that are higher a er higher haircuts in an Eaton and Gersovitz
   2 See  Amador and Phelan (forthcoming) for a discussion of these papers. Cha erjee, Corbae, Dempsey and R´       ios-
Rull (2020) explore the implications of reputational concerns in unsecured consumer credit markets.
    3 See for example Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), which are based on the incomplete markets

framework of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). A er re-entering nancial markets following a default, there are two op-
posing forces at play in these models: rst, default costs are low and expected to remain low in the future, raising the
probability of future defaults. But debt is also low (as the country has fully defaulted), which lowers that probability.
   is second force dominates and generates counter-factually low spreads a er a country re-enters nancial markets
following a default.
    4 See, for instance Yue (2010), who introduced bargaining over restructuring terms in the Eaton-Gersovitz frame-

work. For an earlier model on renegotiation, see Bulow and Rogo (1989). See also Salomao (2017), and Benjamin
and Wright (2008).



                                                           2
(1981) style model by making the bargaining power of the government during a renegotiation
counter-cyclical.     is can lead to higher haircuts in defaults that occur during recessions (and
those lower output states are associated with lower default costs in the future ­ potentially in-
creasing spreads). Note that in our paper, output (which is constant) and debt are not su cient
state variables to capture the behavior of spreads, a fact emphasized by Cruces and Trebesch
(2013). Arellano, Mateos-Planas and R´  ios-Rull (2019) provides an alternative model where partial
defaults lead to further defaults and increases in debt (because of arrears).


2        e Environment
   e continuous and in nite time environment/game we consider is similar to and based on the
environment of A&P21. As in A&P21, here we consider a small open economy endowed with a
constant ow of a consumption good whose government can borrow from risk-neutral price-
taking outside lenders who discount the future at rate > 0. e terms of such borrowing is that
the country can issue long term bonds at every date which pay a coupon at date of ( + ) - ( - ) .
   is coupon schedule ensures that the price of a bond is one at date if default cannot occur.
Assuming exponentially decaying coupon payments is equivalent to the government paying an
instantaneous coupon of + per unit of current debt, ( ) , with such debt decaying at rate .
We assume the initial level of debt is zero, and there exists an exogenous maximum level of debt,
  < /( + ) (which ensures paying the required coupon is always feasible).


2.1    Players
As in A&P21, there is a countable list of potential governments where at any date  0, only
one of the potential governments is active and makes decisions. We assume the rst government
on the list is an opportunistic type, the second a commitment type, with the list then alternating
between types. At all times, with Poisson arrival rate > 0, an opportunistic type government
is replaced by the next government on the list (a commitment type). With arrival rate > 0, a
commitment type government is replaced by an opportunistic type. Such switches are private.


2.2    Strategies
We assume the commitment type is non-strategic and continuously makes coupon payments
( + ) per unit of debt. Unlike A&P21, here we assume the commitment type is sometimes
forced to partially default. To this end, let = { 1, . . . , } denote an increasing grid of fractions
representing the severity of a partial default, where a larger value of represents a smaller haircut,
or a larger level of remaining debt a er the partial default. Let > 0 denote the Poisson arrival

                                                 3
rate of a shock which forces a commitment government with debt ( ) to partially default and
reset its debt to      ( ) . In particular, partial default resets the promised stream of payments of
each existing bond proportionally to            of its previous value. Assume these shocks are not
publicly observed, and that a commitment type never fully defaults.
     An opportunistic type, however, can both fully and partially default. It can always fully de-
fault, and, like the commitment type, can partially default at level , rese ing debt to         ( ) . If a
full default occurs, current bond holders get no additional payments, and the stock of outstanding
debt is set to zero. If an opportunistic type partially defaults, coupon payments are adjusted ex-
actly as if the commitment type partially defaults. Since both types can partially default, a partial
default at any level does not mechanistically reveal the government's type.
     As in A&P21, we assume that strategies are Markov. e payo relevant state variables here
are the level of debt ( ) and the government's reputation ( ) . In A&P21, where only full default
or no default was possible at any given moment, these two state variables could be reduced, with-
out loss, to a single state variable that implied them both, time since last default, denoted . Here,
this is no longer true. With partial default, time since last full default no longer mechanistically
implies debt and reputation. Nevertheless, here we again look for strategies as a function of ,
but consider to be a more abstract object, best thought of as the time on a stopwatch which
can be reset back to either zero (in the case of full default) or to endogenous earlier time-points
depending on the level of partial default, . In particular, let ( ) be the level of debt if there are
no defaults for periods starting from no debt. We search for equilibria where upon a partial
default from ( ) to debt level          ( ) , the stopwatch is reset to the endogenous amount of time
it takes a country to go from zero debt to debt level          ( ) conditional on not defaulting at any
                                                            
level during that time, denoted ( ( )) . ( at is, ( ) is the inverse function of ( ) .)
     For the commitment type, we assume that as long as it is in control, it follows a pre-speci ed
expenditure rule determined by the expectations of international nancial markets of how a com-
mitment type should act. at is, as long as the commitment type is in control, the stock of debt
evolves according to

                                           ( )=     ( ( ), ( ))                                        (1)

for some exogenous function , where ( ) represents the price of a bond when the stopwatch
displays (from now on referred to as period ) a er the realization of the period default event.
    It follows from the sequential budget constraint that ( ) = - ( + ) ( ) + ( )( ( ) + ( )) ,
and thus consumption for the commitment type is determined by ( ) = ( ( ), ( )) where the
function is given by
                               ( , ) -( + ) + ( ( , )+ )


                                                    4
   We further impose the following further conditions on            ( , ) (and thus, implicitly, ( , ) ):

Assumption 1. Let X  [0, ] × [0, 1] . e function : X  R satis es the following: (i) H is
Lipschitz continuous; (ii) H is weakly decreasing in ; (iii) H is weakly increasing in ; (iv) ere
exists  ( 0, + + + + ) such that   ( 0, ) = 0 for all  [0, ] , and ( 0, ) > 0 for all  ( , 1] ;
(v) ( , 1)  0; (vi) is di erentiable in the set of ( , )  X such that ( , ) > 0.

     Restrictions (ii) and (iii) guarantee that the commitment type increases its debt by more the
higher the price of its bonds and the lower the inherited debt stock.5
     For the opportunistic type, in addition to the Markov restriction, we impose a restriction that it
always chooses a level of borrowing (and thus consumption) that is identical to that which would
have been chosen by a commitment government facing the same debt and price. (In A&P21,
we show this restriction is without loss.) With this restriction, the only decision le under the
control of the opportunistic government is whether and how much to default. Let default level
   = 0 denote full default and default level  {1, . . . , } denote the partial default rese ing debt
   to     by adjusting future coupon payments proportionally.
     Given these restrictions, we assume that a strategy for an opportunistic government consists
of a scalar , and two vectors, ( ) and ( ) . e rst vector, ( ) = { 0 ( ), . . . , ( )}, denotes
for all < , the Poisson arrival rate of the opportunistic government defaulting at each level
 .     e second vector, ( ) = { 0 ( ), . . . , ( )}, denotes for all  , the probability of the
opportunistic government defaulting at each level at precisely period . We further assume
    =0   ( ) = 1 for all  , or that an opportunistic type certainly and immediately defaults
at some level for all  . Such a strategy speci cation is de nitely not without loss. We
nevertheless a empt to construct equilibria in this class.


2.3        Payo s
If the government does not default at period , it issues additional bonds ( ( ), ( )) + ( )
at endogenous price ( ) and its consumption is ( ( ), ( )) . If the government fully defaults
(that is, defaults at level = 0), then is reset to zero with 0 = 0. If the government partially
defaults at level  1, debt is reset from ( ) to        ( ) , and is reset to  ( ( )) .
       ere are no direct costs of choosing to fully or partially default and no restrictions on gov-
ernment borrowing from then on. In particular, in the case of full default, the government im-
mediately issues new additional bonds ( 0, ( 0)) at endogenous price ( 0) and its consumption
is ( 0, ( 0)) . In the case of partial default, the government immediately issues new additional
bonds ( ( ), (  ( ( )))) +                ( ) at endogenous price (  ( ( ))) and its consump-
tion is ( ( ), (  ( ( )))) .
   5 See   A&P (2021) for justi cation of the other restrictions.

                                                             5
       e opportunistic type receives a ow payo equal to ( ( )) as long as it is continuously in
power, and discounts future payo s at rate > 0. We assume that : R+  [ , ] for some nite
values and , and that is strictly increasing. We make no other assumptions on the preferences
of the opportunistic type. (As in A&P21, a preview of our results is that our constructed Markov
equilibrium is essentially independent of and . Other than more is preferred to less, and now
is preferred to later, the preferences of the opportunistic type will not ma er at all.)


2.4    Beliefs
Recall ( ) represents the international market's beliefs, or Bayesian posterior, that the govern-
ment is the commitment type when the stopwatch is at . If the government fully defaults at any
period  0, Bayesian updating implies immediately jumps to zero, since only the opportunis-
tic type can fully default.
     Next, consider < . If the government partially defaults at level at , Bayesian updating
depends on the opportunistic type's strategy. Speci cally, if a partial default of level occurs,
Bayesian updating implies ( ) jumps to

                                                        ( )
                                                                                .
                                           ( )      + ( 1 - ( ))          ( )

  is is the arrival rate of an -level default by the commitment type divided by the arrival rate of
an -level default by either type.
    If the government doesn't default at any level at date < , Bayesian updating again depends
on the opportunistic type's strategy. Bayesian updating in this case implies6


                 ( ) = ( 1 - ( )) + ( ) ( 1 - ( ))                  0(    )+             (   ( )-     ) -       .   (2)
                                                                                    =1

    For  , ( ) = 1, since by assumption an opportunistic government immediately defaults
at some level for all  . Further, Bayesian updating requires to remain at one if no default
occurs. As when < , if government fully defaults, Bayesian updating requires to jump to
  6   is formula is the derivative of the following with respect to  evaluated at  = 0

                                                               ( ) (1 -    =1       )
                      ( + ) = ( 1 - )
                                          ( ) (1 -    =1       ) + ( 1 - ( )) ( 1 -           =0    ( ) )
                                                           ( ) (1 -       =1        )
                              +  (1 -                                                                      ).
                                         ( )( 1 -    =1    ) + ( 1 - ( )) ( 1 -              =0    ( ) )




                                                           6
zero. If a government partially defaults at level , Bayesian updating requires                                      to jump to

                                                                             .
                                                             +         ( )

   is is again the arrival rate of an -level default by the commitment type divided by the arrival
rate of an -level default by either type, where the arrival rate of an -level default by an op-
portunistic type is the arrival rate of a type switch, , multiplied the probability of an immediate
 -level default, ( ) .


2.5       Prices
Our construction of a Markov equilibrium will take candidate initial prices ( 0) as given. Prices
for all periods 0 <  are then determined by the delay di erential equation7

                                    ( ) = -( + ) + ( )( + + ( 1 - ( ))                                0(   ))+

                                ( ( ) - ( (            ( ))) )( ( )               + ( 1 - ( ))         ( )) .                    (3)
                           =1

        For    ,

                                        ( ) = -( + ) + ( )( + +                          0(    ))+

                                        ( ( ) - ( (              ( ))) )(            +       ( )) .                              (4)
                                   =1


3        Markov Equilibria
We consider a collection ( ( ), ( ), ( ), , {                     ( )}       =0, {    ( )}    =0 )   to be a Markov equilibrium
if

    1. (Foreign investors break even in equilibrium.) For all , ( ) is the expected discounted
       (by ) value of the stream of coupon payments for a bond issued at period .
                                               ( +)- ( )
    7    is formula is the limit as   0 of                  where

                                    -( + ) 
                   ( ) = ( + ) +              ( + )         ( ) (1 -             ) + ( 1 - ( )) ( 1 -            ( ) )
                                                                        =1                                 =0

                                             -( + ) 
                                         +                  ( (        ( )))      ( ( )  + ( 1 - ( ))            ( ) ) .
                                                       =1




                                                                  7
    2. (Market beliefs are rational.)   : R+  [0, 1] ; satis es Bayes rule.

    3. (Debt evolution and budget constraint.)    e level of debt, as a function of , evolves ac-
       cording to the pre-speci ed expenditure rule .

    4. (opportunistic type optimizes.) For all , no other default strategy improves the continua-
       tion expected lifetime payo of the opportunistic type.


4     Constructing a Markov Equilibrium
In this section, we construct a Markov equilibrium.
       e main idea for the equilibrium construction, as in A&P21, is to rst ensure that consump-
tion for the opportunistic type is always at a constant  > for all periods < , and that
consumption of the opportunistic type is weakly less than  for all  . e construction next
ensures that reputation is reset a er a partial default so that a er a default of level in period
  , jumps to (  ( ( ))) . Such a construction ensures that an opportunistic government is
indi erent between defaulting at any level or not defaulting for < , and is indi erent between
default levels (and is willing to certainly and immediately default at some level) for  .
     To this end, let ( , ) denote the price which causes a commitment type with debt to set
its consumption to . at is, ( , ) is such that ( , ( , )) = . Assumption 1 guarantees that
   ( , ) is strictly increasing in and , re ecting the fact that to maintain a level of consumption
higher than , the bond price must be higher at a higher debt level (as the government must be
generating positive revenue from new issuances to sustain > ); and that a higher consumption
requires a higher bond price, given a debt level.
     Consider then a solution to the following autonomous rst order di erential equation:

                                                               
                                        ( )=   ( ( ), ( ( ),      ))                            (5)

with initial condition ( 0) = 0. Its solution, along with ( ) = ( ( ), ) will de ne the candi-
date ( ( ), ( )) before period , as the debt level and bond price paths that keep consumption
at . Once these candidate paths for debt and bond prices are determined, they will be used to
determine the candidate paths of default arrival rates, ( ) , and reputation, ( ) . We then de ne
our candidate as the earliest period such that ( ) = 1.
    To de ne the candidate ( ) implied by our candidate ( ) and ( ) for  , we derive a
delay di erential equation. First, to ensure that jumps to (  ( ( ))) a er an type partial
default, one needs
                                           ( ) 1 - (  ( ( )))
                                 ( )=                               ,                          (6)
                                        1- ( )      (  ( ( )))

                                                  8
for all  1. Given this and solving equation (3) for               0(       ) and substituting into equation (2), one
derives the delay di erential equation


                                               ( )+ +
                         ( )= + ( )                              - ( )( + + + )
                                                  ( )
                                         ( (      ( )))    ( )
                          ( )        (                    
                                                                                    - 1) .                       (7)
                                =1
                                               ( )      ( ( ( )))

Since our candidate ( ) and ( ) (and thus ( ) ) have been previously determined, this delay
di erential equation, with initial condition ( 0) = 0, solves for our candidate ( ) . De ne as
the smallest such that ( ) = 1.
      is de nes our candidate ( ( ), ( ), ( ), { ( )} =0 ) up to , all as a function of the as-
sumed ( 0) .
    For > , the candidate ( ) and ( ) are no longer determined by the paths necessary to
hold consumption constant at . Candidates for ( ) and ( ) are constructed for > by using
 ( ) and ( ) as initial conditions and using the di erential equations (1) and (4), substituting
  ( ) = ( (  ( 1 ( ))) - 1) for  1 and 0 ( ) = 1 - =1 ( ) into (4), yielding the delay
di erential equation

                                                                              (  ( ( )))
             ( ) = -( + ) + ( ) ( + + ) - ( )                          (                        - 1) .           (8)
                                                                  =1
                                                                            ( ) (  ( ( )))

Se ing ( ) to this value ensures that reputation jumps to (  ( ( ))) a er a partial de-
fault of level , and se ing 0 ( ) to this value ensures that a er a type switch, the newly born
opportunistic type immediately defaults at some level.
     Is this candidate equilibrium an equilibrium? For this, we need to check four conditions.
First, we need our constructed ( )  [0, 1] for any  ( 0, ] . Second, we need our constructed
    =1   ( )  [0, 1] for all  .        ird, we need ( ( ), ( ))   for all  .              is and
consumption equal to for all  [0, ] ensures optimization by the opportunistic government
                         

is satis ed. Finally, we need prices ( ) to actually represent the expected present discounted
value of the coupon payments of a bond issued at period .       is is ensured if and only if ( )
converges to a nite limit as  . In particular, , ( ) must converge to

                                                           ( (        ))
                                         + +      =1       ( (        ))
                                                                               ,                                 (9)
                                               + + +             =1


where    lim        ( ) . Note for any arbitrary           ,     such convergence will in general not occur.

                                                       9
For low , the corresponding ( 0) = ( 0, ) and ( ) will also be low, and the pricing equation
(4) will cause ( ) to diverge downward. Intuitively, the di erential equation (4) is "justifying"
a too low ( ) through ever increasing capital losses. Likewise, for high , the corresponding
  ( 0) = ( 0, ) and ( ) will also be high, and the pricing equation (4) will cause ( ) to diverge
upward. Here, the di erential equation (4) justi es a too high ( ) through ever increasing capital
gains.


5    Main Result
Proposition 1. Let a collection ( ( ), ( ), ( ), { ( )}          =0, {( )} =0 ) be an equilibrium con-
structed as in the previous section. en for all  ( ) and           > , ( (       ( ))) > (  ( ( ))) .

Proof.    at  > implies ( ) is increasing in for < . at ( , ) is decreasing in and
increasing in , along with  ( 0, 1) implies ( , ) is also decreasing in and increasing in .
   us for consumption, ( ) , to be constant at  for < , ( ) must also be increasing in for
  < .

       is result implies that for partial defaults possibly done in equilibrium by the opportunistic
type, the fall in bond prices following a partial default is greater the greater the bondholder hair-
cut. (In our construction, partial defaults to debt values greater than ( ) are only ever done by
the commitment type in equilibrium. If a type switch from commitment to opportunistic occurs
when ( )  ( ) , the opportunistic type immediately either fully defaults or partially defaults
at a level such that        ( ) < ( ) .) Note, our result that bigger partial defaults imply bigger
drops in bond prices holds independent of the values of (the arrival rates of partial default by
the commitment type), or any other parameters of the model such as , , , { 1, . . . , }, , ,
or .


6    An Example
In this section we present an example which computationally meets our equilibrium criteria. e
example parameters, where possible, are the same as in A&P21. In particular, for the commitment
type's borrowing function ( , ) , we choose

                                                         +
                             ( , ) = max        -            -   ,0 ( - ) .                       (10)

   We normalize = 1, and choose other parameters consistent with a unit of time being one
year. us our choice of = 0.01 and = 0.02 implies a 1% chance per year that an opportunistic

                                                    10
                                          q (t)                                                                                          b(t)
   0.9                                                                                   1.00


                                                                                         0.75
   0.8

                                                                                         0.50

   0.7
                                                                                         0.25


   0.6                                                                                   0.00
           0        20       T       40           60     80           100                            0            20       T        40          60    80   100


                                          (t)                                                                                            c(t)
 1.00
                                                                                         1.00

 0.75
                                                                                         0.99
 0.50

                                                                                         0.98
 0.25


 0.00                                                                                    0.97
               0        20       T   40           60     80          100                         0                20       T        40           60   80    100



Figure 1: Equilibrium paths for , , , and starting from 0 = 0 and 0 = 0. is as in equation
(10).    e rest of the parameters are = 1, = 0.01, = 0.02, = 0.01, = 0.2,  = 0.15,
  = { .25, .75}, 1 = 2 = .005. e value of = 30.9 is represented by the vertical line.

                                          n (t)                                                                                      n (t)
 0.5
                                                              0                                          0
                                                                                       0.6
                                                              1 ( = 0.25)                                1 ( = 0.25)
 0.4                                                          2 ( = 0.75)                                2 ( = 0.75)
                                                                                       0.5


 0.3                                                                                   0.4


                                                                                       0.3
 0.2
                                                                                       0.2

 0.1
                                                                                       0.1


 0.0                                                                                   0.0
       0           20        T       40           60          80            100              0               20        T       40               60    80     100




                                                  Figure 2: Equilibrium paths for                                 and          .

government dies in the next year to be replaced by a commitment government, and a 2% chance
per year that a commitment government dies to be replaced by an opportunistic government.
We set the outside world discount rate = 0.01 and = 0.2, corresponding to a yearly principal

                                                                                  11
payo of 20% or roughly ve-year debt.

                                           Change in yield after haircut
                                   8                                        = 0.25

                                   6




                               %
                                   4



                                   2


                                                                            = 0.75
                                   0
                                       0       25           50        75         100



            Figure 3: Increase in interest rates for new bond issuances a er partial default.

    For the parameters associated with partial default, we set the grid of partial default levels
   = { .25, .75}, and the Poisson arrival rates that the commitment type is forced to partially default
at these levels at { .005, .005}.8
    Figure 1 presents the computed equilibrium functions ( ) , ( ) , and ( ) , along with the
implied function ( ) . Here, the graduation date = 30.9. Figure 2 presents the computed equi-
librium functions ( ) and ( ) . Note ( )   for  {0, 1, 2} as  . at is, as  ,
default at some level becomes certain. For  , by construction, a newly born opportunistic
type immediately defaults at some level, but mixes between default levels. Finally, Figure 3 illus-
trates our main result (Proposition 1) for these parameters: For all > 0, if a government wipes
out 25% of its debt (or = .75) bond yields associated with new issuances rise by less than if it
wipes out 75% of its debt (or = .25).


7     Other Equilibria
Are there other Markov equilibria with positive borrowing? While not proved here, we think
not. Mixing by the opportunistic type imposes substantial discipline on equilibria, (speci cally
indi erence), which our construction exploits.
       e intuition for why all equilibria should involve mixing over haircut levels is as follows:
Suppose at some date and history a proposed strategy called for the opportunistic type to set the
Poisson arrival rate of that haircut to zero. Bayesian updating then implies a partial default at
this level must have been done by the commitment type, implying a deviating opportunistic type
    8 Computationally,  we can handle a much ner grid on partial default levels, as well as   values being non-
constant.     e course grid is chosen only to make visualization easier.


                                                       12
could both partially default at this level and improve its reputation (all bene ts, and no costs). So
instead suppose at that date and history, a proposed strategy called for the opportunistic type to,
with some positive probability, partially default at that level at exactly that date. Given that the
probability of a commitment type partially defaulting at any exact date is zero (given the Poisson
arrival rate assumption on forced partial defaults by the commitment type), Bayesian updating
implies if such a partial default occurs, the government's reputation jumps to zero. But then why
should an opportunistic government only partially default when it can fully default and su er no
worse a consequence? is logic suggests that partial defaults by the opportunistic type have to
happen as strictly positive Poisson arrival events as well, implying indi erence as an equilibrium
condition, as in our construction.


8     Conclusion
In papers in the tradition of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), bigger partial defaults have ambiguous
or counterfactual e ects on bond prices, since larger partial defaults put a country in a be er
debt position going forward. We provide here a possible reputational explanation for why larger
haircuts imply larger e ects on bond prices or interest rates for future bond issuances.


References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, "Defaultable Debt, Interest Rate and the Current Account,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 64­83.

    , Manuel Amador, Hugo Hopenhayn, and Ivan Werning, "Take the Short Route: Equilib-
    rium Default and Debt Maturity," 2016. working paper.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk, "Sovereign debt as a contingent claim: a quantitative ap-
  proach," Journal of International Economics, 2005, 65 (2), 297 ­ 314.

Amador, Manuel and Christopher Phelan, "Reputation and Sovereign Default," Econometrica,
 forthcoming.

Arellano, Cristina, "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies," American
  Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 690­712.

    , Xavier Mateos-Planas, and Jos´e-V´       ios-Rull, "Partial default," Technical Report, Na-
                                        ictor R´
    tional Bureau of Economic Research 2019.



                                                 13
Asonuma, Tamon, "Serial Sovereign Defaults and Debt Restructurings," Technical Report March
  2016.

Benjamin, David and Mark Wright, "Recovery Before Redemption: A Model of Delays in
  Sovereign Debt Renegotiations," 2008. UCLA Working Paper.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogo , "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97, 155­178.

Chatterjee, Satyajit, Dean Corbae, Kyle P Dempsey, and Jos´       e-V´      ios-Rull, "A quan-
                                                                     ictor R´
 titative theory of the credit score," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2020.

Cole, Harold L., James Dow, and William B. English, "Default, Se lement, and Signalling:
 Lending Resumption in a Reputational Model of Sovereign Debt," International Economic Re-
 view, 1995, 36 (2), 365­385.

Cruces, Juan J. and Christoph Trebesch, "Sovereign Defaults:     e Price of Haircuts," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July 2013, 5 (3), 85­117.

D'Erasmo, Pablo, "Government Reputation and Debt Repayment in Emerging Economies," 2011.
  Working Paper.

Dovis, Alessandro, "E cient Sovereign Default," Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 282­
 312.

Dvorkin, Maximiliano, Juan M. S´    anchez, Horacio Sapriza, and Emircan Yurdagul,
 "Sovereign Debt Restructurings," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2021, 13
 (2), 26­77.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, "Debt with Potential Repudiation:       eoretical and Em-
  pirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48 (2), 289­309.

Egorov, Konstantin and Michal Fabinger, "Reputational E ects in Sovereign Default," SSRN
  Scholarly Paper ID 2724568, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY January 2016.

Mihalache, Gabriel, "Sovereign default resolution through maturity extension," Journal of In-
 ternational Economics, 2020, 125C, 103326.

Salomao, Juliana, "Sovereign Debt Renegotiation and Credit Default Swaps," Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics, October 2017, 90, 50­63.


                                             14
Sunder-Plassmann, Laura, "Writing o sovereign debt: Default and recovery rates over the
  cycle," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2018, 81, 221­241.

Yue, Vivian Z., "Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiations," Journal of International Economics,
  2010, 80 (2), 176­187.




                                              15
