                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             NON-MODERNIZATION:
                        POWER-CULTURE TRAJECTORIES AND
                     THE DYNAMICS OF POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS

                                        Daron Acemoglu
                                       James A. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 29007
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29007


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We are grateful to Jennifer Pan for her suggestions and advice and Juan Camilo Yamin for this
research assistance. We also thank David Stasavage for his comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Non-Modernization: Power-Culture Trajectories and the Dynamics of Political Institutions
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 29007
July 2021
JEL No. N10,O10,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Modernization theory is a cornerstone of much of political science, despite the mounting
evidence against its predictions. In this paper, we argue that the theory's failings are rooted in
predictions that are not conditioned on history and cultural configurations. We outline a theory in
which the interplay of the distribution of political power and cultural configurations lead to three
distinct self-reinforcing paths of political development, with very different state-society relations,
institutions, and economic structures. These are paths to Despotic, Absent and Shackled
leviathans. The role of cultural configurations, made up of attributes in a society's culture set, is
critical in legitimizing the social arrangements in each path. For example, a Despotic Leviathan,
as in China, cannot be understood without appreciating how Confucian culture has been used to
bolster a worldview in which rulers are supposed to be virtuous and regular people are
discouraged from political participation. We argued that this interpretation is not inherent to
Confucian thought, but has to be understood as an endogenous outcome along the trajectory to
the Despotic Leviathan. None of the three different paths we highlight support modernization
theory. Under the Absent Leviathan, there is no economic modernization. Under the Despotic
Leviathan, economic growth bolsters the existing regime and its supporting cultural
configuration, with no tendency towards democracy or associate political changes. Under the
Shackled Leviathan, there are dynamics leading to economic growth and political changes with
greater bottom-up participation. Nevertheless, the causation does not go from the former to the
latter, and these changes are critically dependent on cultural and political entrepreneurship in
order to formulate and popularize new cultural configurations and institutionalize political
changes.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E52-446
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

James A. Robinson
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
and Department of Political Science
1307 East 60th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
jamesrobinson@uchicago.edu
1        Introduction

"The rule of Virtue may be compared to the Pole Star, which stays in its place while the myriad
stars pay it homage" Xi Jinping speaking to Communist Party members, 2017.                    1   President Xi

was quoting Confucius as a justification for his continued rule at the helm of the Communist
Party. His notion of Virtue leaves no room for civil society or democratic participation, something
already limited in China and becoming much more constricted during his rule. To many political
scientists this is a challenge. Modernization theory, most influentially articulated by Lipset (1959),
is one of the cornerstones of modern political science and predicts that as societies become richer,
more educated and economically more modernized, they should also experience a particular path of
political institutions -- become more democratic, respect civil and human rights more, and develop
several other societal features we commonly associate with Western democracies.2 China's economy
has been modernizing rapidly. It has the largest middle class anywhere in the world (estimated as
730 million people in 2016, see Kharas and Dooley, 2016), and has reached 8.1 years of schooling on
average.3 Many aspects of its economy are more modern than in the US, for example the majority
of its citizens already use electronic payments and the most advanced communication technologies.
Its income per capita has exceeded US $ 13,000 in 2011 prices which makes it 20 % richer than the
UK in 1945 (data from Bolt and van Zanden, 2020), a critical period during this country's political
history, when it was implementing the Beveridge Report's recommendations in building a modern
welfare state backed by a highly democratic political structure.
        Is China's stubborn authoritarian rule the nail in the coffin of modernization theory? Not
necessarily to its defenders. First, they may claim that China is the exception that proves the rule
(Treisman, 2020, p. 246). Second, they may claim that true modernization in China is delayed
because of various historical factors (the Cultural Revolution, Confucian culture or some remnants
of Communist beliefs). For example, Treisman (2020) proposes a "conditional modernization"
theory where culture, amongst other factors, can delay the onset of modernization. Indeed, to Lipset
himself, modernization was partly a cultural process. As a country becomes richer, more educated
and more modern, Lipset argued, its values change and this is the leitmotif of its democratization.
        The problem with modernization theory is in fact deeper: it is inadequate for thinking about
these issues because it posits a link between economics and politics that is not conditional on
institutions and culture and that presumes a definite endpoint -- for example, an "end of history"
    1
      https://www.straitstimes.com/opinion/the-confucian-roots-of-xi-jinpings-policies
    2
      Other important works on modernization theory include Apter (1967), Huntington (1968) and Rostow (1971).
    3
      http://hdr.undp.org/en/data


                                                       1
as in Fukuyama (1989). In practice, the relationship between economics and politics and how
economic and political development impact each other cannot be separated from these institutional
and cultural factors, and this dependence means that there is no unique endpoint towards which
all societies inexorably head.
       This perspective is related to the framework we developed in a number of recent works (Ace-
moglu and Robinson, 2017, 2019), where we argued that historical and various structural forces
shape how state-society relations develop. We pointed out that three broad clusters of long-run
economic and political institutions are possible. In the first (Absent Leviathan), the state is weak
and societal collective action and various norms are strong and constrain political hierarchy. In the
second (Despotic Leviathan), the state is strong and crushes and further impairs an already-weak
society. In the third (Shackled Leviathan), there is a balance between state and society's capacities,
and this enables their co-evolution towards greater strength for each and also undergirds a very
different type of state -- simultaneously powerful and still accountable and responsive to society.
Economic modernization is almost impossible under the Absent Leviathan. It is possible under
the Despotic Leviathan, and under some circumstances it can proceed rather rapidly. But it will
not bring democracy or accountable behavior by rulers and bureaucrats. The positive feedback be-
tween political institutions and economic development is only a feature of the Shackled Leviathan.
As a result, the same economic changes in, say, South Korea will have fundamentally different
implications than when they happen in China.4 These insights, though formulated in a different
way and yielding different implications than in the previous literature, are nevertheless related to
some classic arguments in political theory. Machiavelli proposed similar ideas more than 500 years
ago, identifying a related trichotomy and writing: "the people are everywhere anxious not to be
dominated or oppressed by the nobles, and the nobles are out to dominate and to oppress the
people. These opposed ambitions bring about one of three results: a principality, a free city, or
anarchy" (1961, p. 67).
       Missing from our previous framework, as well as from Machiavelli's thought, is the role of
culture. Different state-society relations are not just bolstered by economic and political contests
(as modeled in Acemoglu and Robinson, 2017). They are also interwoven with particular worldviews
that emerge and legitimize prevailing institutions and distributions of political power. This is the
focus of the current paper. We build a framework where the exact interplay between institutions,
culture and politics is shaped by historical and structural factors, and this interplay can go in
   4
    This highly context-specific effects of economic modernization is confirmed by the cross-national econometric
results of Acemoglu et al. (2008, 2009) see also Acemoglu and Robinson (2018).



                                                       2
diametrically-opposed directions depending on these factors.
   The key new element in this paper turns on the concept of a cultural configuration. We argue,
building on Acemoglu and Robinson (2021), that many societies have a fairly stable culture set
consisting of (cultural) attributes, which determine such things as the importance of hierarchy, the
role of family and gender roles, the higher ideals (such as virtue and honor) that are valued, with
specific types of rituals and relevant customs and traditions. These attributes can be combined
into different cultural configurations, each with different meanings for individuals and societies
and each providing justifications for distinct political arrangements and social hierarchies. Hence,
the Despotic Leviathan -- and why under its auspices, economic growth will not automatically
bring democratic institutions -- cannot be fully understood without appreciating the cultural
configuration that emerges and convinces people that rule by virtuous leaders is legitimate and
ordinary people should not challenge them and should not strive to have their voices heard. It also
provides interpretations that push people towards accepting the virtue of such leaders. Vitally,
however, our framework does not claim (nor is it true) that such attitudes are ingrained and
unchangeable. A given culture set can generate many different cultural configurations, and as the
political balance of power and other structural conditions change, a new cultural configuration can
emerge, with very different justifications for politics, sometimes rather swiftly.
   The Chinese case powerfully illustrates these ideas and elucidates why modernization theory is
not a useful framework. Indeed, cultural factors are central in the Chinese equilibrium, which still
heavily depends on Confucian philosophy. In Confucius's view, the best organization of society
had powerful leaders and a government that did not need to have any accountability, let alone
democracy. Elsewhere, Confucius says "When the Way prevails in the world, commoners do not
debate matters of Government" (Confucius, 2003, 16.2 p. 193). Rather, government would operate
best when leaders cultivate virtue and found the Way. This Confucian philosophy has deeply
influenced Chinese politics for 2,500 years throughout the vicissitudes of dynastic politics, invasions,
European colonialism, economic decline, state collapse and, last but not least, communism. The
famous examination system tested its aspirants on their knowledge of the Confucian classics, and
now the Chinese government sponsors Confucius Institutes all over the world.
   This is the basis of the view of scholars such as Huntington that China was bound to be
nondemocratic given its Confucian culture, writing that "no scholarly disagreement exists regarding
the proposition that traditional Confucianism was either undemocratic or antidemocratic" (1991,
p. 24). Yet, the specific way in which Confucian philosophy was applied cannot be understood
without considering who exercised political power in China and how. The Qin dynasty created

                                                   3
the first version of the Imperial state, relying not just on Confucian ideas but also on Legalism,
as articulated by Lord Shang who claimed "When the people are weak the state is strong; when
the people are strong the state is weak. Hence, the state that possesses the Way devotes itself to
weakening the people" (Shang Yang, 20.1, 2017, p. 79).
      Here virtuous rule apparently involved weakening the people, just in case. Though the Qin
triumphed by military might, the reason that this relative power balance between state and society
and the institutions that have accompanied it have been so enduring in China is because basic
elements of Confucian philosophy have been fused with the top-down model of government artic-
ulated by Legalism. Indeed, neither imperial rule nor the reign of the Communist Party in China
can be understood without appreciating how Confucian philosophy was critical in people's lives
(generating meaning, order in family relations, stable expectations and specific rituals), but at the
same time how it also legitimized top-down rule.5
      Crucially, however, it would also be a mistake to follow Huntington and presume that this
particular legitimization of despotic rule by Confucian thought is a hardwired feature of Chinese
society and politics. Rather, it has emerged and endured because the distribution of political power
and political institutions have reinforced it. Put differently, China's political trajectory has created
a specific type of feedback between its institutions and cultural configuration. The more empowered
are the ruler and the elites, the more ingrained the cultural configuration legitimizing their rule
and discouraging societal participation becomes. And in typical circular fashion, the greater is the
legitimacy conferred on it, the stronger authoritarian rule becomes. Another balance of political
power could have produced a very different cultural configuration. We see this in Taiwan, which
has the same Confucian culture set as China, but over the last 30 years, it has combined the
same attributes in a way that generated a very different cultural configuration, supporting vibrant
democratic rule. It is not only that different cultural configurations, with widely differing political
implications, are possible. It is also that, as we will discuss, the shift from one cultural configuration
to another can be rather abrupt, which is again illustrated by Taiwan's history.
      There is nothing unique about China or Confucian culture. We will encounter similar dynamics
in English history, where different political philosophies were constructed from the same foundations
and justified very different state-society relations and political systems. Moreover, the English case
illustrates even more clearly than the Chinese one how a volte-face in cultural configuration can
  5
    Perry (2008, 2018) discusses the continuities and similarities between imperial and communist ideologies of
state legitimacy. Pan and Xu (2017) document there is a strong correlation between Chinese citizens beliefs in
the importance of Confucianism and the extent to which they view western political institutions and rights as
inappropriate in China.


                                                      4
take place in response to changing political and economic conditions.
   What does this all mean for modernization theory? As we have already hinted at, the coexis-
tence of different political trajectories, leading to very different limiting equilibria of state-society
relations, already invalidates the core precept of modernization theory. However, in our assessment,
the failings of modernization theory are deeper. The exact way in which cultural configurations
emerge, which we argue to be critical for understanding the nature of political power in society,
shapes what economic modernization and economic growth involve and what types of social and
political arrangements are viewed as legitimate. Modernization theory, by ignoring the critical role
of cultural configurations and how they can endogenously remake what is and what is not feasible,
may be inducing us to focus on the wrong variables as determinants of the dynamics of political
institutions.
   We are of course not the first ones to think about the role of culture in politics. Although
cultural factors are not part of many of the seminal frameworks of political science, for example
Tilly's (1990) theory of the emergence of states, Moore's (1966) theory of capitalism, fascism
and communism, or more orthodox Marxist frameworks for understanding political and economic
change, they have featured in a number of important contributions. For example, as we already
mentioned, Huntington places a heavy emphasis on culture in his work on civilizations (1996).
Culture has also played a critical role in the modern literature on nationalism and identity, for
example Anderson (1983), Gellner (2009), Horowitz (2000), or Laitin (1998), and in the literature
about the impact of religion on politics, as in the work by Laitin (1986), Kalyvas (1996) and
Grzymala-Busse (2012, 2015). Putnam's (1993) theory of good democratic governance, building
on Banfield's (1958) insights, also provides a central role to cultural factors. Finally, Almond and
Verba's (1963) seminal work merges culture and political behavior in understanding the support
for democracy.
   Nevertheless, none of these approaches have recognized the two pillars that are at the center
of our framework. The first is the malleable role of cultural configurations (and how they can be
constructed from a stable culture set). Although this notion is central to much of modern sociology
(e.g., work by Geertz, 1973, Swidler, 1986, DiMaggio, 1997, and Sewell, 2005), it has had less of an
impact in political science. An exception is the "constructivist" research on ethnic identity, such as
Posner (1995) and the essays in Chandra (2012), which studies the endogeneity of ethnic identity,
but without extending the analysis to think about the malleability of culture more broadly. The
second is the presence of multiple long-run trajectories, with no natural tendency for all societies to
move in the same direction, develop the same type of relationship between economics and politics,

                                                   5
or even respond in the same way to structural changes.6
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces our conceptual
framework and highlights the interplay between politics and culture. The next three sections apply
this framework to illustrative cases of Despotic, Absent and Shackled leviathans, starting with
the Chinese case. Section V distills some of the lessons from these case studies and reevaluates
modernization theory. Section VI concludes with directions for future work.


2        Reinterpreting the Varieties of Leviathan

We start with a framework building on Acemoglu and Robinson (2019), where very different polit-
ical systems can emerge as stable long-run equilibria, bolstered by different types of state-society
relations. Figure 1 illustrates the configurations we have in mind. The two axes of this figure
represent two key dimensions of how a polity is organized (abstracting from several other relevant
aspects for simplicity). On the vertical axis we have the capacity of the state, which summarizes
both the capacity of state institutions and the ability of these institutions and elites in charge of
them to impose their will and control over society. On the horizontal axis, on the other hand, we
have the capacity of society, which represents the ability of society to organize (for example by
solving its collective action problems) and have its voice heard (either via institutionalized means
or by protests and other non-institutionalized actions). The three long-run political equilibria de-
picted in Figure 1 -- which we call Despotic Leviathan, Absent Leviathan and Shackled Leviathan
-- involve different types of state institutions and different patterns of political participation by
regular citizens. They also come associated with their own "basins of attraction" within which, as
the illustrative trajectories indicate, dynamics gradually evolve toward those long-run institutional
equilibria.
        How different these trajectories are deserves some emphasis. Let us first focus on the trajectory
heading towards the Despotic Leviathan, which captures a general feature of this basin of attraction.
Here, the dominance of the state over society makes society become increasingly impaired and
unable to organize and contest power. Interestingly, however, this trajectory also underscores that
the capacity of the state will ultimately stop growing somewhere below the maximum power it can
achieve. Put simply, the long run state-society configuration that emerges from these trajectories
is one of great imbalance between the capacities of the state and society, but it also involves a limit
    6
    Sociologists, such as Gorski (2003), Adams (2005), and the contributors in Steinmetz (1999), have examined
the role of cultural factors in state formation. But these works have not attempted the type of broad comparative
analysis that we propose here.



                                                       6
                                   Figure 1: Varieties of Leviathan



on how powerful and capable the state becomes.
   In the basin of attraction of the Absent Leviathan, we see the converse dynamics. Now society
is relatively strong and this prevents political hierarchy and strong state institutions from emerging.
Ultimately, any institutional arrangements that create this type of hierarchy tend to atrophy -- a
typical pattern we see in the history of politically decentralized societies (often called "small-scale"
or maybe "stateless" societies).
   In the middle corridor, something very different transpires. In contrast to the two other basins
of attraction, the capacities of both state and society increase simultaneously. In Acemoglu and
Robinson (2019), we interpreted this as resulting from both competition and cooperation between
state and society. Competition is rooted in the fact that as the state gets more capable, it becomes
harder to monitor and society needs to increase its powers in order to be able to keep up and
maintain its relative situation. Cooperation is equally important: When society is capable of
reigning in the state, it becomes more willing to share information and allow the state to penetrate
and regulate various productive and social relations. This type of state-society balance is in fact
critical for the emergence of democratic institutions, a general notion of liberty (providing protection


                                                   7
and social opportunities for agency for individuals), and economic dynamism. That trajectories in
this middle region are tending towards values of state capacity greater than those achieved by the
Despotic Leviathan is related to these features.
   A degree of self-reinforcing dynamics is apparent in all of these trajectories. For example, for
the Despotic Leviathan, the stronger the state and elites become, the weaker is society. What
are the roots of these self-reinforcing dynamics? Although these dynamics have some element of
power begetting power due to the standard economic and political reasons (see e.g., Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2012), detailed analysis of historical dynamics suggests that there is more to it. States
become stronger when they are viewed as more legitimate, and when they are stronger, they tend
to increase their legitimacy. Similarly, along this trajectory, it becomes accepted that citizens have
less business in interfering in government affairs and there is less need for civil society organizations
monitoring and pressuring elites. But some of the major tools for understanding issues of legitimacy
and what is socially acceptable -- social meanings, expectations, values and beliefs -- are missing
from this framework. Where did they come from?
   This is what we would like to develop and add to the framework in the current paper. We start
from the modern sociology literature in thinking about culture. Geertz defines culture as "his-
torically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in symbols, a system of inherited conceptions
expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate, perpetuate, and develop their
knowledge about and attitudes towards life" (1973, p. 89). Several aspects of this definition are
worth emphasizing. Most importantly, Geertz refuses the simplistic notion that culture is about
stable values. Rather, culture is about interpreting the world, defining social meaning, communi-
cating and justifying social actions. This notion of culture also clarifies that in any given society
there are many different ways of creating meaning and justifying actions. This perspective is the
basis of Swidler's influential work, which defines culture as:

      a "toolkit" or repertoire from which actors select differing pieces for constructing lines
      of action. Both individuals and groups know how to do different kinds of things in
      different circumstances" (1986, p. 277).

   Put differently, many different values, interpretations and justifications are consistent with a
given culture. This is the basis of our notion of a cultural configuration which emphasizes that
different configurations, with different social implications, can be produced from the same culture.
   In Acemoglu and Robinson (2021), we develop this perspective further by conceptualizing the
constituent elements of culture as "attributes" that are contained in a culture set and can be com-


                                                   8
bined together in various different ways to produce different cultural configurations. For instance,
as we will see in the next section, there are several important elements in Confucian philosophy
related to the importance of virtue, tradition, rituals and hierarchy, but these can be combined
in different ways, and their combinations provide different social meanings and legitimizations for
different types of political arrangements.
   The fluidity of a culture is pivotal here. Though in Acemoglu and Robinson (2021) an important
part of the emphasis is on how fluid (malleable) different cultures may be, here we simplify matters
and presume that we are dealing with sufficiently fluid cultures that allow a multitude of cultural
configurations with distinct political and social implications. This opens the way specifically to
what DiMaggio (1997, p. 265) emphasizes when he notes:

      once we acknowledge that people behave as if they use culture strategically, it follows
      that the cultures into which people are socialized leave much opportunity for choice and
      variation.

Building on his terminology, we interpret the world as having plenty of scope for the "strategic use
of culture".
   What does this imply in the context of Figure 1? We start from the perspective that the true
extent of self-reinforcing dynamics underlying these trajectories cannot be understood without
studying how these trajectories themselves shape social meaning, values and beliefs. Put simply,
the trajectory going towards the Despotic Leviathan cannot be separated from the cultural configu-
ration that dictates that top-down rule is legitimate, rulers are virtuous or divinely empowered, and
common people interfering in matters of state is inappropriate. This cultural configuration, used
strategically both by leaders to further their positions and by citizens to adapt to life in a despotic
polity, then makes it harder for civil society to become stronger and renders it more likely that
the imbalance of power will continue. In typical self-reinforcing fashion, the longer we are in the
basin of attraction of the Despotic Leviathan, the more ingrained the current cultural configuration
gets, and the easier it becomes to legitimize the rule of elites -- be they emperors or bosses of the
Communist Party.
   Likewise, in the basin of attraction of the Absent Leviathan, state institutions atrophy because
the population comes to believe that any political hierarchy is dangerous, a tool in the hands of
upstart individuals, and/or likely to lead to much worse outcomes along a predictable slippery slope.
Analogous to what we described in the context of the Despotic Leviathan, it is difficult to escape
from the orbit of the Absent Leviathan, because people increasingly view political hierarchy as


                                                  9
illegitimate. As we describe below, this type of thinking becomes second nature to many individuals
living in politically decentralized societies without powerful state institutions, and of course once
it becomes widespread, and incorporated into their belief systems, it makes such societies likely to
endure and political hierarchy and state institutions much less likely to emerge.
   A very different type of cultural configuration supports the trajectories in the middle corri-
dor, where the Shackled Leviathan emerges. Now, it is neither unacceptable for regular people
to participate in politics and keep rulers accountable, nor is it illegitimate to create political hier-
archy and centralized institutions. Instead, a cultural configuration with a number of distinctive
aspects develops. First, differently from the trajectory supporting the Despotic Leviathan, suspi-
cious attitudes towards those who are politically powerful endure. Though this attitude has some
similarity to the politically egalitarian beliefs under an Absent Leviathan, it is very different from
them, because it takes a more institutionalized form. People are willing to vote and participate
in civil society organizations and other institutionalized-forms of political engagement in order to
do this. Second, in partial contrast to the first, it becomes natural for people to trust impersonal
institutions and accept the political hierarchy that is associated with them (think of the natural
way in which many people in democratic and even semi-democratic societies accept the authority
of courts, bureaucracies and political officeholders). In fact, people become willing to demand more
from, and also willing delegate more to, the state.
   Third and fundamentally related to the first two, a different model of political philosophy
emerges: according to this model, political power emanates from the people who can then delegate
it to state institutions or rulers. These rulers and institutions can become further empowered and
take on greater responsibilities, but are supposed to remain accountable and act on behalf of the
people. This model of "popular sovereignty" builds on and further promotes a synergy between
suspicions towards political hierarchy and the willingness of people to trust and empower state
institutions and the people in charge of them.
   As with the trajectories in the orbits of Absent and Despotic leviathans, in this case, too, the
longer we stay along the trajectory towards the Shackled Leviathan, the stronger these approaches
to social meaning and political legitimacy become. For example, the stronger is society's ability to
organize and have its voice heard, the more ingrained the notion of popular sovereignty becomes.
Likewise, the stronger and more autonomous state institutions are, the easier it is to trust them
for effectiveness and the more justifiable it is for people to actively participate in politics to control
them and have their voices heard in the functioning of these increasingly powerful state institutions.
   Finally, while we have emphasized the self-reinforcing relationship between the distribution of

                                                   10
political power and the cultural configurations that legitimize those arrangements, our framework
does not claim that these are immutable. As in Acemoglu and Robinson (2019), political, economic
or demographic shocks can both reshape the basins of attraction of the different types of leviathans
and shift a polity from one basin to another. Hence, historical conditions create powerful tendencies
for persistence, but do not cause permanent lock-in. Cultural feedbacks enrich but do not change
this picture, because the same types of shocks can induce changes in cultural configurations. As
a result, our framework implies that Huntington's portrayal of Chinese culture as unchanging and
unchangeable was simplistic. In contrast, we will see that it is possible for attributes to be rewired so
as to generate alternative cultural configurations, support different power-culture trajectories, and
legitimize very different types of state-society relations and distinct types of political institutions.
In fact, major shocks that shift a society into a new basin of attraction can induce very rapid
cultural change.In the rest of the paper, we go through three applications, one corresponding to
each of the three types of leviathans, in order to provide more details about the interplay between
politics and cultural configurations, and also highlight how cultural configurations can change in
response to structural shocks. Once these additional insights are obtained, it will become much
more apparent why modernization theory fails to provide an empirically accurate or useful account
of the dynamics of political institutions and how we need to move beyond it.


3    When State Dominates Society: The Despotic Leviathan

The historical formation of the Chinese state began with the first Qin dynasty which united the
country by military conquest in 221BC. This was based on a model of a top-down state micro-
managing society, along the lines recommended by Lord Shang, but still drawing on Confucian
philosophy. Confucius painted a picture of an ideal society held together by ritual virtue and filial
piety. A famous depiction appears in the text The Great Learning:

      Their thoughts being sincere, their hearts were then rectified. Their hearts being recti-
      fied, their persons were cultivated. Their persons being cultivated, their families were
      regulated. Their families being regulated, their States were rightly governed. Their
      States being rightly governed, the whole kingdom was made tranquil and happy. (Legge,
      1893, pp. 358-359)

    Here virtue begins in peoples' hearts and ripples up to the level of the state (Fei, 1992, pp.
62-63). The government does not need mechanisms of accountability to behave in the collective
interest; this will simply be the consequence of everyone cultivating virtue. If they do not, then

                                                   11
accountability would not solve the problem. The role of the specific cultural configuration bolster-
ing top-down rule is pivotal. It would have been most probably infeasible for successive Chinese
dynasties to rely on intense repression in order to control their populations. But when people are
convinced that such top-down rule is legitimate, it becomes much more likely to survive.
    This cultural configuration was based on a powerful synthesis of despotism and Confucianism.
A telling illustration is the imperial examination system which was definitively institutionalized by
the Song dynasty. In this system, the people staffing the government were chosen via three levels
of examination. What was examined was knowledge of Confucian thought, and the state was able
to impose its interpretation of Confucian ideas onto the people who then ran the state. The state
thus reinforced a cultural configuration, legitimizing its authority.
    All the same, this cultural configuration cannot be understood without recognizing the polit-
ical structure in which it was embedded. As Weber noted long ago, "the basic characteristics of
the [Confucian] "mentality" ... were deeply co-determined by political and economic destinies"
(1951, p. 249). Or put differently, the trajectory underpinning and moving towards the Despotic
Leviathan in Figure 1 is made possible by the synergy between despotic political power and a
cultural configuration adapted to it.


4    When Society Dominates the State: The Absent Leviathan

The synergy between political power and specific cultural configurations is critical not just for the
Despotic Leviathan, but also for its polar opposite, a polity with an Absent Leviathan. Because
power is distributed differently, the cultural configurations that emerge and sustain economic and
political relations in such societies are very different. Malinowski's ethnographic work in Melanesia
elucidates some of the most salient features of politics and cultural configurations in such societies.
    To illustrate the nature of these relations on the small coral island of Kitava, Malinowski relates
the "myth of the flying canoe" (1922, pp. 311-316). The Kitavans decided to build canoes for a
great Kula expedition, a large system of inter-island exchange. The main character in the myth,
Mokatuboda, who possessed magic powers, built his canoe in the village and then flew it to the
sea by magic (pp. 312-313). Mokatuboda's control of magic not only transported his canoe, but
was making him a very powerful headman. According to the myth, he used magic to make it rain
on his own fields and thus harvested far more crops than others. But rather than celebrating him,
the Kitavans decided to stop his accumulation of power and wealth: "His brothers and maternal
nephews sharpened the spear, they hit him, he died" (p. 315).



                                                  12
    The anti-hierarchic, intensely egalitarian attitudes illustrated by this myth are very common
across politically decentralized societies that do not have state institutions. In such societies, most
conflict is resolved via traditions and norms or some sort of enforced compromise, so there is less
need for state institutions for dispute resolution. But how do you prevent people like Mokatuboda
or chiefs or big men from becoming economically and then politically dominant? This is where
egalitarianism comes in: people are not allowed to accumulate too much wealth or too much
political power. This egalitarianism affects every aspect of society (see Acemoglu and Robinson,
2019). For example, trade is regulated and constricted (lest, it leads to too much accumulation).
Some goods are not allowed to be bought (otherwise they confer too much status or could be
used for patronage or power accumulation). In Kitava, economic institutions enmesh "the whole
community into a network of reciprocal obligations and dues, one constant flow of gift and counter-
gift" (Malinowski, 1921, p. 8). Institutions forced output to be distributed in a very equal way,
and the organization of the Kula ring similarly reinforced egalitarianism.
    Notably, none of this is institutionalized. It is a set of beliefs and practices that maintains
this egalitarian equilibrium, and hence the cultural configuration is critical. For example, in most
such societies supernatural beliefs reinforce the non-hierarchical, egalitarian social system. Those
who become rich or powerful are suspected of sorcery or witchcraft (Malinowski, 1926). Though
all of these practices and their implications for state-society relations are diametrically opposed to
those we saw in the Chinese case, there is an important commonality: the cultural configuration is
synergistic with the distribution of political power. A cultural configuration that refuses hierarchy
and treats powerful men as nefarious, dangerous upstarts cannot coexist with the building of state
institutions or incipient hierarchy, and the lack of such institutions further bolsters this cultural
configuration. Tellingly, when the process of state-building starts in such societies, we often see
powerful forces towards altering the cultural configuration (for example, as led by Shaka Zulu when
he was building the early state institutions in Zululand; see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2019).


5    When Society Balances the State: The Shackled Leviathan

The nature of state-society relations is very different in the middle corridor in Figure 1. Here, in
a process that we called the "Red Queen effect" in Acemoglu and Robinson (2019), the capacities
of both state and society co-evolve: the stronger the state becomes (for example, in terms of its
capacity to regulate the economy or enforce laws and rules), the more active and assertive society
needs to become in order to rein it in. This is a dynamic process, involving significant institutional



                                                  13
changes along the way. It is, in equal part, about politics and culture. The powers that society
and citizens need to acquire in order to remain in the corridor are political, but they need to be
bolstered by appropriate cultural configurations.
   This dynamic can be seen in the English case, which witnessed fundamental institutional change
in the 17th century. Though a monarchy, in the 16th century the country already housed a highly
active citizenry, for example, with local communities organizing in various participatory ways,
making demands from the central state, and sometimes resisting policies the state was attempting
to impose on them (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2019, Hindle, 2000). The tradition of Germanic
assemblies that were central for the island's politics before the Norman invasion still had major
effects at the time (Wickham, 2016). Nevertheless, institutional means for popular participation in
government were lacking.
   A number of momentous changes started altering English society and economy from the middle
of the 16th century. First, the capacity of the national state began to increase under Henry VII and
picked up speed with Henry VIII's "Tudor Revolution of Government" (Elton, 1953). Second, as
Tawney (1941) emphasized, a class of commercially-minded new farmers, the "gentry", emerged and
started changing the economy after monastic lands were expropriated and then sold off by Henry
VIII (Heldring, Robinson and Vollmer, 2015). Third, Atlantic and inter-oceanic trade opportunities
enriched a new class of merchants and industrialists who had until then been excluded from the
governing coalition of the country (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005, Pincus, 2009, Jha,
2015). These newly-empowered groups vied for greater political power, destabilizing the political
system and paving the way to the Civil War in 1642 and later to another, albeit less disruptive,
civil war culminating in the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
   These epochal events that led to a constitutional monarchy and intensified political participa-
tion from a broader segment of society were not just political. They also involved the emergence
of a radically new cultural configuration. At the center of this change was the notion of popular
sovereignty that was articulated around the same time as the Civil War. The Levelers articu-
lated and fought for popular participation in politics in the 1640s. Thomas Hobbes's 1651 classic,
Leviathan, articulated a materialistic portrayal of the "state of nature" and a contractarian model
of the creation of the state based on a "covenant". John Locke pushed this perspective further,
proposing an almost modern version of popular sovereignty, whereby sovereignty rests with the
people who then delegate it to a ruler on the condition that he acts in line with their interests and
instructions. It is difficult to imagine how the significant increase in political participation could
have taken place without this new philosophy of popular sovereignty. The emergence of these ideas

                                                 14
of popular sovereignty and "resistance" (meaning, resistance to the monarchy's unchecked power)
was itself rooted in the political changes brought about by the demands and revolt of newly-enriched
merchants, industrialists and gentry, as Sommerville emphasizes when he writes "Talk of resistance
became more common after 1640 not because of the sudden discovery of resistance theory, but
because resistance had become a practical possibility" (1999, p. 75).
    Hence, even though very different in nature than those that emerge under the Despotic and Ab-
sent leviathans, the trajectories in the basin of attraction of the Shackled Leviathan, too, critically
depend on the interplay and synergy of politics and cultural configurations. Moreover, the more
dynamic nature of the interactions between state and society inside the corridor crystallizes another
key question: how do cultural configurations change? How did the notion of popular sovereignty
come to be articulated and influential in 17th-century England, for example? This is the question
we tackle in the next section in the context of reevaluating modernization theory.


6    Whither Modernization Theory

We have so far described three different types of political and social dynamics -- under the auspices
of, respectively, Despotic, Absent and Shackled leviathans. Do these dynamics support moderniza-
tion theory?
    In the case of Absent Leviathan, economic modernization is rare, because the types of eco-
nomic arrangements Malinowski described in Melanesia do not encourage technological change or
productivity-enhancing large-scale trade. Even accumulation of wealth and assets is constricted by
the cultural configuration that tries to maintain egalitarianism. This does not completely preclude
all economic modernization, since some individuals or groups can sometimes accumulate enough
power or form the right coalitions to take command and, in the process, reorganize economic rela-
tions (Flannery and Marcus, 2014, Acemoglu and Robinson 2019). However, when that happens,
the most likely transition is from the Absent Leviathan to the Despotic Leviathan, which does not
involve institutionalizing popular political participation.
    What about economic growth and modernization under the Despotic Leviathan? As the Chinese
case illustrates, this is feasible. However, it very often takes the form of "despotic growth", whereby
the state and elites play a defining role and their dominance over society, rather than weakening,
becomes solidified. Hence, as growth under the Song dynasty and during the post-Mao era highlight,
this type of economic growth does not typically bring any type of democracy or greater political
participation or accountability. On the contrary, as again underscored by recent Chinese history,



                                                  15
rapid growth can sometimes increase the grip of the despotic state, which gains greater legitimacy
and comes to control more resources, which it can use to repress or cultivate support.
   While dynamics in the basis of attraction of the Absent and Despotic leviathans provide no
support for modernization theory, economic modernization and a transition towards more demo-
cratic political institutions do go hand-in-hand in the Shackled Leviathan configuration. Yet, even
this type of change does not take the almost automatic form that modernization theory predicts.
Changes in cultural configuration necessitate both major efforts by "cultural entrepreneurs" in or-
der to recombine existing attributes into a new cultural configuration and intense struggles over
these configurations within the population. The English case illustrates this dynamic, too.
   Monarchic rule, without constitutional or participatory constraints, was justified in early mod-
ern England by a cultural configuration emphasizing the central role of obedience to authority. The
roots of this can be traced to the writings of Saint Paul, who stated in Colossians 1:16: "For by
him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether
they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers." This model of Pauline obedience was
reinforced by Saint Augustine, whose views Ryan sums up as: "[one] would find true peace and
justice only in God's kingdom. Here we must simply obey the powers that be" (2012, p. 199). The
Catholic Church promoted this view, emphasizing that God's chosen rulers were communicated by
the Pope. According to this model, even if rulers misbehaved, one had to be obedient because they
would be judged by God. Ryan argues "The conventional view down to the sixteenth century was
that if a ruler required his subjects to repudiate Christ, they did not have to comply; short of that,
they had to obey" (2012, p. 199).
   The social changes brought by Tudor monarchs, and especially Henry VIII, had started changing
this picture, partly because of the break between the Church of England and the papacy, which
meant that English kings could not appeal to the Pope's authority. It was against this background
that the ideas of popular sovereignty were elaborated and articulated by cultural entrepreneurs such
as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke. Entrepreneurship, we think, is an apt word in this context,
because these thinkers were creating and trying to popularize a different way of conceptualizing the
world -- and as a result legitimizing a different set of political institutions and state-society relations
(see Mokyr, 2016). In doing this, Hobbes and Locke, as well as the Levelers and others, built not just
on the Bible and Christian thought, but also on ancient customs, especially ideas of participatory
Germanic institutions, mentioned above. They drew on notions of popular sovereignty which had
flourished in the Medieval city states of northern Italy (manifested in the writings of such scholars as
Marcelius of Padua), and which became transformed in the process of the Reformation spearheaded

                                                    16
by Martin Luther and Jean Calvin and "A movement toward a more overtly constitutional view of
politics took place" (Ryan, 2012, pp. 342-343) (see also Skinner, 1978, Wolin, 2004).
   These justifications were not accepted by all English people, however. There ensued an intense
political and cultural struggle, and the English Civil War has to be viewed within this broader per-
spective. There was no certainty that this struggle would lead to the victory of popular sovereignty
over more authoritarian ideas such as the Divine Right of Kings, propagated by the Stuart monar-
chs.
   A major part of the struggle was about convincing the broader public of the plausibility and
desirability of alternative cultural configurations, which thinkers like Hobbes and Locke achieved for
popular sovereignty. Nevertheless, for these changes to be enduring, they had to be institutionalized,
meaning that the institutional foundations of political power had to change in tandem. This meant
a need for not just cultural but also political entrepreneurship, which we also see in this historical
episode. After the Civil War the English Commonwealth was created and in 1653 England's
first written constitution, the Instrument of Government, was promulgated. This was the first
constitution in the world that featured explicit separation of powers between the executive and
the legislative an innovation from notions of "mixed government" (Vile, 1967). These innovations
ultimately took their final form after the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
   Overall, the English case illustrates yet another instance of the synergy between power and
culture, and also emphasizes that any path of political institutions that ended up accompanying
economic changes was not an automatic process, but required intense struggle and various inno-
vations from cultural and political entrepreneurs. So even when we see something that looks like
the predictions of modernization theory in the middle corridor (while it is completely absent in
the rest of Figure 1), its nature is very different than what modernization theory claims. This
last point is again central: the emergence of a cultural configuration supporting political change
is always contingent on the historical balance between state and society as well as cultural and
political entrepreneurship. We cannot bank on the existence of such entrepreneurs in all societies
and epochs, and even when they exist, their ideas may not succeed in supplanting those enshrined
in the older cultural configuration backed up by the prevailing distribution of political power.
   Let us finally emphasize that Figure 1 should not be read as suggesting unchanging cultures.
While it is true that the cultural configuration supporting the Despotic Leviathan takes stronger
root the longer the Despotic Leviathan remains in power, it never becomes completely immutable.
This can be seen clearly in the case of Confucian culture. Huntington's pronouncement that Con-
fucian culture is anti-democratic notwithstanding, Confucius's teachings were sufficiently fluid that

                                                 17
they should not be viewed as rigidly authoritarian. As Goldin (2011, p. 10) observes, "Confucius
wished his statements to remain fluid", and the Confucian attributes can be recombined to generate
very different cultural configurations. Confucius also states: "a state cannot stand once it has lost
the confidence of the people" (Confucius, 12.7, p. 128), which can clearly be given a democratic
interpretation -- a bad government will lose the confidence in the people and then can be brought
down by the people.
    This is exactly what happened in Taiwan, which has an even stronger Confucian culture than
mainline China (not having suffered the Cultural Revolution). In the decades that followed the com-
munist revolution, Taiwan, too, was ruled despotically by Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang (KMT).
But the political equilibrium started shifting as a result of social and economic changes that followed
land reforms and industrialization (which may themselves have been triggered by KMT's efforts to
deliver growth and a more egalitarian distribution of income in order to stave off any support for
communism) and a new integration into the international system. By the 1990s, demand for a more
democratic regime was growing in the population and forcing political change in Taiwan. Confirm-
ing our interpretation, changing politics brought rapid changes in the cultural configuration, but
using the same basic attributes of the Confucian culture set. Political participation was justified
with the Confucian idea that non-virtuous leaders cannot stand. In the words of Fetzer and Soper's
(2012): "the Confucian tradition is flexible ... it allows for more than one interpretation, and it
can be used as a basis for democracy and human rights" (p. 3).
    Could the Taiwanese case be interpreted as an example of modernization theory? The answer is
once again no. Although economic modernization was one of the root causes of the changes that led
to the emergence of democracy in Taiwan, what supported the newly-emerging democratic institu-
tions was not a wholesale "political modernization", but a recombination of Confucian attributes
in order to create a new cultural configuration. As in the English case, these changes were neither
automatic nor inevitable, and again required a certain degree of cultural entrepreneurship and, of
course, the ability to leverage the fluidity of Confucian culture.


7    Conclusion

In this paper, we have articulated a very different approach to political change than the popular and
influential modernization theory. In comparison to the almost automatic link that this theory draws
between economic modernization and a particular path of political institutions, we emphasized
three very different dynamics. First, the dynamics of political institutions need to be accompanied



                                                  18
by changes in cultural configurations -- by which we mean changes in how people use existing
attributes of their culture set in order to generate social meaning, coordinate expectations and
manufacture justifications for various political and economic outcomes. Second, the same economic
changes may strengthen despotic rule and bolster the cultural configuration that supports despotic
rule in some societies, while destabilizing them and paving the way to democratization in others.
History, institutions, the exact balance of power between state and society (and elites and citizens)
and the nature of prevailing cultural configurations matter in determining which outcomes will
ensue. Third, even when there are strong possibilities for a particular path of political institutions,
like democracy, whether this will take place depends on cultural entrepreneurs proposing new
cultural configurations and political entrepreneurs coordinating political action. There should be
no presumption that such entrepreneurship will immediately arise or necessarily succeed even when
other conditions are suitable.
   We developed these ideas theoretically building and extending the framework in Acemoglu
and Robinson (2019), which highlights how different state-society relations -- corresponding to
Despotic, Absent and Shackled leviathans -- can emerge and become self-sustaining.
   Moving away from the simple framework of modernization theory is not only empirically com-
pelling, but also opens up a host of new areas for conceptual, theoretical and historical studies.
For example, what are the conditions that facilitate cultural and political entrepreneurship? What
aspects of the balance of power between state and society matters most for culture and politics?
What types of cultural configurations will be more enduring even when challenged by new mod-
els? And how useful will these ideas be in understanding various episodes of modernization and
non-modernization in history?


Bibliography

   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005) "The Rise of Europe:
Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth," American Economic Review, 95, 546-
579.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2008)
"Income and Democracy," American Economic Review, 98, 808-842.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2009)
"Reevaluating the Modernization Hypothesis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 56, 1043-1058.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail, New York: Crown.



                                                  19
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2017) "The Emergence of Weak, Despotic
and Inclusive States," NBER Working Paper No. 23657.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2018) "Beyond Modernization Theory", The
Annals of Comparative Democratization, 16(3), 26-31.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2019) The Narrow Corridor, New York:
Penguin Books.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2021) "Culture, Institutions and Social Equi-
libria: A Framework," NBER Working Paper No. 28832.
   Adams, Julia (2005) The Familial State: Ruling Families and Merchant Capitalism in Early
Modern Europe, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
   Almond, Gabriel A. and Sidney Verba (1963) The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and
Democracy in Five Nations, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Anderson, Benedict (1983) Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread
of Nationalism, London: Verso.
   Apter, David E. (1967) The Politics of Modernization, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Banfield, Edward C. (1958) Moral Basis of a Backward Society, New York: The Free Press.
   Bolt,    Jutta    and    Jan   Luiten   van     Zanden   (2020) "The Maddison Project,"
https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/publications/wp15.pdf
   Chandra, Kanchan ed. (2012) Constructivist Theories of Ethnic Politics, New York: Oxford
University Press.
   Confucius (2003) Analects, translated by Edward Slingerland, Indianapolis: Hackett Pub-
lishing Company.
   DiMaggio, Paul (1997) "Culture and cognition," Annual Review of Sociology, 23, 263-287.
   Elton, Geoffrey R. (1953) The Tudor Revolution in Government: Administrative Changes
in the Reign of Henry VIII, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Fei, Xiaotong (1992) From the Soil: The Foundations of Chinese Society, Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
   Fetzer, Joel and J Christopher Soper (2012) Confucianism, Democratization, and Human
Rights in Taiwan, Lanham: Lexington Books.
   Flannery, Kent and Joyce Marcus (2014) The Creation of Inequality: How Our Prehistoric
Ancestors Set the Stage for Monarchy, Slavery, and Empire, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
   Fukuyama, Francis (1989) "The End of History?" The National Interest, 16, 3-18.
   Geertz, Clifford (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures, New York: Basic Books.

                                                 20
   Gellner, Ernest (2009) Nations and Nationalism, Second Edition, Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
   Goldin, Paul R. (2011) Confucianism, Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Gorski, Philip S. (2003) The Disciplinary Revolution: Calvinism and the Rise of the State
in Early Modern Europe, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Grzymala-Busse, Anna (2012) "Why Comparative Politics Should Take Religion (More)
Seriously," Annual Review of Political Science, 15, 421-442.
   Grzymala-Busse, Anna (2015) Nations under God: How Churches Use Moral Authority to
Influence Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Heldring, Leander, James A. Robinson and Sebastian Vollmer (2015) "The Long-Run
Impact of the Dissolution of the English Monasteries," NBER Working Paper No. 21450.
   Hindle, Steve (2000) The State and Social Change in Early Modern England, C. 1550-1640,
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
   Horowitz, Donald L. (2000) Ethnic Groups in Conflict, Updated Edition, Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
   Huntington, Samuel P. (1968) Political Order in Changing Societies, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
   Huntington, Samuel P. (1991) "Democracy's Third Wave," Journal of Democracy, 2, 2,
12-34.
   Huntington, Samuel P. (1996) The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order,
New York: Simon and Schuster.
   Jha, Saumitra (2015) "Financial Asset Holdings and Political Attitudes: Evidence from
Revolutionary England," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 3, 1485­1545.
   Kalyvas, Stathis N. (1996) The Rise of Christian Democracy in Europe, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
   Kharas, Homi and Meagan Dooley (2020) "China's Influence on the Global Middle Class"
Brookings.
   Laitin, David D. (1986) Hegemony and Culture: Politics and Religious Change among the
Yoruba, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Laitin, David D. (1998) Identity in Formation: The Russian-Speaking Populations in the
New Abroad, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
   Legge, James (1893) The Chinese Classics, Volume 1, 2nd Edition, Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

                                                21
   Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959) "Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Devel-
opment and Political Legitimacy," American Political Science Review, 53, 1, 69-105.
   Machiavelli, Niccol`
                      o (1961) The Prince, New York: Penguin.
   Malinowski, Bronislaw (1921) "The Primitive Economics of the Trobriand Islanders," Eco-
nomic Journal, 31, 121, 1-16.
   Malinowski, Bronislaw (1922) Argonauts of the Western Pacific, London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
   Malinowski, Bronislaw (1926) Crime and custom in savage society, New York: Harcourt,
Brace & Co.
   Mokyr, Joel (2016) A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
   Moore, Barrington Jr. (1966) Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and
Peasant in the Making of the Modern World, Cambridge: Beacon Press.
   Pan, Jennifer and Yiqing Xu (2017) "China's Ideological Spectrum," Journal of Politics,
80, 1 254-273.
   Perry, Elizabeth J. (2008) "Chinese Conceptions of "Rights": From Mencius to Mao- and
Now," Perspectives on Politics, 6, 1, 37-50.
   Perry, Elizabeth J. (2018) "Cultural Governance in Contemporary China: "Re-Orienting"
Party Propaganda," in To Govern China: Evolving Practices of Power edited by Vivienne Shue
and Patricia M. Thornton, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Pincus, Steven C.A. (2009) 1688: The First Modern Revolution, New Haven: Yale Univer-
sity Press.
   Posner, Daniel (2005) Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Putnam, Robert H. (1993) Making Democracy Work, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
   Rostow, Walt W. (1971) Politics and the Stages of Growth, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Ryan, Alan (2012) On Politics, Volume 1, New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
   Sewell, William (2005) Logics of History: Social Theory and Social Transformation, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
   Shang Yang (2017) The Book of Lord Shang, edited and translated by Yuri Pines, New York:
Columbia University Press.

                                               22
   Skinner, Quentin (1978) The Foundations of Modern Political Thought: Volume 2 The Age
of Reformation, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Sommerville, Johann P. (1999) Royalists and Patriots: Politics and Ideology in England
1603-1640, New York: Longman.
   Steinmetz, George ed. (1999) State/Culture: State-Formation after the Cultural Turn,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
   Swidler, Ann (1986) "Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies," American Sociological
Review, 51, 2, 273-286.
   Tawney, R.H. (1941) "The Rise of the Gentry, 1558-1640," Economic History Review, 11, 1,
1-38.
   Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, Oxford: Blackwell.
   Treisman, Daniel (2020) "Economic Development and Democracy: Predispositions and Trig-
gers," Annual Review of Political Science, 23, 241-257.
   Vile, M. J. C. (1967) Constitutionalism and the Separation of Powers, New York: Oxford
University Press.
   Weber, Max (1951) The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism, New York: The Free
Press.
   Wickham, Chris (2016) Medieval Europe, New Haven: Yale University Press.
   Wolin, Sheldon (2004) Politics and Vision, Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                23
