                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DO POLICIES TO INCREASE ACCESS TO TREATMENT
                        FOR OPIOID USE DISORDER WORK?

                                         Eric Barrette
                                        Leemore Dafny
                                         Karen Shen

                                      Working Paper 29001
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29001


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Abby Alpert, W. David Bradford, Zack Cooper, Ellen Meara, and Kosali Simon for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful for comments by participants in seminars
at Dartmouth, the American Society of Health Economists, Johns Hopkins, the University of
Minnesota, Duke University, and the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill. We are grateful
to the staff of the Health Care Cost Institute for answering numerous data and access-related
questions. All errors are our own, and the views in this paper may not reflect the views of the
organizations with which we are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eric Barrette, Leemore Dafny, and Karen Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Policies to Increase Access to Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder Work?
Eric Barrette, Leemore Dafny, and Karen Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 29001
July 2021
JEL No. H51,I1,I12,I13,I28

                                          ABSTRACT

Even among commercially-insured individuals, opioid use disorder (OUD) is undertreated in the
U.S.: nearly half receive no treatment within 6 months of a new diagnosis. Using a difference-in-
differences specification exploiting the extension of insurance parity requirements for substance
disorder treatment to small group enrollees in 2014, we find that parity increases utilization of
residential treatment but decreases utilization of agonist medications, the standard of care. We
find direct interventions to increase access to medication may be more promising: increases in the
county-level share of physicians able to prescribe agonists are associated with substitution toward
medication-assisted treatment.

Eric Barrette                                    Karen Shen
Medtronic                                        Department of Economics
900 F St. NW                                     Harvard University
Suite 500                                        1805 Cambridge Street
Washington, DC 20004                             Cambridge, MA 02138
eric.barrette@gmail.com                          karenshen@g.harvard.edu

Leemore Dafny
Harvard Business School
Harvard Kennedy School
Morgan Hall 481
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ldafny@hbs.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29001
1      Introduction
Since the 1996 introduction of OxyContin, the extended-release oxycodone preparation mar-
keted to treat acute or chronic pain, the rate of opioid dependence and abuse has skyrocketed
in the U.S.1 Deaths from overdoses involving opioids have climbed annually, rising from just
over 10,000 per year in 2000 to 49,860 in 2019, far exceeding deaths attributed to car ac-
cidents in recent years (CDC/NCHS, 2018). The growth in fatal overdoses since 2013 has
been particularly steep, owing in part to increasing consumption of synthetic opioids such
as fentanyl, which is 50-100 times more potent than morphine.2
    To date, most policy interventions and academic studies have focused on curbing pre-
scriptions for opioids and physician prescribing behavior (e.g. Schnell, 2017; Alpert et al.,
2020). There is evidence these efforts have reduced both the volume of prescriptions as well
as the quantities prescribed (Bao et al., 2016; Buchmueller and Carey, 2018; Sacks et al.,
2021). Given that an estimated 8-12 percent of patients prescribed opioids for chronic pain
have historically developed an opioid use disorder (OUD) (Cicero et al., 2014), these efforts
should lead to a reduction in OUD prevalence. However, an estimated 1.6 million Americans
already suffer from OUD, and there is a pressing need for additional research on how to in-
crease access to, and utilization of, treatment--particularly medication-assisted treatment,
for which there is the most robust clinical support.
    This study helps to address this gap. Using data from a large commercial claims database
between 2008-2017, we study treatment utilization, clinical outcomes, and spending among
a sample of individuals newly diagnosed with OUD. Just 53 percent of commercially-insured
individuals newly diagnosed with OUD received medication within six months of their di-
agnosis, and this share actually declined over our sample period (Shen et al., 2020).3 An
additional 23 percent of newly diagnosed individuals received treatment that did not include
medication. We study the effect of two policies designed to increase access to treatment:
(1) improving insurance coverage of treatment and (2) increasing the supply of providers of
1
  https://www.hhs.gov/opioids/about-the-epidemic/index.html
2
  https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/fentanyl
3
  As we describe below, there are three medications approved to treat OUD; our data primarily capture buprenorphine,
  by far the most common medication utilized.




                                                         1
medication-assisted treatment or MAT (specifically, prescribers of buprenorphine, the most
commonly utilized medication).
    To examine how insurance coverage affects treatment, we evaluate the effect of insurance
parity laws, which require commercial plans to provide equal coverage for substance use
treatment as for other medical conditions, on treatment utilization and outcomes. We use a
difference-in-differences strategy that compares small group and large group enrollees before
and after the Affordable Care Act extended parity requirements to small group plans effective
2014; parity was previously mandated for large group plans as of 2010 via the Mental Health
Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008. We find that the extension of parity to small
groups increased the utilization of residential treatment among small-group enrollees newly
diagnosed with OUD, but decreased the utilization of MAT, resulting in no net change in
the propensity to receive any treatment. We also find no statistically significant impacts on
clinical outcomes or medical spending as a result of parity.
    Given the decrease in MAT utilization as a result of parity, we next consider the potential
impact of MAT supply-side policies that would increase the number of clinicians eligible to
prescribe buprenorphine. Examples of such policies include the hub-and-spoke model in Ver-
mont,4 or lowering training requirements for buprenorphine prescribers.5 For this analysis,
we collected data via a Freedom of Information Act request on the number of providers in
each U.S. county who have acquired the requisite credential to prescribe buprenorphine, and
created a normalized measure of provider supply, BP MD Share, by dividing this number
by the number of "frontline" physicians in a county.6 We estimate models relating patients'
treatment decisions to BP MD Share in the relevant county and year, controlling for patient
and plan characteristics, county and county-year covariates, and state-by-year fixed effects.7
    We find that increases in BP MD Share are associated with greater utilization of MAT
4
  As described in Brooklyn and Sigmon (2017), the hub-and-spoke model creates centers of addiction expertise ("hubs")
  to increase the willingness of "spokes" (primary care providers) to provide addiction care by offering support to these
  providers such as intake, induction, and care for patients who destabilize.
5
  In the final days of the Trump administration, the Department of Health and Human Services issued new addiction
  treatment guidelines exempting physicians with a narcotics prescribing license from mandatory training before
  prescribing buprenorphine. The guidelines were withdrawn in early 2021 by the leadership of the Department of
  Health and Human Services installed by President Biden; officials reportedly cited the need for additional study.
6
  As we discuss in the text, we define "frontline" physicians as primary care physicians and psychiatrists. For all but
  the final year of our study period, non-physicians were not eligible to prescribe these medications.
7
  As we explain below, the data are too thin to support county fixed effects, but we include as a control variable the
  initial BP MD Share for each county.


                                                           2
(with or without additional outpatient services) in the six months following diagnosis, lower
utilization of medication-free outpatient treatment, and modest improvements in clinical
outcomes. This analysis relies on the assumption that variation in BP MD share over time
and across counties (controlling for the initial county BP MD share, as well as state-year fixed
effects) is orthogonal to other determinants of patients' treatment decisions and outcomes.
This assumption could be violated if, for example, counties with the largest increases in BP
MD Share within a given state diagnose more patients with OUD, perhaps due to greater
physician awareness and engagement. To assess the potential impact of omitted variables
such as these, we confirm the results are robust to (1) excluding county-year covariates,
which may be correlated with unobserved covariates; and (2) excluding patients who receive
treatment on the same day of diagnosis, which (as we discuss below) may arise due to changes
in physicians' diagnosing behavior (i.e., the "diagnosis margin.")
       Supplementary analyses show the benefits of increasing BP MD Share are most pro-
nounced when counties have below-median values of BP MD Share.8 In these county-years,
increases in BP MD Share are associated with greater utilization of MAT but not with
reductions in other treatment modalities, driving an increase in the overall propensity to
receive treatment and substantially larger clinical benefits than in the entire sample. In fact,
the data suggest that increasing BP MD Share in counties at above-median levels is not
associated with higher overall treatment rates nor with significant improvements in clinical
outcomes, although rates of MAT do increase (at the expense of medication-free regimens).
       While most prior studies utilize aggregate data including the Medicaid and uninsured
population or focus specifically on the Medicaid population, there are advantages to studying
the commercially insured population. First, patient churn in this population is considerably
less, enabling the researcher to track outcomes over time, and to study patients conditional
on prior health history (e.g., of substance use disorder). Focusing on the newly diagnosed
enables us to compare individuals at similar stages of their disease across areas and over time,
and isolates changes in the extensive treatment margin. Second, low-income, non-disabled
adults were not generally covered by Medicaid until the Affordable Care Act expansions
8
    The national population-weighted median value of (BP MD Share ) is 7.5 percent over the study period, 2009-2017.
    In these analyses, counties may shift from below to above median over time.




                                                          3
beginning in 2014, limiting the study period for the Medicaid population. Last, although
survey data suggests OUD prevalence among commercially-insured adults is only one-third
that among the uninsured and publicly insured (SAMHSA, 2017a), due to the sheer size of
the commercially-insured population, the total numbers of commercially-insured and publicly
insured adults suffering from OUD are similar. Hence, any effort to increase treatment rates
will need to address the barriers across a range of populations.
    Overall, our results suggest that increasing the generosity of commercial insurance cov-
erage for OUD treatment did not increase the utilization of MAT, the clinical standard of
care. Rather, we find that more generous coverage increases utilization of a higher-cost
care alternative, residential care, whose effectiveness has not been established in the clinical
literature. In contrast, we find suggestive evidence that utilization of MAT increases with
availability of physicians eligible to prescribe buprenorphine, controlling for other observable
and potentially unobservable factors (i.e., via state-year fixed effects). In areas with below-
median access to buprenorphine prescribers, increases in buprenorphine prescribers lead to
higher treatment rates and improved clinical outcomes. In areas with above-median access,
we find patients substitute away from medication-free treatment and toward MAT, meaning
that the extensive margin of receiving any treatment is not significantly affected. Additional
research is needed to develop and assess robust ways to increase the share of patients who
receive treatment for this deadly disorder.
    The paper proceeds in five additional sections. Section 2 provides background on OUD,
the medications used to treat it, and prior related literature. Section 3 describes our data
sources and presents key descriptive findings. Section 4 outlines both empirical analyses, and
Section 5 presents the main results, robustness checks, and extensions. Section 6 concludes.




2     Background

2.1    Prevalence and treatment of opioid use disorder
The most widely cited estimates of the prevalence of substance use disorder in the U.S. derive
from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), which conducts face-to-face


                                               4
interviews with approximately 70,000 individuals each year. Using the NSDUH, the CDC
estimated that 1.6 million people met the criteria for an opioid use disorder (OUD) in 2019.
A larger population is estimated to have misused opioids (10.1 million) but did not meet the
criteria for an OUD.9
    OUD is treated by a diverse set of providers and therapies. A key distinction between
treatment types is whether or not they include medication, often referred to as"medication-
assisted treatment," or MAT. Two types of medications are currently approved for the
long-term treatment of opioid dependence: opioid agonists and opioid antagonists. Opioid
agonists are themselves opioids, but they activate opioid receptors for longer durations and
at a lower intensity than analgesic opioids, and thus prevent withdrawal symptoms without
producing the same euphoric effect. The most studied agonist is methadone, which was
approved for the treatment of opioid dependence in 1972, and is taken orally once per day.
Buprenorphine (also sold under brand names such as Suboxone and Zubsolv) was approved
by the FDA for treatment of opioid addiction in 2002. Buprenorphine is a partial agonist,
meaning that it has a ceiling effect, thus limiting its potential for abuse relative to methadone.
In addition, it is commonly delivered in combination form with naloxone, which prevents the
opioid from acting if injected, further decreasing its risk of abuse. While methadone can only
be dispensed in federally licensed facilities, buprenorphine can be prescribed for take-home
use by physicians who obtain a waiver from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).10
The second type of medication used to treat OUD are opioid antagonists, which block, rather
than activate, opioid receptors so that patients who take antagonists and then use an opioid
do not experience the opioid's effects. The only FDA-approved antagonist is naltrexone. The
extended release version (a monthly injection with the brand name Vivitrol) was approved
to treat OUD in 2010. Because it has no abuse potential, Vivitrol is often favored for use in
criminal justice settings.
9
 The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), defines a diagnosis of "substance use disorder"
 as "when recurrent use causes clinically and functionally significant impairment, such as health problems, disability,
 and failure to meet major responsibilities." Diagnostic criteria include evidence of impaired control, social impair-
 ment, risky use, and pharmacological criteria. (see Appendix A for further details) This definition is distinct from
 other commonly used terms such as "dependence" or "misuse." Misuse is defined as use in any way not directed
 by a doctor, including use without a prescription of one's own, and use in greater amounts, more often, or for a
 lengthier period of time than prescribed.
10
   Buprenorphine is available as a sublingual film or tablet (typically taken once or twice daily), and since early 2018,
   as a monthly arm patch.



                                                           5
     Most medication-assisted therapy is known as "maintenance therapy," meaning that pa-
tients are expected to continue taking the medication for an extended period of time (possibly
indefinitely).11 In contrast, medication-free treatment generally begins with detoxification
and is followed by abstinence-supporting care. This care can be delivered in an inpatient or
residential setting, or in varying intensities on an outpatient basis.12
     An interesting feature of substance abuse treatment is that a substantial amount of care
is delivered by specialty providers, including dedicated substance abuse treatment facilities.
These providers are generally licensed by states, which vary in their licensing requirements.
However, in many states, it is not necessary to have a prescribing professional on staff to be
a licensed treatment provider. In addition, many facilities also follow an abstinence model
of treatment. During our study period, the share of substance abuse treatment facilities
offering medication-assisted treatment increased from just 22% in 2009 to a (still low) 38%
in 2017 (SAMSHA, 2019).
     A significant body of clinical research supports medication-assisted treatment (MAT).13
In clinical trials that compare patients receiving these medications with a control placebo
group, those receiving MAT with agonists experienced significant reductions in other opioid
use (as measured through hair or urine tests, or self-reports) and increased retention in
treatment programs.14 There are far fewer studies of extended-release naltrexone, but the
literature thus far generally finds improved outcomes, albeit at lower rates than agonist
therapy (Lee et al., 2018; Connery, 2015). On the other hand, there is relatively little
evidence of the effectiveness of any treatment regimen that does not include medication.
     Clinical studies do not speak directly to the effects of MAT outside of tightly controlled
clinical trial settings. There are non-clinical, retrospective studies that use insurance claims
11
   Methadone and buprenorphine are also sometimes used for detoxification, meaning that patients are given
   methadone and buprenorphine to manage withdrawal symptoms in either an inpatient or outpatient setting and
   gradually tapered over the course of the detoxification period. (SAMHSA (2017b) estimates that this treatment
   accounts for less than 10% of admissions using medication).
12
   Outpatient care includes higher intensity "day treatment" (known as "partial hospitalization" if the program
   exceeds 20 hours of care per week or "intensive outpatient treatment" for programs of 9-20 hours per week)` as
   well as standard outpatient programs (<9 hours per week) (American Society of Addiction Medicine, 2018). Many
   treatment programs take a "step down" approach where higher intensity services are offered to patients with the
   most severe disorders, who may transition over time to less intense levels of care.
13
   See Mattick et al. (2009) and Mattick et al. (2014) for a review; we summarize the evidence further in Appendix B.
14
   In many trials, the control and treatment groups also received additional services such as psychotherapy, as is
   generally recommended, but studies comparing MAT with and without psychotherapy generally fail to find a
   statistically significant difference in outcomes (e.g. Sigmon et al., 2016).


                                                         6
data to compare patients receiving MAT to other patients; these have found reductions in
spending and improvements in outcomes for patients receiving MAT, but they generally do
not control for selection into treatment (e.g., Kessel et al., 2018; Larochelle et al., 2018;
Wakeman et al., 2020)

2.2      Parity laws
In the private insurance market, so-called "parity laws" have expanded coverage for OUD
treatment. Parity laws require private insurance plans to offer equivalently generous cover-
age (measured by cost sharing, day limits, etc.) for mental health and/or substance abuse
services as they do for general medical and surgical services. The first federal parity statute
was the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 (MHPA), but it explicitly exempted substance use
disorders. As a result, several states passed parity laws for substance use disorders prior to
the second federal parity action, the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (MH-
PAEA), which was passed in 2008 and required parity for substance use disorders effective
2010.15 However, both MHPAEA and most (if not all) of the earlier state laws excluded
individuals and small groups (i.e., groups with fewer than 50 members) (Buchmueller et al.,
2007). The Affordable Care Act extended parity to small groups in 2014. Because our data
begins in 2008, we study this last parity action, using large group enrollees as the control
group for our difference-in-differences study.16
     Evidence regarding the impact of parity laws on treatment utilization has been mixed (see
Peterson and Busch, 2018, for a review). Prior studies generally make use of two different
types of data sources: (1) claims data (similar to this paper), and (2) data from treatment
facilities. Most studies that use claims data (including this study) find no impact of parity on
the overall utilization rate of treatment, although they show that parity laws reduce patient
cost-sharing and increase the use of out-of-network services (Busch et al., 2014; Ettner et al.,
2016; McGinty et al., 2015). On the other hand, studies using facility-level data generally
find that the volume of "treatment admissions" increased as a result of parity (e.g., Wen
et al., 2013; Maclean et al., 2017). Because these studies use data on treatment admissions,
15
   To be more precise, MHPAEA required parity for policy years beginning after October 9, 2009, but private policy
   years are typically calendar years. (Source: CMS Fact Sheet: The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act)
16
   Parity was also extended to individual plans, but we do not consider these enrollees in our study given other large
   changes to the individual insurance market by the ACA.


                                                          7
however, the effects will combine increases in OUD prevalence, extensive margin increases
in treatment, and intensive margin increases in treatment. These data are also unlikely to
capture most buprenorphine treatment, which is generally prescribed in-office. Our analysis
extends prior work on the impact of parity by using a more recent natural experiment,
isolating its effects on MAT, and examining health outcomes.

2.3      Provider supply
Another potential barrier to treatment is the availability of providers.                              In the case of
medication-assisted treatment, provider supply may be limited by the strict regulation of
medications used to treat OUD. Methadone can only be dispensed at federally licensed Opi-
oid Treatment Programs (OTPs, commonly known as methadone clinics). Buprenorphine
can be prescribed for at-home use, but only by physicians who have obtained an "X" waiver.17
Physicians obtain waivers by completing an eight-hour training course or through board cer-
tification in addiction medicine. In 2016, nurse practitioners and physician assistants became
eligible for waivers with 24 hours of training.18 See Appendix C for a broader discussion of
regulation regarding controlled substances used to treat substance abuse disorders.
     The top panel of Figure 1 shows trends in the supply of Opioid Treatment Programs
and X waivers from 2004-2017. While the number of OTPs has been fairly stable over the
past fifteen years (around 1,300 nationwide), there has been a steady increase in the number
of waivered prescribers since the approval of buprenorphine, with a pronounced surge after
2016. The bottom panel graphs estimates of the number of patients using methadone,
buprenorphine, and naltrexone, constructed from national, public data sources. It shows
that the number of patients using buprenorphine for OUD has climbed in tandem with the
increase in waivered providers; we estimate it exceeded 1.2 million unique users in 2016,
with significantly fewer patients using methadone (around 320,000) and naltrexone (around
30,000).
     There are relatively few studies of the effects of increasing provider supply on treatment
utilization and outcomes. Swensen (2015) exploits county-level changes in substance abuse
17
   These waivers were created in the Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000. However, buprenporphine, the first drug
   to fall under the Act's requirements, was approved by the FDA for the treatment of opioid use disorder in 2002.
18
   Waivers are subject to legislated patient limits--originally 30 for all providers; now 100 for prescribers in the first
   year and 275 for those who apply after their first year for an increase.


                                                            8
facilities and finds a reduction in fatal overdose rates in counties with increases in treatment
facilities. Our study is complementary: we use patient-level data, which enables us to
explore the impact of interventions (both demand and supply-side) on specific treatment
modalities and clinical outcomes, and allows for a richer set of controls. Another related
study, Wen et al. (2018), shows an association between buprenorphine provider supply and
buprenorphine prescribing in Medicaid at the state-level, but given the unit of observation
cannot control for other policies that may vary at the state-year level. Our study includes
state-year fixed effects to account for this variation.




3         Data

3.1         Private Insurance Claims Data
Our primary data are insurance claims from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) dataset
for calendar years 2008-2017. HCCI aggregates data from three large national insurers who
jointly cover one-quarter of the non-elderly, commercially insured population and contains
data on members from all fifty states and the District of Columbia. Relative to the national
commercially insured population, HCCI is more concentrated in urban areas. Cooper et al.
(2019) note that the HCCI data appears to be more geographically comprehensive than the
MarketScan database, the other leading source for commercial claims data. We restrict our
analysis sample to enrollees between the ages of 18 and 64 who receive medical, mental
health, and prescription drug benefits from their primary insurer.19 After applying this
restriction, our baseline sample contains 12-15 million individuals per month, corresponding
to about 15% of the commercially insured 18-64 population.
19
     Some large employers choose to "carve out" mental or pharmaceutical benefits to companies other than their insur-
     ance carrier, e.g. to a pharmaceutical benefits management company (PBM). In such cases, we lack comprehensive
     claims information.




                                                           9
3.1.1     Identifying patients with opioid use disorder (OUD)

We identify enrollees with OUD in two ways: (1) inclusion of an OUD diagnosis on any non-
lab claim;20 (2) receipt of buprenorphine formulations used for the treatment of OUD.21 We
add the second route because prescription drug claims lack diagnosis codes, so individuals
who are treating their OUD solely with buprenorphine (or whose other treatment services
are not included in insurance claims, e.g. Narcotics Anonymous meetings) may not have
an OUD diagnosis in our data.22 During the study period, we find OUD prevalence in our
sample increased steadily from 1.7 to 3.9 per 1,000 enrollees. By comparison, data from the
NSDUH (which relies on self-reports) shows similar prevalence among the privately-insured
for 2017, but a smaller increase since 2008--from 4.2 to 4.3 per 1,000 enrollees.

3.1.2     Defining a "new diagnosis" analysis sample

We restrict our analysis sample to patients with a "new" diagnosis of OUD, defined as
patients whose first OUD-related claim in our data appears after a period of at least 12
months with no OUD-related claims. We further require that these patients be observed for
an additional six months after diagnosis, so that we can explore the care they receive and a
range of outcomes observable through claims data.23 Limiting the sample to new diagnoses
enables us to study clinical outcomes and spending for a sample of individuals with the
same disease state, assuming no variation in physicians' diagnosing behavior,24 and yields
an analysis sample of approximately 9,000 patients per year.
     We describe the composition of this sample in Figure 2. The figure confirms some of
the demographic characteristics of the opioid crisis identified in prior literature: a dispro-
portionate share of the sample is male (57%) and young (43% aged 18-34, as compared to
14% of all HCCI enrollment ages 18-64). Given the incidence in the young population, it
20
   We exclude lab claims because diagnoses on lab claims are sometimes listed when testing for the presence of a
   condition, even if the test was not positive.
21
   As described in Appendix A, some formulations of buprenorphine are primarily used for treatment of pain while
   others are used for treatment of OUD; these can be identified by the specific "NDC codes" included in claims.
22
   44% of people receiving buprenorphine in a given year do not have an associated OUD diagnosis.
23
   Note that patients need not have claims during the followup period; however, they must continue to have insurance
   coverage through one of the carriers in HCCI in order to be included in the analysis sample. 1.5% of those included
   in the new diagnosis sample have no claims during the 6-month period post-diagnosis.
24
   The inclusion of state-year fixed effects in all models should absorb much of this variation, which is also unlikely
   to be correlated with small versus large-group treatment decisions.




                                                          10
is unsurprising that a sizeable share of the new diagnosis sample (23%) receives coverage
through the policy of a parent or guardian. Figure 2 also provides the distribution of the
sample by the year and setting of the patient's initial OUD diagnosis.25 Nearly half the
sample is diagnosed in a detox or treatment setting, and 14% are diagnosed in the ER. The
remainder are primarily diagnosed during a non-treatment office visit, such as a physical,
psychiatric evaluation, or visit for a different medical complaint.

3.1.3     Treatment, spending, and clinical outcomes of patients with new OUD
          diagnoses

For each newly diagnosed patient, we construct indicator variables for receiving different
types of treatment in the six months post-diagnosis, indicator variables for experiencing
specific adverse events in the six-months post-diagnosis, and also measure total medical
spending in the pre-diagnosis and post-diagnosis periods.
     We define three mutually exclusive treatment categories: MAT, Medication-free Resi-
dential, and Medication-free Outpatient. Mutually exclusive categories aid us in analyzing
substitution across modalities. "MAT" includes patients receiving medication at any point
in the 6-month post-diagnosis period. 93% of the MAT sample received buprenorphine.26
The MAT sample includes patients who received medication as their only source of treat-
ment in our data (67%), as well as patients who receive other treatment services in addition
to medication (33%).27 Defined this way, nearly 30% of newly diagnosed OUD patients re-
ceived MAT in the six months following their diagnosis. Another 23% obtain medication-free
25
   The sample is roughly halved in size for 2017, as our claims data end in 2017 so we only have a 6-month followup
   period for patients diagnosed during the first half of the year. Setting aside 2017, the number of patients in the
   analysis sample does not increase over time, notwithstanding the previously documented increase in OUD prevalence
   among HCCI enrollees, because the share of HCCI enrollees receiving both mental health and prescription drug
   benefits through their primary insurer--a requirement for inclusion in our sample--is decreasing over time.
26
   We classify patients as receiving buprenorphine if they have at least one buprenorphine prescription drug claim in
   the six months following their diagnosis. Results are similar if we limit to prescriptions of at least 30 days' supply.
   Methadone and naltrexone are identified using procedure codes. Our data include relatively few methadone claims,
   and it is possible that some patients are paying for it out-of-pocket or receiving it free of charge. However, data
   from the National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services suggest that only 10% of the 300,000 methadone
   patients per year in the US have private health insurance. IMS counts of buprenorphine suggests that about 57%
   of the 1.2 million buprenorphine patients in 2016 paid for their prescription using private insurance, leading to
   a buprenorphine utilization rate among privately insured patients that is about 20 times the utilization rate of
   methadone.
27
   MAT includes all individuals receiving medication, including the small share who receive both residential treatment
   and medication. Results from categorizations that are not mutually exclusive are very similar and available upon
   request.




                                                           11
services, which we subdivide into those receiving residential treatment (4%) and those receiv-
ing outpatient services only (19%). Table 1 summarizes our clinical and spending outcome
measures for the full sample (column 1), and by treatment type (columns 2-5).
       The first few rows report the incidence of three clinical outcome measures: overdoses,
drug-related ER visits, and non-drug-related ER visits, all measured over the 6 months fol-
lowing a new diagnosis. We find that only 4.5% of our sample has an overdose claim during
the post-diagnosis period; this rate likely understates the volume of overdoses because some
overdoses may not result in any insurance claims (e.g., overdoses handled in the field by
first responders). On the other hand, 26% of all newly-diagnosed OUD patients experi-
ences one or more drug-related ER visits, which we define as any ER visits that include an
overdose, drug dependence, poisoning, or withdrawal diagnosis code (again, excluding lab
claims).28 Finally, 23% of the sample visits the ER for non-drug-related reasons. Overall, the
rate of adverse clinical outcomes post-diagnosis appears to be lowest among those receiving
medication-assisted treatment (column 2), and highest among people receiving medication-
free residential treatment (column 3). However, these patterns may reflect both selection
into treatment as well as the causal effects of treatment.
       The bottom rows of Table 1 summarizes average spending for each group in the six
months before and after a new OUD diagnosis.29 Average spending in the six months prior
to diagnosis is high--nearly $12,000 (in CPI-adjusted 2017 dollars)--and it increases to more
than $17,000 in the six months following diagnosis. Post-diagnosis spending for patients
receiving medication-free treatment (columns 3 and 4) is significantly higher than post-
diagnosis treatment spending for patients receiving MAT (column 2), reflecting both higher
treatment spending and higher non-treatment spending for patients receiving medication-
free treatment. However, patients receiving MAT also have lower pre-treatment spending,
suggesting these raw comparisons are likely to suffer from selection bias. Notably, non-
28
     We summarize the most frequent primary diagnoses for these visits in Table A3.
29
     We assign claims to spending categories using a priority order system detailed in the Appendix that generally
     allocates spending to the "highest intensity" service provided on a given day. Allocating spending by day rather
     than by service allows us to capture treatment-related spending that is not billed as a "treatment service," such
     as physician billing for evaluation and management or lab services in a treatment program. However, it may also
     result in overcounting if patients receive non-treatment related services on the same day as a treatment service. We
     do not count detox as a treatment service.




                                                            12
treatment spending increases post-diagnosis for all patients except those receiving MAT.30

3.2      Prescriber Data
We use the individual's zip code and diagnosis year in the claims data to merge in county-year
data on several variables, including our measure of access to buprenorphine, BP MD Share.
This measure is constructed by taking the number of providers with waivers to prescribe
buprenorphine and dividing by the number of primary care physicians and psychiatrists
("frontline providers") in the county-year. The numerator is constructed from data on the
practice zipcode (at the time the waiver was granted) and waiver date of every provider
granted a waiver to prescribe buprenorphine, which we obtained through a FOIA request
to SAMHSA.31 We use this source to estimate the number of waivered providers in every
county and year.32 The denominator is constructed from the Area Health Resource Files.33
Normalizing the number of providers with waivers in this way serves two purposes. First,
it addresses the fact that some counties have relatively low or high availability of medical
professionals. A central county may provide care for residents of outlying counties, and
failing to normalize for the density of medical professionals could yield misleading estimates
of access. Second, this normalization is appropriate in light of potential policies to address
access, e.g., easing the restrictions for prescribing buprenorphine or abbreviating training.
PCPs and psychiatrists are among the likeliest targets of such interventions, as they are the
primary frontline physicians encountering patients with OUD.34
     Nationally, BP MD Share increased from 6.2% at the end of 2008 to 18.1% at the end
of 2017. There is substantial variation in BP MD Share across locations and over time.
30
   Note that by construction, all pre-diagnosis spending is non-treatment spending.
31
   At present, only limited historical data is publicly available, specifically state-level counts of waivers.
32
   Unfortunately, although the data records provider moves, it does not record the date on which a move occurs. We
   use the first recorded location to construct BP MD share. In unreported results, we confirm that using the last
   reported location does not alter the results. Approximately 5% of providers experience at least one move in our
   data. We also do not observe if or when providers stop practicing or prescribing buprenorphine.
33
   The AHRF obtains these measures from the American Medical Association's Masterfile and defines primary care
   physicians as MDs and DOs who provide direct patient care and practice principally in one of the four primary
   care specialties: general or family practice, general internal medicine, pediatrics, and obstetrics and gynecology.
34
   Addiction medicine specialists are often psychiatrists, therefore many of these specialists are included in the denom-
   inator. One exception to the waiver process is that patients can also be dispensed buprenorphine at OTPs (although
   they cannot receive a prescription for take-home use unless issued by a waivered provider). However, survey data
   of these facilities suggest that the number of patients receiving buprenorphine at an OTP is relatively small (about
   50,000 in 2015, less than 5% of the total estimated number of patients receiving buprenorphine) (Alderks, 2016)
   and it is likely that these OTPs may employ waivered providers. Thus, we do not make adjustments for OTP
   locations in our analysis.


                                                          13
Figure 3 graphs the growth in state-level BP MD Share between 2008 and 2017 against the
initial state-level BP MD Share in 2008. The figure identifies some early adopters (e.g.,
Vermont, Maine, New Mexico, Rhode Island and Utah) as well as late adopters (e.g., New
Hampshire, Idaho, Kentucky, Washington). It also shows that state-level BP MD Share does
not converge over time: instead, there is a clear positive relationship between growth before
and after 2008. This pattern implies attempts to instrument for access to buprenorphine
using state-time variation (e.g., state-specific post-ACA Medicaid expansions) are unlikely
to be orthogonal to other factors potentially affecting treatment utilization.35 Thus, our
analysis exploits cross-county variation in BP MD Share, and controls for state-year effects.




4         Empirical Strategy
We pursue two separate analyses of potential barriers to treatment. The first analysis exploits
the extension in parity to small groups by the Affordable Care Act in 2014; as noted earlier,
the MHPAEA had previously required parity for large groups in 2010. These results reveal
the impact of increasing the generosity of insurance coverage (a demand-side intervention)
on different types of OUD treatment. The second analysis explores the relationship between
access to buprenorphine providers and patient outcomes. This analysis speaks to the impact
of a more targeted, supply-side policy intervention.

4.1         Effects of Insurance Parity on OUD Treatment and Outcomes
To study the effect of insurance parity, we use a difference-in-differences specification that
compares small group to large group enrollees before and after parity was extended to small
groups in 2014. For this analysis, we apply three additional restrictions to our analysis sample
of newly diagnosed OUD patients. First, we limit the estimation sample to fully-insured
enrollees, so as to maximize the comparability of the treatment (small group) and control
(large group) samples. Small group enrollees are nearly always enrolled in fully-insured
plans, whereas the majority of large group enrollees are in self-insured plans. Sponsors of
35
     Indeed, such an attempt on our part showed evidence of "pre trends," as expansion states were generally increasing
     access to buprenorphine both before and after the Medicaid expansion took place.




                                                           14
self-insured plans often influence the type and degree of utilization review, whereas insurers
typically set these terms for fully-insured enrollees. Second, we exclude the first year of data
(2009) as parity was not required uniformly of all large group plans until 2010. Finally,
we also drop patients newly diagnosed during the second half of 2013 in the event their
spending (partly in 2014) reflects the policy change. Summary statistics (Appendix Table
D1) show that patient characteristics in this smaller sample (which still contains over 28,000
observations) are very similar to those of the full sample. Using this sample, we estimate
the following specification:


             Yist =  + Xi + SmallGroupi × Postit +  SmallGroupi + st +           ist        (1)

for each newly-diagnosed individual i living in state s and diagnosed in year t. The dependent
variables Yist are indicator variables for different treatment modalities, spending measures,
and clinical outcome measures.
   The coefficient of interest is , which captures the differential effect of being enrolled in
a small group plan after parity was extended to small groups in 2014. We control for patient
and insurance characteristics Xi (sex, age band, plan type, indicator for a high-deductible
healthplan), as well as state-year fixed effects st . For dependent variables Yist , we use
binary measures reflecting treatment utilization, binary measures of clinical outcomes, and
continuous measures of spending. We transform spending measures using log (x + 1).
   To explore pre-trends, we also plot coefficients t from the expanded specification below:


                  Yist =  + Xi + t SmallGroupi × I(Year = t) + st +        ist              (2)

   One threat to a causal interpretation of the results is the possibility of changes in the
composition of small and large group members which are also correlated with changes in
utilization. For example, in other work, we report that older patients became less likely to
utilize buprenorphine over this period (Shen et al., 2020). If small group enrollees are skewing
younger or older over time, such a trend could bias the results. Thus, in the Appendix, we
also provide estimates of models where we interact each of our controls Xi with the Post
indicator.


                                              15
4.2         Effects of Access to Buprenorphine Prescribers on Treatment
            and Outcomes
Our second analysis estimates the relationship between changes in the local availability of
buprenorphine providers and the propensity of newly-diagnosed OUD patients to receive
treatment (with or without buprenorphine), as well as clinical and spending outcomes.
       For each patient i living in county c and diagnosed in year t, we regress treatment
utilization, clinical, and spending outcome measures Yict on our measure of buprenorphine
access using the following specification:


            Yict =  + Xi +  BP MD Sharect + µBP MD Sharec,2008 + Zct + st +                             ict .    (3)


Our main coefficient of interest is  , which captures the relationship between the dependent
variable (e.g., an indicator for receiving MAT) and BP MD Sharect . In addition to the same
patient-level controls Xi previously described, we also include county-year covariates Zct
that may impact our outcome measures (average health care spending for commercially-
insured adults, to capture variation in local price levels and healthcare utilization, and the
unemployment rate, to capture economic conditions which may independently affect health
and health-related spending).36 The unemployment rate has specifically been found to be
positively related to adverse opioid-related events (Hollingsworth, Ruhm, and Simon, 2017).
       We again include state-year fixed effects (st ) to help control for fixed and time-varying
factors at the state level that may affect both BP MD Share and the various outcomes
of interest. For example, increases in BP MD Share may coincide with increases in state
funding for substance abuse treatment or other state initiatives that affect MAT (e.g., the
state-level Medicaid expansions occurring in 2014+), which could independently affect the
propensity to initiate MAT. Finally, to control for county-level unobservables that might bias
the coefficient of interest, we include the "initial" county-level BP MD Share (measured in
2008, the year prior to the start of the study period). We include this lagged measure in lieu
of county fixed effects because the median county in our sample contains only six patients
36
     Average county-year spending is calculated using HCCI claims for all non-elderly enrollees with both medical and
     prescription claims data; the county-year unemployment rate is from the BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics.



                                                          16
across all years. Initial BP MD Share will capture relevant county-specific, time-invariant
characteristics that may affect both BP MD Share and our outcomes of interest, such as pre-
existing substance abuse treatment infrastructure. Because our variable of interest (BP MD
Share ) varies at the county-year level, we report standard errors clustered by county-year.
   One concern with this empirical strategy is that our sample might be endogenously
selected as a response to the variable of interest. For example, if treatment capacity directly
influences the diagnosis margin, the population diagnosed with OUD might be systematically
different in counties experiencing greater increases in BP MD Share. Finkelstein et al.
(2017) finds that regional variation in "diagnostic intensity" amplifies regional differences in
estimated health. Although state-level variation (and changes) in diagnostic intensity in our
setting are absorbed through fixed effects, county-level changes in diagnosis margins could
pose a problem for identification. We attempt to address this concern in Section 5 by further
restricting the sample to exclude individuals who receive treatment on the same day they
are diagnosed. Around 29% of our sample is diagnosed (per the claims data) on the first day
of treatment. If more providers are trained to dispense buprenorphine, they may diagnose
more marginal cases of it because they have tools to help treat it; such cases are likelier to
result in same-day treatment. As implied by Figure 2, the sample excluding these patients
will primarily consist of patients diagnosed in ER or non-treatment office-based settings,
including psychiatric visits. Summary statistics for this sample, in which treatment rates
are quite a bit lower, as expected, are in Appendix Table D1.
   A second concern is that omitted variables may bias the coefficient of interest. For ex-
ample, unobserved economic conditions may both increase the prevalence of OUD and drive
physicians to seek waivers, but these conditions might also reduce the likelihood that patients
choose to receive treatment for their disease (perhaps due to a heightened need to work, or
concerns about cost-sharing for treatment). Alternatively, increases in BP MD Share may
coincide with other county-specific policy changes or investments in treatment accessibility
or capacity, in which case any changes in outcomes would also reflect these unobserved re-
forms. Although we cannot fully address the concerns associated with omitted variables, we
present estimates of our baseline specification that exclude county-year covariates to assess
whether the results are sensitive to omitting these controls.


                                              17
5      Results

5.1      Effects of Post-ACA Parity for Small Groups on OUD Treat-
         ment and Outcomes
In this section, we present results obtained by comparing the post-diagnosis treatment de-
cisions and clinical and spending outcomes of patients with small group coverage relative to
patients with large group coverage, before and after the extension of parity requirements to
small groups.
     Table 2 shows the impact of parity on the propensity for patients to receive treatment of
any kind as well as specific types of treatment within six months of diagnosis using equation
(1). While parity may have impacted all types of treatment, our prior is that the effect
will be most pronounced for residential treatment, which is particularly expensive and hence
likely to be subject to the most restrictive prior authorization or utilization limits before
parity was mandated.37 Column (1) shows that extending parity to small groups did not
increase the probability that a newly diagnosed small-group enrollee received any treatment.
Columns (2)-(4) show that in fact, parity reduced the likelihood that patients received MAT,
while increasing the likelihood that patients received medication-free treatment, in particu-
lar medication-free residential treatment. The coefficient estimates on Small Group × Post,
which captures the average effect of parity on small versus large-group employees, are statis-
tically significant at =0.01 for residential treatment and = 0.05 for MAT. The magnitude
of the residential effect is quite large: the point estimate implies parity increases utiliza-
tion of residential care by 0.014 relative to a pre-period small group mean of 0.033, or 48
percent.38 Proportionally, the impact on medication-assisted treatment (8.7 percent of base-
line) is smaller, but MAT has a much higher baseline utilization level, at 0.38 for small-group
sample members during the pre-period. The net effect is that parity does not increase the
37
   As previously noted, the specific treatment types are defined to be mutually exclusive. Patients with medication
   claims at any point during the 6-month post-diagnosis period are classified under"MAT." Of the 1,368 newly
   diagnosed patients who received residential treatment in the sample used for the parity analysis, 285 are classified
   in the MAT category. Results are insensitive to adding them to the residential category.
38
   The point estimate (standard error) obtained when defining "residential" to include patients who receive medication
   as well as residential care is 0.015, which corresponds to an increase of 43 percent relative to the pre-period small
   group mean of .035 using this definition for residential care.



                                                          18
odds of receiving any treatment; rather it appears to lead to substitution away from MAT
and toward residential care which rarely includes it.39
       Many of the included controls are statistically significant and of independent interest,
albeit not the focus of this study. Treatment probabilities are generally decreasing with age
and are lower for females. We also find that employees are more likely to receive MAT, while
dependents are more likely to receive medication-free care (both residential and outpatient),
even after controlling for age and gender.
       To check the parallel trends assumption, we also estimated models interacting the small
group indicator with individual year dummies (as represented in equation 2 above). Figure
4 plots the coefficient estimates on these interaction terms, where the omitted year is 2010.
There is no evidence of a pre-ACA difference in utilization trends for small versus large-group
enrollees. The decline in the use of MAT relative to large groups is pronounced between 2014
and 2016, and lessens in 2017, a year during which BP MD Share also surges.
       We next examine how clinical outcomes evolved post-parity for newly diagnosed OUD pa-
tients in small-group plans relative to large-group plans. Table 3 presents the same difference-
in-differences specification as in Table 2, but substituting the indicators for treatment with
indicators for specific adverse clinical events during each patient's six-month post-diagnosis
period. We do not find any significant effects of small-group parity on the probability of
these events, and all of the coefficient estimates are positive, suggesting that the substitu-
tion of medication-free care for MAT as a result of parity may have been harmful. Plots of
yearly interactions with the small group indicator also show no evidence of pre-trends (see
Appendix Figure D1).
       Table 4 contains the results for spending outcomes: treatment spending, non-treatment
spending, and total spending. We find parity did not result in higher treatment spending
among patients newly diagnosed with OUD, a result that may appear surprising in light of
the high average costs of residential care. However, residential treatment is fairly rare, and
the increase in spending on this category is more than offset by the reduction in MAT. We also
do not find statistically significant changes in non-treatment or total spending (treatment
39
     Given the small sample for residential treatment, we also estimated models using indicators for any residential
     treatment (i.e., with or without medication), which occurs for 4.8% of the sample. The results are qualitatively
     similar and available upon request.



                                                          19
and non-treatment combined) as a result of parity. Overall, the estimates are imprecise,
however, so it is not possible to rule out sizeable changes in spending.
   As discussed above, the estimates of the impact of parity may be biased if small group
patients differ from large group patients in ways that are correlated with their insurance
coverage, have differential trends in outcomes, and for which we do not control in the main
specification. For example, if our sample of small group enrollees skews younger over time,
and younger enrollees experienced different trends in utilization and outcomes in the post-
parity years of our sample for reasons unrelated to parity, the coefficient estimates may be
biased. As a robustness check, we supplement the specifications in Tables 2-4 with inter-
actions between each patient-level observable and a post-parity indicator (Appendix Tables
D2-D4). Including these controls does not change our finding of significant substitution of
treatments as a result of parity, and it has relatively limited impact on any of the coefficient
estimates capturing the impact of parity on clinical or spending outcomes, suggesting that
such factors are unlikely to be a significant source of bias.
   Collectively, these results suggest that coverage limitations present in small group policies
pre-ACA constrained patients' ability to access residential care, but not MAT, and that
extending parity likely decreased the use of MAT due to substitution of other treatment
modalities.

5.2     Effects of Access to Buprenorphine Prescribers on Treatment
        and Outcomes
In this section, we examine the relationship between increases in BP MD Share in a patient's
county and the probability that a patient receives medication-assisted or medication-free
treatment. We also explore the implications for treatment and non-treatment spending, as
well as adverse health events.

5.2.1   Baseline specification

In Table 5, we report estimates of equation (3) using indicators for receiving different types
of treatment in the post-period (i.e., the six months following a new diagnosis) as dependent
variables. Again, we do not find that this policy lever is associated with a significant change



                                              20
in the probability that a newly diagnosed OUD patient receives any treatment (column 1).
We again see evidence of substitution of treatments, but in the opposite direction of that
observed in the parity analysis: patients are significantly likelier to receive MAT if their local
access to it (as measured by BP MD Share ) increases (column 2), and less likely to receive
medication-free outpatient treatment (column 4).
       We can interpret the magnitudes of the coefficient estimates by considering the effect
of the median county increase BP MD Share between 2008-2017, 8.8 percentage points.
An increase of this size is associated with an estimated increase of 1.5 percentage points
(+/- 0.4 percentage points using the 95% confidence interval) in the probability that a
newly diagnosed patient with OUD receives MAT. This increase is small, albeit not trivial,
as compared to the overall sample mean of 30 percent. However, it is largely offset by a
statistically significant decrease in medication-free outpatient therapy. Thus, while patients
are significantly more likely to receive MAT when more providers can prescribe it, they are
not, on average, significantly more likely to receive any treatment.
       Next, we consider the relationship between an increase in BP MD Share and indica-
tors for post-diagnosis clinical outcomes. We find increases in BP MD Share correspond to
statistically-significant reductions in the share of patients with drug-related ER visits (col-
umn 2). The estimates imply a county with the median increase in BP MD Share experiences
a reduction in drug-related ER visits of one percentage point, relative to a sample mean of
26 percentage points. We find no statistically significant relationships with the other clinical
outcomes (overdose and "other" ER visits).
       Table 7 considers the association between changes in buprenorphine provider supply and
health care spending for OUD patients. The coefficient estimates are noisy and none are
statistically significant at conventional levels. The point estimates suggest any modest in-
crease in treatment spending is more than offset by reductions in non-treatment spending,
yielding a net negative, but statistically insignificant, coefficient estimate for total spending.
However, it is possible to rule out a total spending increase of more than 0.8% associated
with the median county increase in BP MD Share from 2008-2017.40 The coefficients on the
40
     This upper bound is obtained by adding 1.96 standard deviations to the mean estimate (.005), multiplied by the
     median county increase, 0.088.




                                                         21
control variables reveal that non-treatment spending and overall spending for newly diag-
nosed OUD patients are positively correlated with average healthcare spending for the entire
commercially insured population in a county-year and that all three measures of healthcare
spending are negatively correlated with the unemployment rate in the county. Treatment
spending decreases with age, but overall spending increases. In addition, treatment spending
is higher for males, but overall spending is lower.
   In order to allay concerns that the diagnosis margin may be endogenous to local BP MD
Share, we re-estimate all specifications after excluding patients who receive treatment on
the same day of diagnosis (see Tables D5-D7 of the Appendix). Treatment utilization rates
are lower for this group by construction, but we continue to find that county-level BP MD
Share is positively associated with MAT use and negatively associated with residential and
outpatient treatment use (Table D5), although the effect sizes are smaller and less precisely
estimated. We also continue to find evidence of a reduction in drug-related ER visits (Table
D6), suggesting that the clinical improvements are not driven by MAT treatment providers
diagnosing less severe patients. Finally, we also find slightly stronger suggestive evidence
(p<.10) of decreased post-diagnosis total spending as a result of increased BP MD Share
in this sample, driven by decreases in both treatment-related and non-treatment-related
spending (Table D7) .
   As a second check on the robustness of these results, we re-estimate these models after
dropping the county-year control variables. To the extent that these measures are correlated
with unobserved county-year factors that may also be correlated with BP MD Share, this
exercise provides some suggestive evidence that omitted county-year factors are not driving
the results. The coefficient estimates of interest for all dependent variables, presented in
Appendix Tables D8-D10 are very similar.

5.2.2   Nonlinear effect of BP MD Share

We hypothesize that the relationship between access to treatment and the share of providers
who are waivered to prescribe buprenorphine may diminish at higher levels of BP MD Share.
We test this hypothesis by interacting our main independent variable, BP MD Share, with
an indicator that takes a value of 1 if a county's BP MD Share has surpassed the national



                                              22
(population-weighted) median for a county during our sample years, 7.5 percent. This effec-
tively allows for two different slopes (one below the median and one above the median) for
the relationship between the outcome variables and BP MD Share.
   Table 8 displays the results of this specification for OUD treatment. Column (2) confirms
our hypothesis, showing that the relationship between the probability that a newly diagnosed
patient receives MAT and BP MD Share is three times as large when BP MD Share is below
rather than above the median. In addition, while there is almost complete substitution
toward MAT and away from other treatment regimens at above-median values of BP MD
Share, increases in MAT in below-median counties appear to translate one-for-one into higher
treatment rates (i.e., there is no crowdout of other treatment modalities). Overall, we
estimate that below the national median of 7.5 percent, each increase of 1 percentage point
in county BP MD Share is associated with a 0.4 percentage point change in the probability
a an individual diagnosed with OUD receives MAT, and a similar increase in the probability
they receive any treatment at all.
   Tables 9 and 10 presents the same specification estimated using clinical and spending
outcomes as dependent variables. In Table 9, column (2) shows that the negative effect on
drug-related ER visits is only statistically significant below the median BP MD Share, and
column (3) shows that in this region of BP MD Share, other ER visits decline as well. In Table
10, we find that treatment spending increases with BP MD Share when it is below the median
level (column 1), which is unsurprising given the lack of treatment substitution. Nevertheless,
we do not find a significant increase in total spending even in this region of values (column
3), presumably due to the noisy estimated reductions in non-treatment spending. These
results suggest that for places with below-median shares of waivered providers, increasing
this share has the potential to significantly increase MAT utilization and to improve clinical
outcomes for patients with OUD, without necessarily leading to increases in total spending.




                                              23
6     Conclusion
As the U.S. opioid crisis continues, policymakers are exploring ways to expand access to
treatment. Unfortunately, there is a lack of empirical evidence to guide funding and planning.
This study attempts to fill some of the gap by exploring treatment among a large sample of
commercially-insured patients newly-diagnosed with OUD during the period 2009-2017.
    We focus on two potential barriers to treatment: (1) insurance coverage of substance
use treatment, and (2) the availability of local physicians able to prescribe buprenorphine,
the OUD treatment with the most robust clinical support. Using a difference-in-differences
specification exploiting the extension of insurance parity to small groups beginning in 2014,
and assuming treatment utilization for newly diagnosed small and large group enrollees would
otherwise have similar trends (controlling for a range of patient and plan observables), we
find that parity generated significant increases in residential treatment, and a decline in
medication-assisted treatment. We find no net change in the propensity for newly diagnosed
patients to receive any form of treatment, nor do we find statistically significant effects on
clinical or spending outcomes, although the point estimates are noisy.
    To examine the impact of expanding provider supply, we consider the relationship be-
tween treatment patterns and local access to providers with waivers to prescribe buprenor-
phine. We find that increases in BP MD Share are associated with greater utilization of
MAT, and in counties at below-median levels of BP MD Share, this increase is not offset
by substitution away from other treatment modalities. In these below-median counties, we
also observe clear improvements in clinical outcomes, as measured by drug-related ER visits
and other ER visits, when BP MD Share increases. Effects on spending in these counties
are unclear: treatment spending rises, but appears at least partially offset by reductions in
non-medical spending, yielding noisy estimates of the impact on total spending. Overall,
these findings suggest that expanding access to prescribers is likely to increase uptake of
MAT, but in areas where access is already relatively high, this increase is likely to come at
the expense of other treatment modalities.
    Together, our findings suggest that policy interventions aimed at expanding access to
treatment have impacts on the treatment modality selected, but in many settings there is


                                             24
no net affect on the propensity to receive any treatment. The clinical standard of care,
medication-assisted treatment, appears to be more limited by provider access than by insur-
ance coverage, while the most expensive type of care, residential care, appears to be limited
by coverage restrictions. These findings likely reflect the segmented nature of substance
abuse treatment, particularly with regard to medication. A significant amount of care is
provided in specialty facilities, which typically lack waivered providers.41 Going forward,
future research on the determinants of the decision to seek care, and on the effectiveness
of a more integrated care system for patients with OUD, would be extremely helpful in
developing policy solutions.




41
     In our sample, 31% of people who received any treatment received treatment from a specialty facility. MAT rates
     were 26% for those who received some treatment from a specialty facility, and 71% for those who did not receive
     treatment from a specialty facility.


                                                          25
References
Alderks, C. E. (2016). Trends in the use of methadone, buprenorphine, and extended-release
  naltrexone at substance abuse facilities: 2003-2015.

Alpert, A. E., S. E. Dykstra, and M. Jacobson (2020). How do prescription drug monitoring
  programs reduce opioid prescribing? the role of hassle costs versus information. Working
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

American Society of Addiction Medicine (2018). What are the ASAM levels of care?

Bao, Y., Y. Pan, A. Taylor, S. Radakrishnan, F. Luo, H. A. Pincus, and B. R. Schackman
  (2016). Prescription drug monitoring programs are associated with sustained reductions
  in opioid prescribing by physicians. Health Affairs 35 (6), 1045­1051.

Brooklyn, J. R. and S. C. Sigmon (2017). Vermont hub-and-spoke model of care for opioid use
  disorder: development, implementation, and impact. Journal of Addiction Medicine 11 (4),
  286.

Buchmueller, T. C. and C. Carey (2018). The effect of prescription drug monitoring programs
  on opioid utilization in medicare. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1),
  77­112.

Buchmueller, T. C., P. F. Cooper, M. Jacobson, and S. H. Zuvekas (2007). Parity for
  whom? exemptions and the extent of state mental health parity legislation: Although
  many states have passed parity laws, the potency of those laws varies from state to state.
  Health Affairs 26 (Suppl2), w483­w487.

Busch, S. H., A. J. Epstein, M. O. Harhay, D. A. Fiellin, H. Un, D. Leader, and C. L. Barry
  (2014, January). The Effects of Federal Parity on Substance Use Disorder Treatment. The
  American Journal of Managed Care 20 (1), 76­82.

CDC/NCHS (2018). CDC WONDER Database: Underlying Cause of Death.

Cicero, T. J., M. S. Ellis, H. L. Surratt, and S. P. Kurtz (2014). The changing face of
  heroin use in the united states: a retrospective analysis of the past 50 years. JAMA
  Psychiatry 71 (7), 821­826.

Clemans-Cope, L., M. Epstein, and G. M. Kenney (2017). Rapid growth in Medicaid spend-
  ing on medications to treat opioid use disorder and overdose. The Urban Institute .

Connery, H. S. (2015). Medication-assisted treatment of opioid use disorder: review of the
  evidence and future directions. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 23 (2), 63­75.

Cooper, Z., S. V. Craig, M. Gaynor, and J. Van Reenen (2019). The price ain't right?
  hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 134 (1), 51­107.



                                            26
Ettner, S. L., J. M. Harwood, A. Thalmayer, M. K. Ong, H. Xu, M. J. Bresolin, K. B.
  Wells, C.-H. Tseng, and F. Azocar (2016). The mental health parity and addiction equity
  act evaluation study: Impact on specialty behavioral health utilization and expenditures
  among "carve-out" enrollees. Journal of Health Economics 50, 131­143.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, P. Hull, and H. Williams (2017). Adjusting risk adjustment­
  accounting for variation in diagnostic intensity. New England Journal of Medicine 376 (7),
  608.

Hollingsworth, A., C. J. Ruhm, and K. Simon (2017). Macroeconomic conditions and opioid
  abuse. Journal of Health Economics 56, 222­233.

Kessel, J. B., L. D. Castel, and D. A. Nemecek (2018). Clinical and cost outcomes of
  buprenorphine treatment in a commercial benefit plan population. Am J Pharm Bene-
  fits 10 (1), e1--e6.

Larochelle, M. R., D. Bernson, T. Land, T. J. Stopka, N. Wang, Z. Xuan, S. M. Bagley,
  J. M. Liebschutz, and A. Y. Walley (2018). Medication for opioid use disorder after non-
  fatal opioid overdose and association with mortality: A cohort study. Annals of Internal
  Medicine .

Lee, J. D., E. V. Nunes Jr, P. Novo, K. Bachrach, G. L. Bailey, S. Bhatt, S. Farkas, M. Fish-
  man, P. Gauthier, C. C. Hodgkins, et al. (2018). Comparative effectiveness of extended-
  release naltrexone versus buprenorphine-naloxone for opioid relapse prevention (x: Bot):
  a multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled trial. The Lancet 391 (10118), 309­318.

Lewis, D. C. (1999). Access to narcotic addiction treatment and medical care: prospects for
  the expansion of methadone maintenance treatment. Journal of Addictive Diseases 18 (2),
  5­21.

Maclean, J. C., I. Popovici, and E. R. Stern (2017, January). Health Insurance Expansions
 and Provider Behavior: Evidence from Substance Use Disorder Providers. Working Paper
 23094, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mattick, R., C. Breen, J. Kimber, and M. Davoli (2014). Buprenorphine maintenance versus
 placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database of System-
 atic Reviews (2).

Mattick, R. P., C. Breen, J. Kimber, and M. Davoli (2009). Methadone maintenance ther-
 apy versus no opioid replacement therapy for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database of
 Systematic Reviews (3).

McGinty, E. E., S. H. Busch, E. A. Stuart, H. A. Huskamp, T. B. Gibson, H. H. Goldman, and
 C. L. Barry (2015, August). Federal Parity Law Associated With Increased Probability Of
 Using Out-Of-Network Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services. Health Affairs 34 (8),
 1331­1339.




                                             27
Peterson, E. and S. Busch (2018). Achieving mental health and substance use disorder
  treatment parity: a quarter century of policy making and research. Annual Review of
  Public Health 39, 421­435.

Sacks, D. W., A. Hollingsworth, T. Nguyen, and K. Simon (2021). Can policy affect ini-
  tiation of addictive substance use? evidence from opioid prescribing. Journal of Health
  Economics 76, 102397.

Samet, J. H., M. Botticelli, and M. Bharel (2018). Methadone in primary care -- one
  small step for congress, one giant leap for addiction treatment. New England Journal of
  Medicine 379 (1), 7­8. PMID: 29972744.

SAMHSA (2017a). National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Technical report.

SAMHSA (2017b). Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS) 2005-2015. Technical report.

SAMSHA (2019). National survey of substance abuse treatment services (n-ssats): 2019.

Schnell, M. (2017). Physician behavior in the presence of a secondary market: The case of
  prescription opioids. Working paper.

Shen, K., E. Barrette, and L. S. Dafny (2020). Treatment of opioid use disorder among
  commercially insured us adults, 2008­17. Health Affairs 39 (6), 993­1001.

Sigmon, S. C., T. A. Ochalek, A. C. Meyer, B. Hruska, S. H. Heil, G. J. Badger, G. Rose,
  J. R. Brooklyn, R. P. Schwartz, B. A. Moore, et al. (2016). Interim buprenorphine vs.
  waiting list for opioid dependence. New England Journal of Medicine 375 (25), 2504­2505.

Swensen, I. D. (2015). Substance-abuse treatment and mortality. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 122, 13­30.

Wakeman, S. E., M. R. Larochelle, O. Ameli, C. E. Chaisson, J. T. McPheeters, W. H. Crown,
 F. Azocar, and D. M. Sanghavi (2020). Comparative effectiveness of different treatment
 pathways for opioid use disorder. JAMA Network Open 3 (2), e1920622­e1920622.

Wen, H., J. R. Cummings, Hockenberry, L. M. Gaydos, and D. B. G (2013). State parity
 laws and access to treatment for substance use disorder in the United States: implications
 for federal parity legislation. JAMA Psychiatry 70 (12), 1355­1362.

Wen, H., J. M. Hockenberry, and H. A. Pollack (2018). Association of buprenorphine-
 waivered physician supply with buprenorphine treatment use and prescription opioid use
 in medicaid enrollees. JAMA Network Open 1 (5), e182943­e182943.




                                            28
Figure 1: Trends in supply and use of medication-assisted treatment
     (a) Number of Opioid Treatment Programs and Waivered
     Prescribers, 2004-2017

       1500                                                                               50000


       1250
                                                                                          40000


       1000
                                                                                          30000

        750

                                                                                          20000
        500


                                                                                          10000
        250
                                                          OTPs (left axis)

                                                          X waivers (right axis)
          0                                                                               0
          2004                   2008              2012                            2016

     (b) Number of patients using MAT, by drug , 2004-2016, in
     millions

       1.2    Methadone   Bupe     Vivitrol




        .9



        .6



        .3



        0
              2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


     Notes: The top panel plots counts of OTPs from the National Survey of Sub-
     stance Abuse Treatment Services (black) and counts of X waivers (grey) from
     SAMHSA public data. The bottom panel shows the annual number of patients
     using methadone (black), buprenorphine (grey), and Vivitrol (ER naltrexone; red)
     by year for the years 2004 through 2016, in millions. Methadone estimates are
     from the National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services; buprenorphine
     estimates are from the IMS Total Patient Tracker assuming an average of 8 pre-
     scriptions per patient per year; Vivitrol estimates are from Alkermes 10K filings
     assuming a 50% Medicaid market share and prices of $500 per Medicaid and $1000
     per private insurance dose.




                                              29
                                                     Figure 2: Summary statistics for new diagnosis sample


                                                              Sex                                      Female                                                        Male

                                                              Age                  18-24                  25-34                35-44               45-54             55-64

         Policyholder relationship                                                                     Employee                           Spouse                    Child

                                                          Plan type EPO            HMO                                                                   POS          PPO

                Year of diagnosis                                        2009       2010        2011            2012         2013         2014     2015        20162017

                 Site of diagnosis                                           ER              Detox                       Treatment    Psych                    Office Oth.

                                                                    0                   .2                     .4                .6                 .8                      1
                                                                                                          Share of Analysis Sample



Notes: This figure summarizes key individual-level variables for the new diagnosis sample, as defined in the text.
The policyholder relationship variable is missing for 2% of the sample and thus does not sum to 1. N=78,222.




Figure 3: Relationship between change in state BP MD Share (2017-2008) and
initial level in 2008

                                                     .3                                                                              ME

                                                                                                      AK
                                                                                                             NM                                                VT
                 Change in BP MD Share (2017-2008)




                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                   KY
                                                                                  WA                                UT
                                                                            NH                       MA

                                                     .2                                       WV
                                                                                                     CT
                                                                             OH
                                                                              OR DE                       MD
                                                                                            PA NY
                                                                                     DC
                                                                      ID NC   CO TN AL
                                                                                IN      AZ NV
                                                                            SC WY       FL
                                                     .1                    OK            LA NJ
                                                                             VAHI CA
                                                                               WI        MS
                                                                          MO MT    GA      MI
                                                                       MN
                                                                     SDKS IL
                                                                       ND       TX
                                                                    AR
                                                                    NE
                                                              IA


                                                     0
                                                          0                  .05                    .1                           .15                      .2
                                                                                             BP MD Share in 2008


Notes: This figure plots initial (2008) BP MD Share against the change in BP MD Share between 2008 and 2017.
State-level estimates are obtained by cumulating SAMHSA's reports of new waivers by state and year and thus are
subject to some error due to providers becoming inactive or moving states.




                                                                                                     30
               Figure 4: Effect of small-group parity on treatment utilization


                             Any                                                     MAT
   .1




                                                             .1
                                                             .05
   .05




                                                             0
   0




                                                             -.05
   -.05




                                                             -.1
   -.1




          2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017                   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                      Med-free Res                                               Med-free OP
    .1




                                                             .1
    .05




                                                             .05
   0




                                                             0
   -.05




                                                             -.05
   -.1




                                                             -.1




          2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017                   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017



Notes: This figure shows estimated coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals on Small Group × year indicator
variables in the sample of newly diagnosed OUD patients who were not diagnosed in the last six months of 2013.
Dashed vertical lines indicate the post-period begins in 2014.




                                                        31
  Table 1: Mean clinical and spending outcomes by type of treatment received

                                             (1)      (2)         (3)                      (4)          (5)
                                             All     MAT Med-free Res             Med-free OP        No TX

     % of Sample                          100.0       30.0                 3.7               18.7        37.5

     Clinical outcomes (%)
     Any OD                                 4.5        3.0                 7.0                5.0         5.2
     Drug-related ER                       25.8       16.7                37.7               26.4        30.5
     Other ER                              22.8       18.0                24.1               19.1        27.0

     6m Spending ($)
     Before Diagnosis                   11,934      7,695              11,087              9,437      14,679
     After Diagnosis                    17,513     12,479              39,843             20,942      17,588
       Treatment                         4,326      4,485              26,016             10,686           0
          Residential                      484        368               9,966                  0           0
          Outpatient                     3,389      2,608              16,050             10,686           0
          RX                               453      1,509                   0                  0           0
       Non-Treatment                    13,186      7,994              13,827             10,256      17,588

Notes: This table reports the mean values of the clinical and spending outcomes (in CPI-U adjusted 2017 constant
dollars) for the new diagnosis sample. All patients are included in column 1 (N=78,222). Columns 2-5 subdivide
the sample into four groups: column 2 includes patients who received medication-assisted treatment, column 3
includes patients who received residential treatment that did not include the use of medications, column 4 includes
patients who received treatment without residential services or medication, and column 5 includes patients who did
not receive any form of treatment. Clinical outcomes are expressed as the percentage of patients observed with any
of the listed events in the six months following diagnosis. Spending is computed as total allowed amounts in the six
months before or after the diagnosis. Details on how events and spending categories are defined are available in
Appendix A.




                                                        32
             Table 2: Effect of small-group parity on treatment utilization

                                    (1)                    (2)                 (3)                    (4)
                                    Any                   MAT              Med-free Res           Med-free OP
   Small Group × Post        -0.009       [0.012] -0.027       [0.011]   0.014       [0.005]     0.005      [0.010]
   Small Group              0.025         [0.008] 0.029        [0.007]     0.000     [0.003]    -0.004      [0.006]
   Female                   -0.075        [0.006] -0.051       [0.006]    -0.001     [0.002]   -0.023       [0.005]
   Age 25-34                -0.071        [0.010] 0.077        [0.009]   -0.030      [0.004]   -0.117       [0.008]
   Age 35-44                -0.181        [0.010]  -0.004      [0.009]   -0.046      [0.004]   -0.131       [0.008]
   Age 45-54                -0.298        [0.009] -0.088       [0.009]   -0.049      [0.004]   -0.162       [0.008]
   Age 55-64                -0.385        [0.010] -0.135       [0.010]   -0.060      [0.004]   -0.190       [0.008]
   Employee                 0.018         [0.007] 0.067        [0.006]   -0.015      [0.003]   -0.034       [0.006]
   POS                      0.021         [0.007]  -0.008      [0.007]   0.025       [0.003]     0.004      [0.006]
   PPO                      0.048         [0.010] 0.029        [0.010]    -0.006     [0.004]   0.026        [0.008]
   CDHP                      -0.009       [0.008] -0.018       [0.008]    -0.002     [0.003]    0.011       [0.007]
   Constant                 0.695         [0.008] 0.309        [0.008]   0.067       [0.003]   0.319        [0.007]
   State-Year FEs              Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes
   Depvar Mean                 0.53                  0.31                   0.04                  0.18
   Adj R2                      0.12                  0.08                   0.04                  0.05
   Obs                        28325                 28325                  28325                 28325

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (1) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed,
fully-insured enrollees between 2010 and 2017 who were not diagnosed in the second half of 2013. The independent
variable of interest is an indicator for being covered in a small-group plan after parity was passed. Omitted
categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Significance:

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        33
      Table 3: Relationship between clinical outcomes and small-group parity

                                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)
                                           Overdose          Drug-related ER           Other ER
            Small Group × Post          0.003      [0.005]      0.010    [0.011]   0.002       [0.010]
            Small Group                -0.002      [0.003]    -0.016     [0.007] -0.030        [0.007]
            Female                     0.005       [0.003]   0.032       [0.006] 0.085         [0.005]
            Age 25-34                 -0.023       [0.004]   -0.060      [0.009] 0.039         [0.008]
            Age 35-44                 -0.030       [0.004]   -0.075      [0.009] 0.044         [0.008]
            Age 45-54                 -0.023       [0.004]   -0.065      [0.009] 0.056         [0.008]
            Age 55-64                 -0.023       [0.005]   -0.065      [0.010] 0.065         [0.009]
            Employee                  -0.016       [0.003]   -0.061      [0.006] -0.058        [0.006]
            POS                        -0.000      [0.003]      0.001    [0.006]  -0.006       [0.006]
            PPO                        -0.002      [0.004]    -0.024     [0.010]   0.008       [0.009]
            CDHP                        0.005      [0.004]     0.020     [0.008]  0.013        [0.007]
            Constant                  0.069        [0.004]   0.330       [0.008] 0.184         [0.007]
            State-Year FEs               Yes                   Yes                   Yes
            Depvar Mean                  0.04                  0.25                  0.21
            Adj R2                       0.01                  0.02                  0.03
            Obs                         28325                 28325                 28325

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (1) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed,
fully-insured enrollees between 2010 and 2017 who were not diagnosed in the second half of 2013. The independent
variable of interest is an indicator for being covered in a small-group plan after parity was passed. Omitted
categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Significance:

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        34
    Table 4: Relationship between spending outcomes and small-group parity

                                          (1)                       (2)                   (3)
                                      Ln(TX Spend)           Ln(Non-TX Spend)       Ln(Total Spend)
           Small Group × Post        -0.025      [0.098]  -0.030        [0.071]       0.005     [0.044]
           Small Group               0.130       [0.064] -0.101         [0.047]     -0.084      [0.029]
           Female                   -0.594       [0.050] 0.832          [0.036]     0.373       [0.022]
           Age 25-34                -0.740       [0.079] 0.137          [0.058]       0.067     [0.035]
           Age 35-44                -1.685       [0.079] 0.812          [0.058]     0.227       [0.035]
           Age 45-54                -2.555       [0.077] 1.446          [0.057]     0.422       [0.035]
           Age 55-64                -3.272       [0.086] 2.017          [0.063]     0.679       [0.039]
           Employee                   0.059      [0.056] -0.543         [0.041]     -0.386      [0.025]
           POS                      0.334        [0.058] 0.102          [0.042]     0.167       [0.026]
           PPO                      0.546        [0.086]   0.027        [0.063]     0.196       [0.038]
           CDHP                      -0.054      [0.069]  -0.053        [0.051]      -0.055     [0.031]
           Constant                 5.513        [0.068] 6.298          [0.050]     8.142       [0.031]
           State-Year FEs              Yes                     Yes                    Yes
           Depvar Mean                 4.07                    7.15                   8.41
           Adj R2                      0.12                    0.20                   0.16
           Obs                        28325                   28325                  28325

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (1) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed,
fully-insured enrollees between 2010 and 2017 who were not diagnosed in the second half of 2013. The independent
variable of interest is an indicator for being covered in a small-group plan after parity was passed. Omitted
categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are reported in brackets. Significance:

  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        35
Table 5: Relationship between county-level access to waivered providers and OUD
treatment utilization

                                  (1)                    (2)                  (3)                    (4)
                                  Any                   MAT               Med-free Res           Med-free OP
   BP MD Sharect             0.040      [0.056] 0.167         [0.050]    -0.036      [0.023]    -0.092     [0.040]
   BP MD Sharec,2008         0.181      [0.095]   0.109       [0.090]     0.020      [0.032]     0.053     [0.059]
   Female                  -0.077       [0.004] -0.057        [0.003]   -0.004       [0.001]   -0.016      [0.003]
   Age 25-34               -0.077       [0.006] 0.071         [0.006]   -0.032       [0.003]   -0.117      [0.005]
   Age 35-44               -0.184       [0.006] -0.010        [0.006]   -0.041       [0.002]   -0.134      [0.005]
   Age 45-54               -0.302       [0.006] -0.092        [0.005]   -0.046       [0.002]   -0.164      [0.005]
   Age 55-64               -0.390       [0.006] -0.144        [0.005]   -0.055       [0.003]   -0.192      [0.005]
   Employee                 0.020       [0.004] 0.047         [0.004]   -0.010       [0.001]   -0.016      [0.003]
   POS                      0.010       [0.005] -0.008        [0.004]   0.011        [0.002]    0.007      [0.004]
   PPO                      0.019       [0.007]  0.012        [0.006]   -0.023       [0.003]    0.014      [0.006]
   CDHP                     -0.010      [0.005] -0.022        [0.004]     0.002      [0.002]    0.010      [0.004]
   Ln(AvgSpendct )           0.008      [0.015] 0.035         [0.014]     0.004      [0.005]   -0.033      [0.011]
   Unemp Ratect            -0.007       [0.002]  -0.001       [0.002]    -0.000      [0.001]   -0.006      [0.001]
   Constant                 0.694       [0.118]   0.041       [0.111]     0.058      [0.040]    0.624      [0.088]
   State-Year FEs            Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes
   Depvar Mean               0.53                   0.30                   0.04                  0.19
   Adj R2                    0.13                   0.08                   0.03                  0.05
   Obs                      78222                  78222                  78222                 78222

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (3) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed
patients between 2009 and 2017. The independent variable is BP MD Share, the ratio of the number of
practitioners with waivers to prescribe buprenorphine to the number of PCPs and psychiatrists in a county in that
year. The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new" diagnosis of OUD in year t while living in county
c, as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables vary at the patient level. Omitted categories are
age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year level and reported in
brackets. Significance:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        36
Table 6: Relationship between county-level access to waivered providers and OUD
patient clinical outcomes

                                            (1)                    (2)                    (3)
                                          Overdose           Drug-related ER           Other ER
             BP MD Sharect             0.024      [0.021]     -0.107    [0.049]  -0.012        [0.044]
             BP MD Sharec,2008         -0.049     [0.032]      -0.014   [0.077]   0.065        [0.074]
             Female                   0.009       [0.002]    0.031      [0.003] 0.086          [0.003]
             Age 25-34               -0.029       [0.003]    -0.066     [0.005] 0.050          [0.005]
             Age 35-44               -0.033       [0.003]    -0.080     [0.005] 0.061          [0.005]
             Age 45-54               -0.028       [0.003]    -0.068     [0.005] 0.059          [0.005]
             Age 55-64               -0.027       [0.003]    -0.077     [0.006] 0.067          [0.006]
             Employee                -0.013       [0.002]    -0.066     [0.004] -0.066         [0.003]
             POS                       -0.001     [0.002]      -0.004   [0.004]   0.000        [0.004]
             PPO                       -0.000     [0.003]     -0.013    [0.006]   0.011        [0.006]
             CDHP                      0.001      [0.002]      0.008    [0.004]   0.006        [0.004]
             Ln(AvgSpendct )           0.011      [0.006]       0.015   [0.012] 0.026          [0.012]
             Unemp Ratect              -0.001     [0.001]       0.001   [0.001]   0.002        [0.001]
             Constant                  -0.012     [0.045]      0.209    [0.100]  -0.049        [0.093]
             State-Year FEs             Yes                    Yes                   Yes
             Depvar Mean                0.05                   0.26                  0.23
             Adj. R2                    0.01                   0.03                  0.02
             Obs                       78222                  78222                 78222

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (3) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed
patients between 2009 and 2017. The independent variable is BP MD Share, the ratio of the number of
practitioners with waivers to prescribe buprenorphine to the number of PCPs and psychiatrists in a county in that
year. The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new" diagnosis of OUD in year t while living in county
c, as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables vary at the patient level. Omitted categories are
age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year level and reported in
brackets. Significance:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        37
Table 7: Relationship between county-level access to waivered providers and OUD
post-diagnosis spending

                                         (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                                     Ln(TX Spend)         Ln(Non-TX Spend)          Ln(Total Spend)
            BP MD Sharect             0.141     [0.465]  -0.558         [0.347]     -0.168      [0.215]
            BP MD Sharec,2008        1.676      [0.780]  -0.249         [0.533]      0.047      [0.320]
            Female                  -0.607      [0.029] 0.846           [0.020]    0.356        [0.013]
            Age 25-34               -0.821      [0.050] 0.220           [0.037]    0.076        [0.023]
            Age 35-44               -1.701      [0.050] 0.950           [0.037]    0.295        [0.022]
            Age 45-54               -2.626      [0.049] 1.526           [0.035]    0.472        [0.022]
            Age 55-64               -3.363      [0.053] 2.018           [0.038]    0.664        [0.023]
            Employee                 0.099      [0.032] -0.538          [0.022]    -0.373       [0.013]
            POS                      0.239      [0.037] 0.171           [0.027]    0.195        [0.017]
            PPO                      0.286      [0.055] 0.166           [0.040]    0.199        [0.024]
            CDHP                     -0.078     [0.040]  -0.003         [0.029]     -0.027      [0.018]
            Ln(AvgSpendct )           0.178     [0.121] 0.184           [0.078]    0.246        [0.049]
            Unemp Ratect            -0.076      [0.013] -0.059          [0.009]    -0.051       [0.005]
            Constant                 4.691      [0.980] 5.261           [0.626]    6.532        [0.397]
            State-Year FEs            Yes                     Yes                     Yes
            Depvar Mean               4.08                    7.39                    8.56
            Adj R2                    0.12                    0.19                    0.15
            Obs                      78222                   78222                   78222

Notes: This table reports OLS regression estimates of equation (3) in the text using the sample of newly diagnosed
patients between 2009 and 2017. The dependent variables are ln(spending measure + 1). The independent variable
is BP MD Share, the ratio of the number of practitioners with waivers to prescribe buprenorphine to the number of
PCPs and psychiatrists in a county in that year. The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new"
diagnosis of OUD in year t while living in county c, as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables
vary at the patient level. Omitted categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered
at the county-year level and reported in brackets. Significance:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        38
Table 8: Relationship between OUD treatment utilization and county-level access
to waivered providers, above and below national median share

                                           (1)                       (2)               (3)                   (4)
                                           Any                      MAT            Med-free Res          Med-free OP
   BP MD Sharect
   × BP Share Below Medct           0.380        [0.145]    0.389       [0.137]     0.032   [0.054]     -0.041        [0.109]
   × BP Share Above Medct            -0.007      [0.059]     0.110      [0.052]    -0.037   [0.024]    -0.081         [0.044]
   BP Share Above Medct             0.026        [0.010]    0.026       [0.009]     0.003   [0.003]     -0.002        [0.007]
   BP MD Sharec,2008                 0.169       [0.094]      0.098     [0.088]     0.018   [0.032]      0.053        [0.059]
   Female                          -0.077        [0.004]    -0.057      [0.003]   -0.004    [0.001]   -0.016          [0.003]
   Age 25-34                       -0.077        [0.006]    0.072       [0.006]   -0.032    [0.003]   -0.117          [0.005]
   Age 35-44                       -0.184        [0.006]     -0.009     [0.006]   -0.041    [0.002]   -0.134          [0.005]
   Age 45-54                       -0.302        [0.006]    -0.092      [0.005]   -0.046    [0.002]   -0.164          [0.005]
   Age 55-64                       -0.390        [0.006]    -0.144      [0.005]   -0.055    [0.003]   -0.192          [0.005]
   Employee                         0.020        [0.004]    0.047       [0.004]   -0.010    [0.001]   -0.016          [0.003]
   POS                               0.010       [0.005]     -0.008     [0.004]   0.011     [0.002]     0.007         [0.004]
   PPO                               0.019       [0.007]     0.012      [0.006]   -0.007    [0.002]    0.014          [0.006]
   CDHP                             -0.010       [0.005]    -0.022      [0.004]     0.002   [0.002]    0.010          [0.004]
   Ln(AvgSpendct )                    0.012      [0.015]     0.038      [0.014]     0.006   [0.005]   -0.032          [0.011]
   Unemp Ratect                    -0.007        [0.002]      -0.001    [0.002]    -0.000   [0.001]   -0.006          [0.004]
   Constant                        0.641         [0.119]      0.002     [0.111]     0.021   [0.041]    0.618          [0.089]
   State-Year FEs                     Yes                        Yes                Yes                  Yes
   Depvar Mean                        0.53                       0.30               0.04                 0.19
   Adj R2                             0.13                       0.08               0.03                 0.05
   Obs                               78222                      78222              78222                78222

Notes: This table re-estimates equation (3), where the independent variable BP MD Sharect is interacted with
indicator variables for BP MD Sharect being below or above the national county median across all years in the
sample (population-weighted). The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new" diagnosis of OUD in
year t while living in county c as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables vary at the patient
level. Omitted categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year
level and reported in brackets. Significance:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                           39
Table 9: Relationship between clinical outcomes and county-level access to
waivered providers, above and below national median share

                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)
                                              Overdose          Drug-related ER           Other ER
         BP MD Sharect
         × BP Share Below Medct             0.015    [0.057]    -0.320      [0.132] -0.392        [0.125]
         × BP Share Above Medct             0.024    [0.023]     -0.075     [0.051]   0.023       [0.047]
         BP Share Above Medct              -0.000    [0.004]    -0.017      [0.008] -0.023        [0.008]
         BP MD Sharec,2008                 -0.049    [0.031]     -0.006     [0.077]   0.077       [0.074]
         Female                           0.009      [0.002]    0.031       [0.003] 0.086         [0.003]
         Age 25-34                       -0.029      [0.003]   -0.066       [0.005] 0.050         [0.005]
         Age 35-44                       -0.033      [0.003]   -0.080       [0.005] 0.061         [0.005]
         Age 45-54                       -0.028      [0.003]   -0.068       [0.005] 0.059         [0.005]
         Age 55-64                       -0.027      [0.002]   -0.077       [0.005] 0.0667        [0.006]
         Employee                        -0.013      [0.002]   -0.066       [0.006] -0.066        [0.003]
         POS                               -0.001     [0.00]    -0.004      [0.004]   0.000       [0.004]
         PPO                               -0.000    [0.002]   -0.013       [0.006] 0.011         [0.006]
         CDHP                              0.001     [0.003]     0.008       [0.004   0.006       [0.004]
         Ln(AvgSpendct )                   0.011     [0.006]      0.013     [0.012]  0.021        [0.012]
         Unemp Ratect                      -0.001    [0.001]      0.001     [0.001]   0.001       [0.001]
         Constant                          -0.011    [0.047]   0.244        [0.102]   0.010       [0.094]
         State-Year FEs                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
         Depvar Mean                        0.05                  0.26                  0.23
         Adj R2                             0.01                  0.03                  0.02
         Obs                               78222                 78222                 78222

Notes: This table re-estimates equation (3), where the independent variable BP MD Sharect is interacted with
indicator variables for BP MD Sharect being below or above the national county median across all years in the
sample (population-weighted). The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new" diagnosis of OUD in
year t while living in county c as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables vary at the patient
level. Omitted categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year
level and reported in brackets.




                                                        40
Table 10: Relationship between post-diagnosis spending and county-level access
to waivered providers, above and below national median share

                                             (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                                         Ln(TX Spend)         Ln(Non-TX Spend)          Ln(Total Spend)
        BP MD Sharect
        × BP Share Below Medct           3.038      [1.194]  -0.554         [0.791]      0.187      [0.488]
        × BP Share Above Medct            -0.230    [0.495]  -0.436         [0.374]      -0.169     [0.232]
        BP Share Above Medct             0.210      [0.078]  -0.040         [0.052]      0.011      [0.031]
        BP MD Sharec,2008                1.572      [0.760]  -0.225         [0.527]      0.039      [0.319]
        Female                          -0.607      [0.029] 0.846           [0.020]    0.356        [0.013]
        Age 25-34                       -0.821      [0.050] 0.220           [0.037]    0.076        [0.023]
        Age 35-44                       -1.700      [0.050] 0.950           [0.037]    0.295        [0.022]
        Age 45-54                       -2.624      [0.049] 1.526           [0.035]    0.472        [0.022]
        Age 55-64                       -3.362      [0.053] 2.018           [0.038]    0.665        [0.023]
        Employee                         0.098      [0.032] -0.538          [0.022]    -0.373       [0.013]
        POS                              0.240      [0.037] 0.171           [0.027]    0.195        [0.017]
        PPO                              0.287      [0.055] 0.165           [0.040]    0.199        [0.024]
        CDHP                             -0.077     [0.040]  -0.003         [0.029]      -0.027     [0.018]
        Ln(AvgSpendct )                   0.212     [0.121] 0.184           [0.078]    0.250        [0.049]
        Unemp Ratect                    -0.070      [0.013] -0.050          [0.009]    -0.050       [0.005]
        Constant                        4.257       [0.992] 5.278            [0.38]     6.481       [0.402]
        State-Year FEs                     Yes                   Yes                      Yes
        Depvar Mean                        4.08                  7.39                     8.56
        Adj R2                             0.12                  0.19                     0.15
        Obs                               78222                 78222                    78222

Notes: This table re-estimates equation (3), where the independent variables BP MD Sharect interacted with
indicator variables for BP MD Sharect being below or above the national county median across all years in the
sample (population-weighted). The unit of observation is a patient i who received a "new" diagnosis of OUD in
year t while living in county c as described in the text. Except where noted, control variables vary at the patient
level. Omitted categories are age 18-24 and EPO/HMO plan type. Standard errors are clustered at the county-year
level and reported in brackets.




                                                        41
