                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW AMERICANS RESPOND TO IDIOSYNCRATIC AND EXOGENOUS CHANGES
             IN HOUSEHOLD WEALTH AND UNEARNED INCOME

                                        Mikhail Golosov
                                        Michael Graber
                                        Magne Mogstad
                                       David Novgorodsky

                                       Working Paper 29000
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29000


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not reflect the views of
the Internal Revenue Service or the U.S. Treasury Department. This work is a component of a
larger project on income risk in the United States, conducted through the SOI Joint Statistical
Research Program. We appreciate the constructive comments and suggestions from Stefanie
Stantcheva, four anonymous referees, Richard Blundell, Martin Holm, Claus Thustrup Kreiner,
and Wojciech Kopczuk. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mikhail Golosov, Michael Graber, Magne Mogstad, and David Novgorodsky. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Americans Respond to Idiosyncratic and Exogenous Changes in Household Wealth and
Unearned Income
Mikhail Golosov, Michael Graber, Magne Mogstad, and David Novgorodsky
NBER Working Paper No. 29000
July 2021
JEL No. D15,H2,J22

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how Americans respond to idiosyncratic and exogenous changes in household wealth
and unearned income. Our analyses combine administrative data on U.S. lottery winners with an
event-study design that exploits variation in the timing of lottery wins. Our first contribution is to
estimate the earnings responses to these windfall gains, finding significant and sizable wealth and
income effects. On average, an extra dollar of unearned income in a given period reduces pre-tax
labor earnings by about 50 cents, decreases total labor taxes by 10 cents, and increases
consumption by 60 cents. These effects are heterogeneous across the income distribution, with
households in higher quartiles of the income distribution reducing their earnings by a larger
amount. Our second contribution is to develop and apply a rich life-cycle model in which
heterogeneous households face non-linear taxes and make earnings choices along both intensive
and extensive margins. By mapping this model to our estimated earnings responses, we obtain
informative bounds on the impacts of two policy reforms: an introduction of UBI and an increase
in top marginal tax rates. Our last contribution is to study how additional wealth and unearned
income affect a wide range of behavior, including geographic mobility and neighborhood choice,
retirement decisions and labor market exit, family formation and dissolution, entry into
entrepreneurship, and job-to-job mobility.

Mikhail Golosov                                   Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Chicago                             University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street                               1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                          and NBER
golosov@uchicago.edu                              magne.mogstad@gmail.com

Michael Graber                                    David Novgorodsky
Department of Economics                           University of Chicago
University of Chicago                             Saieh Hall for Economics
5757 S. University Avenue                         1126 E. 59th St.
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Chicago IL, 60637
m.graber@uchicago.edu                             david.novgorodsky@gmail.com
1    Introduction
How do Americans respond to idiosyncratic and exogenous changes in household wealth and unearned
income? Economists and policymakers are keenly interested in this question. For example, the earnings
responses to such shocks are important, both to infer income and wealth effects and to assess the effects
of public policy such as income taxation and cash transfers like universal basic income. However, giving
a credible answer to this question has proven difficult. A key challenge is to find variation in wealth or
unearned income that is both as good as random and specific to an individual as opposed to economy-wide.
Such variation is necessary to isolate the effects of changes in wealth or unearned income, holding fixed
other determinants of behavior such as preferences and prices.
    The goal of our paper is to address this challenge and offer a credible answer as to how Americans
respond to idiosyncratic and exogenous changes in household wealth and unearned income. We analyze a
wide range of individual and household responses to lottery winnings and explore the economic implications
of these responses for a number of key questions that economists and policymakers are interested in. The
analyses combine administrative data for the U.S. for the period 1999 to 2016 with an event-study design
that exploits variation in the timing of lottery wins. Winning a lottery can be viewed as a shock to household
wealth or, equivalently, a permanent shock to unearned income. Importantly, the win is an idiosyncratic
change that is difficult to anticipate and plausibly exogenous.
    As described in Section 2, our analyses are based on a population-level panel data set which is con-
structed by combining the universe of worker tax records with third-party-reported lottery winnings. The
worker data give us information about labor earnings and other sources of individual and household income,
as well as various demographics. The data on lotteries contain a record for winnings in state lotteries, with
information about the unique identifier of each winner and the winning amount.
    In Section 3, we use the panel data set to estimate individual and household earnings and employment
responses to winning the lottery. As described in this section, we employ an event-study design that exploits
variation in the timing of lottery wins. This lets us eliminate unobserved time-invariant individual hetero-
geneity by comparing winners before and after they win, while accounting for age and time effects by using
the later winners as a control group before they win. The event study shows evidence of sizable, swift, and
persistent labor market responses to winning the lottery.
    To interpret the magnitudes of these event-study estimates, we use the variation in the timing of lottery
wins as an instrumental variable (IV) for lottery winnings. The resulting IV estimates tell us the individual
and household responses per dollar of additional wealth due to the lottery winnings. We find that Americans
respond to an exogenous increase in household wealth by significantly reducing their employment and labor
earnings. For an extra 100 dollars in wealth, households reduce their annual earnings by approximately 2.3
dollars on average. The labor earnings responses per dollar of additional wealth are larger for higher income
households as compared to lower income households. Households in the bottom quartile of the pre-win
income distribution reduce their annual household labor earnings by 1.3 dollars per 100 dollars of additional
wealth, whereas winners in the top quartile decrease their annual household labor earnings by 3.1 dollars
per 100 dollars of additional wealth.
    The size of these wealth effects can be hard to gauge as the observed responses to windfall gains should

                                                      1
vary across individuals depending on a number of factors, such as the age at which the individual wins,
her savings behavior, and the tax rates she faces. This issue motivates our analyses in Section 4. In this
section, we first study how winning the lottery changes the unearned income that households allocate to
consumption and leisure across years. We then estimate the share of yearly allocated unearned income that
is spent on reducing labor versus increasing consumption. In other words, we estimate both the allocation
of the windfall gains over time and the marginal propensities to earn (MPE) and consume (MPC) out of
unearned income in a given period.
       The analyses in Section 4 draw on two popular approaches to study the allocation of windfall gains over
time: the annuitization method and the capitalization method.1 Under the annuitization method, one assumes
that households smooth winnings over the remaining lifetime, while under the capitalization method one
does not make any assumptions about household behavior, but rather uses observed capital income and rates
of return to compute unearned income directly. Since there are pros and cons to each method, we apply
both approaches and find that they produce remarkably similar measures of per-period unearned income and
consumption expenditure. This similarity not only increases confidence in the estimated MPEs and MPCs,
but also indicates that American lottery winners save most of the windfall for future periods, as predicted by
textbook models of consumption smoothing.
       To draw causal inference about the MPEs and MPCs, we use variation in the timing of lottery wins as
an instrument for yearly unearned income. On average, an extra dollar of unearned income in a given period
reduces pre-tax labor earnings by about 50 cents, decreases total labor taxes by 10 cents, and increases
consumption by 60 cents. Interestingly, the MPEs and MPCs vary systematically across the pre-win income
distribution. For example, individuals in the bottom quartile of the pre-win income distribution use most of
the increase in unearned income on consumption, while individuals in the top quartile prioritize reducing
labor over increasing consumption.
       In Section 5, we illustrate the policy relevance of the estimated MPEs. We develop and apply a rich
life-cycle model in which heterogenous households face non-linear taxes and make earnings choices along
both intensive and extensive margins. Households have essentially arbitrary heterogeneity in income and
substitution effects as well as in their propensity to stop working. We derive the exact mapping between the
theoretical objects of interest and the estimated quantities from Section 4, such as the MPEs. This mapping
allows us to empirically study two policy reforms: an introduction of a Universal Basic Income (UBI) and
an increase in the top marginal tax rates.
       The key identification challenge is that the effect of practically any policy reform depends on a number of
parameters besides income effects; moreover, the number of such parameters increases with the complexity
of the environment. We overcome this challenge by showing that it is possible to obtain informative bounds
on the effects of policy reforms that we consider under weak conditions. Our bounds demonstrate that
the introduction of a UBI will have a large effect on earnings and tax rates. For example, even if one
abstracts from any disincentive effects from higher taxes that are needed to finance this transfer program,
each dollar of UBI will reduce total earnings by at least 52 cents. With the relatively modest disincentive
   1
     Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010), and Blundell, Low and Preston (2013) are some examples
of papers that use the annuitization method, while Stewart (1939), Saez and Zucman (2016), and Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020)
are examples of applications of the capitalization method.


                                                                 2
effects of a Marshallian earnings elasticity of 0.3, a UBI crowds out earnings essentially one for one. By
comparison, income effects have less pronounced implications for the earnings reduction from increasing
the top marginal tax rates.
       We conclude our empirical analysis, in Section 6, with a broader evaluation of how Americans respond to
idiosyncratic and exogenous changes in household wealth and unearned income. We provide new evidence
on a number of key questions that economists and policymakers are interested in: To what extent does low
wealth prevent households from moving to better neighborhoods? Are certain types of households more
likely to move than others, and what type of neighborhood do they move to? Does a rise in unearned
income make individuals more likely to choose jobs with lower wages in exchange for more favorable non-
wage attributes? Are wealth effects important for retirement decisions and the design of public pension
systems? Does a lack of wealth constitute an important barrier to entrepreneurship? How does an increase
in household wealth affect the incentives to marry or divorce? What can we learn about models of household
behavior from a comparison of earnings responses of the lottery winner and her spouse?
       In our investigation of these questions, we describe the key identification and measurement challenges
that arise, motivate how lottery winnings as a source of variation in wealth or unearned income can address
these challenges, and discuss how our findings relate and contribute to existing work. To give just one
example from this comprehensive and novel set of analyses, we find that winning a lottery leads to an im-
mediate, one-off increase in the annual moving rate of approximately 3.5 percentage points (approximately
25 percent). Lower-income households, younger households, and renters constitute the groups that are most
responsive to a change in wealth in terms of geographic mobility. One striking finding is that households do
not systematically move to neighborhoods that are typically-measured (using local-area opportunity indices,
poverty rates, and educational attainment) as having higher quality. This is true even for parents with young
kids. This finding suggests that pure unconditional cash transfers do not lead households to systematically
move to locations of higher quality, and non-financial barriers must play a big role. This is a useful contribu-
tion to the recent literature that emphasizes the lack of information about better neighborhoods as a friction
that prevents moves to opportunity (e.g., Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz and Palmer, 2020).
       Our paper builds on and extends the analyses of labor market responses to lottery winnings in Imbens,
Rubin and Sacerdote (2001), Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) and Picchio, Suetens
and van Ours (2018).2 We view Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) as a particularly
relevant comparison to our study. They use Swedish administrative data to not only estimate wealth effects,
but also to compute labor supply elasticities and income effects using these estimates. Based on these
computations, they conclude that income effects are modest. This conclusion, in turn, led a number of
studies to build models specifically around the assumption that income effects are essentially negligible
(Dyrda and Pedroni, 2018; Wolf, 2019; Auclert and Rognlie, 2020; Auclert, Bardóczy and Rognlie, 2020).3
   2
      In Appendix J we provide a detailed comparison to this past work. There also exist a few studies that estimate the consumption
effects of lottery winnings (e.g., Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote, 2001, but also Kuhn, Kooreman, Soetevent and Kapteyn, 2011 and
Fagereng, Holm and Natvik, 2020). The evidence is mixed. Some estimates suggest that individuals quickly consume most of the
windfall. Other estimates suggest that neither durable nor non- durable consumption responds strongly to lottery winnings. Finally,
Bulman, Fairlie, Goodman and Isen (2021) is a contemporaneous study utilizing administrative data on U.S. lottery winners to study
the college attendance responses of college-age children to large, unanticipated income windfalls to their parents. The authors find
relatively small effects of an increase in household resources on college attendance of college-age children.
    3
      Moreover, Auclert and Rognlie (2020) show that standard New Keynesian models must fail in important ways if preferences


                                                                 3
Our analysis reveals that the earnings responses to lottery winnings are sizable and far from negligible in the
U.S. The estimated wealth effect on pre-tax labor earnings is roughly twice as large as the effect estimated by
Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) for Sweden and Picchio, Suetens and van Ours (2018)
for the Netherlands. This difference increases even further if one focuses on after-tax labor earnings, the
headline earnings measure in Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017). This finding cautions
against the use of wealth effects estimates from countries other than the U.S. as inputs for models that are
otherwise calibrated or estimated using U.S. data, and emphasizes that it is important to distinguish between
pre- and post-tax earnings responses.
    Our paper is also related to two other sets of studies which attempt to isolate the labor market responses
to an exogenous change in unearned income or wealth. The first utilizes various forms of natural experi-
ments as sources of shocks to unearned income or wealth. Examples include changes in transfer income
(e.g., Krueger and Pischke, 1992; Bengtsson, 2012; Jacob and Ludwig, 2012; Gelber, Isen and Song, 2016;
Feinberg and Kuehn, 2018; Jones and Marinescu, 2019) and inheritances and bequests (e.g., Holtz-Eakin,
Joulfaian and Rosen, 1994; Andersen and Nielsen, 2012). Such natural experiments are interesting because
they present plausibly-exogenous variation in resources which can be used to draw causal inferences about
labor market responses. However, responses to such shocks may be hard to gauge and economically inter-
pret, as they should vary with individual characteristics as well as the nature of the shock, such as whether
it is persistent or transitory, idiosyncratic or market-wide, and expected or unanticipated. For estimating
responses to unearned income or wealth, lottery winning presents the advantage of being an idiosyncratic,
plausibly-exogenous shock that is unlikely to be anticipated and, as we show in Section 5, the earnings
responses to such shocks can be directly mapped into economically-relevant parameters.
    The second set of studies uses models of labor supply to attempt to recover income effects and labor
supply elasticities from observational variation in unearned income, wages, and tax rates. The models, data,
and findings have been summarized and critiqued in multiple review articles including Pencavel (1986),
Killingsworth and Heckman (1986), Blundell and Macurdy (1999), Keane (2011), and Saez, Slemrod and
Giertz (2012). As emphasized in these reviews, there is no consensus about the size of income effects. One
reason is that it has been difficult to find an exogenous source of variation in unearned income. Many studies
use observational variation in spousal or capital income over time and across households to instrument for
changes in unearned income. The challenge, however, is that it is difficult to ensure that such variation is
independent of other determinants of behavior such as preferences and wages. Other studies use variation in
take-home pay that arises either from tax reforms or from changes in observed earnings or wages. However,
it is often not clear that these changes allow one to separately identify income and substitution effects
without strong assumptions on functional form and the distribution of unobservables.4 By comparison,
lottery winnings allow one to isolate the effects of changes in unearned income, holding fixed all other
determinants of behavior such as preferences and wages. Thus, our paper offers credible evidence on income
effects in the U.S., including how they vary across the income distribution.
are restricted such that wealth has no effect on labor supply. Thus, they argue, it is necessary to develop new classes of New
Keynesian models.
    4
      Reflecting this identification challenge, Kimball and Shapiro (2010) argue there is no consensus on the size of income and
substitution effects in labor supply.



                                                               4
2      Data and sample selection
In this section, we describe the institutional background and the data, explain the construction of the esti-
mation sample, and define the key terms and conventions that we use throughout our paper.

2.1     Institutional background
Currently, 45 U.S. states conduct some type of state lottery. Any winning of at least $600 and at least 300
times the purchase price of a ticket triggers generation of Form W-2G. This form is provided to both the
winner and to tax authorities, and is used for income tax filing. Form W-2G contains information about the
amount of lottery winnings disbursed in a given year, a unique identification number for the winner, and her
state of residence.5 For lottery drawings with multiple winners, the winnings are split before a Form W-2G
is issued, and separate W-2G forms are furnished to each winner.
      In the U.S., lottery winnings are considered ordinary taxable income in the year the payment is made.
The vast majority of winnings are paid lump sum but there is a small fraction of winnings that are paid in
installments over time. The legal treatment of the ownership of lottery winnings for married households is
determined by state laws. Although there is some variation across states, de facto most lottery winnings
accrued during marriage are treated as being owned by spouses equally.6

2.2     Data sources
We begin with the universe of W-2G forms generated between 1999 and 2016. This data on W-2G forms
is merged to two additional data sources. First, it is linked to each winner's data on wage earnings as
reported on W-2 forms. Next, it is linked to each winner's federal tax returns (Form 1040 with various
schedules), which contain data on income from other sources (self-employment, savings, Social Security,
and unemployment insurance) as well as various household characteristics. We also observe data on spousal
income for married winners who file tax returns. Most married households in the U.S. file tax returns jointly.
      Most data are reported at an annual frequency. While we observe reported income and federal income
taxes, we do not observe state income taxes directly. To compute total income taxes (federal and state)
and marginal tax rates, we use the tax calculator of Bakija (2019).7 By comparing federal income taxes
computed using this calculator to the observed federal income taxes, we confirm that the calculator is very
accurate on our sample, with reported and calculated values being virtually identical.8
    5
      Form W-2G is also used for other kinds of unusual payments, such as those from horse-race betting and casino gambling.
However, we directly observe whether the Form W-2G is a payment from a state lottery for lottery winnings, and restrict attention
to these payments.
    6
      Broadly speaking, there are two groups of states: those that presume explicitly in their statutes that all property acquired during
marriage should be divided equally in the event of a divorce, and those that do not have such a presumption explicitly stated (Hersch
and Shinall, 2019). In practice, the prevailing tendency in all states is to treat lottery winnings as owned by spouses equally (see,
e.g., In re Marriage of Mahaffey, 1990; Smith v. Smith, 1990; Ullah v. Ullah, 1990; In re Marriage of Swartz, 1993; DeVane v.
DeVane, 1995; Thomas v. Thomas, 2003).
    7
      We follow common practice (see, e.g., Brewer, Saez and Shephard, 2010; Chetty, Friedman, Olsen and Pistaferri, 2011; Saez,
Slemrod and Giertz, 2012; Kleven and Schultz, 2014) and use a tax calculator to impute marginal tax rates. Accounting for
additional distortions from future transfers, such as social security payments, would require specifying a full structural life-cycle
model (see, e.g., Altig, Auerbach, Kotlikoff, Ilin and Ye, 2020).
    8
      In our data, reported and calculated values have a correlation of 0.997 and a median absolute deviation of $47.


                                                                   5
2.3    Terminology and key variables
We now define key variables and conventions that we use throughout our paper. At the outset, we note
that many economic outcomes are reported at the household level and cannot be attributed to a specific
individual for married households. Therefore, for consistent comparison of all outcomes across both single
and married households, we report all variables, unless we explicitly state otherwise, on a per-adult basis by
normalizing them by the number of adults in the household (one if single and two if married).

Lottery win variables.           We define the win year for any individual as the first year in which her Form
W-2G from a lottery winning appears in our sample. Similarly, whenever we refer to the year in which an
individual wins a lottery we mean the win year for that individual. Unless we explicitly state otherwise,
we generally measure the size of the lottery win on a post-tax, per-adult basis. To compute post-tax lottery
winnings, we begin with the (pre-tax) amount reported on Form W-2G for the win year. We then calculate
additional taxes from the lottery winnings in the win year in three steps. We take total taxable income
observed two years before the win year (i.e., pre-win taxable income) and calculate total income taxes in the
win year absent behavioral response and lottery winnings. We then add lottery winnings to pre-win taxable
income and re-calculate total income taxes in the win year. The increase in taxes after adding winnings is
our measure of additional taxes from lottery winnings. Post-tax lottery winnings, then, are pre-tax winnings
in the win year net of the calculated additional taxes. Form W-2G does not indicate whether the lottery
win is paid lump-sum or in installments. However, we can infer the latter case when we observe multiple
consecutive years of W-2G forms with similar reported amounts. When this occurs, we take the amount
reported on the first-observed Form W-2G and convert it to the lump-sum present value by assuming that
installments are paid in equal amounts over 25 years, using a 2.5 percent interest rate for discounting.9

Tax return and earnings variables.                Wage earnings of any individual is the sum of pre-tax wages, tips,
salary, taxable fringe benefits, and other forms of taxable compensation provided by all employers of that
individual in a given year. Self-employment income consists of self-employment business income, farm
income, and partnership income in a given calendar year. Total labor earnings is the sum of wage earnings
and self-employment income. Capital income is the sum of dividend income, interest income, pension and
annuity income, rental and royalty income, and non-labor income from estates, trusts, farms, and mortgage
investments in a given calendar year. Gross income is sum of total labor earnings, capital income, and
Social Security and unemployment insurance payments. We report all monetary values in inflation-adjusted
2016 U.S. dollars using the Consumer Price Index to adjust.10 Additional details on variable definitions are
provided in Online Appendix C.
   9
      There is some variation across installment-paid lotteries over whether the winner is required to take the winnings in installments
or merely has an option to do so, the number of years over which the installments are paid, and whether and how nominal win
amounts are adjusted for inflation. We do not have sufficient information to know which specific rules apply to a given lottery
win. In any case, inferred installment-paid lottery disbursements are rare, as they comprise around 2 percent of all winners in U.S.
administrative data, and dropping them from our sample barely moves our results.
   10
      In the main analysis, we use unadjusted wage earnings as reported on Form W-2. We also explored winsorizing wage earnings
and the results do not change. We report the results of this robustness check in Appendix Figure B.2.




                                                                   6
Research design variables. For our research design we generally use the following terminology and no-
tation. We call all individuals who won a lottery in a given calendar year a cohort, and denote that year by
w. The baseline year is defined as s years prior to the lottery win and is used as the pre-treatment reference
point in the event study. We report all our results for s = 2 but our findings are virtually unchanged for other
choices of s. The event time for cohort w corresponds to calendar year w + , where can be positive or
negative depending on whether we look at the outcomes which occur after or before winning a lottery.


2.4      Representativeness of lottery winners and lottery winnings
To construct our main estimation sample, we impose three restrictions. First, we require each individual to
be of working age (that is, between age 21 and 64) in their win year. Second, we require each individual
to be in the sample for at least two years prior to generating their first Form W-2G. This ensures that we
observe pre-win economic outcomes for each individual, as needed in an event study. Lastly, we restrict
our main sample to lottery wins of at least $30,000 per winner. We choose this amount since, if smoothed
over her remaining lifetime, it amounts to an economically-meaningful increase in income of approximately
$1,000 per year for an average winner.11
       Column 1 in Table 2.1 reports a set of key summary statistics for our sample. All summary statistics
for the winners are measured in their baseline year, i.e., two years prior to their win year. Each statistic is
calculated as a weighted average using cohort size as weights. We compare winners to the average working-
age U.S. tax filer in column 2. We find that lottery winners have similar wage earnings, employment status,
and age as compared to an average tax filer. However, lottery winners are more likely to be single and male,
and slightly less likely to own a home.
  11
     The point estimates of wealth effects and effects of unearned income in Sections 3 and 4, respectively, are even larger if we
include smaller wins. Including the smallest wins makes the sample of lottery winners less comparable to the population at large
in terms of observable characteristics. We thus prefer to focus on larger wins that yield observationally-representative samples and
economically-meaningful increases in annual income.




                                                                 7
               Table 2.1: Summary statistics of individual characteristics and labor market outcomes


                                                             Winners (Age 21-64)                Tax Filers (Age 21-64)
                                                                     (1)                                  (2)
                    Covariate                 Statistic
                    Wage Earnings              Mean                   $34,541                             $33,005
                    Employment                 Prop.                   0.79                                 0.80
                    Age                        Mean                    43.93                               41.78
                    Female                     Prop.                   0.39                                 0.51
                    Married                    Prop.                   0.45                                 0.58
                    Homeowner                  Prop.                   0.45                                 0.49
                      Relative Q1 AGI Share                              0.28                                0.25
                      Relative Q2 AGI Share                              0.21                                0.25
                      Relative Q3 AGI Share                              0.24                                0.25
                      Relative Q4 AGI Share                              0.27                                0.25
                                     N                                 90,731                          154,372,671

Notes: This table presents a summary of the descriptive statistics in our sample of working-age winners. All monetary values are reported in 2016
U.S. dollars, using the Consumer Price Index to adjust for inflation. In the first section of the table, we report mean characteristics. All values for
the winners sample are measured two years prior to the win year and reported as cohort-size-weighted averages. The final column reports the same
set of descriptive statistics for the universe of tax filers aged 21-64, taking a population-weighted average across the 1999 to 2015 tax years. In the
second section of the table, we present a comparison of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income (AGI) among winners to that
in the universe of tax filers aged 21-64. For each calendar year of tax-filer data, we map each winner to the corresponding quartile in the tax-filer
AGI distribution. We then calculate the share of winners falling into each quartile of the tax-filer AGI distribution. Finally, we take the mean of the
shares across calendar time (for each quartile). For the tax-filer population, this share is mechanically 0.25.


     The last four rows of Table 2.1 show how the income distribution of lottery winners compares to that
of working-age tax filers. We do so by calculating the share of individuals in our sample that falls into
each quartile of adjusted gross income (AGI) in the working-age tax filer population. We find that lottery
winners are well represented in each income quartile. In Appendix Table A.1 we report a summary of
the distribution of pre-tax lottery winnings in our sample. About half of our lottery winnings are between
$30,000 and $100,000, but there is also a substantial fraction of winnings over $200,000.
     A natural question is how to think about the policy relevance of the lottery shocks in our data. In general,
one would like to have exogenous shocks to wealth and unearned income that are similar in magnitude to
changes associated with policy reforms. The shocks that we study are comparable in magnitude to both
typical shocks to labor income and to the permanent income changes associated with many common policy
proposals. To see this, note that our average size of lottery win is approximately equivalent to a $7,500 post-
tax annuity payment. Such a permanent change in annual income is comparable to several other relevant
permanent income changes considered in the literature. For example, in the U.S., a 1 standard deviation
shock to the permanent component of log earnings approximately corresponds to $6,000 annually, as follows
from estimates in Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). We can also look at reforms to the tax and transfer system
as a comparison to our lottery shocks. In terms of transfer policy, there is a range of popular proposals


                                                                          8
to introduce a UBI, which is an lump-sum payment to each adult. The suggested values of these transfers
range from $500 to $1000 tax-free per month (see, e.g., Stern, 2016, Lowrey, 2018, and Yang, 2018), which
corresponds to a $6,000 to $12,000 recurring annual payment. In terms of tax policy, among the most
discussed policy levers to raise revenue is an increase to the top marginal tax rate on earnings. For each
year that an individual works, an increase in the top marginal tax rate on earnings can be represented as
an increase in the tax rate on all earnings plus an increase in post-tax unearned income equal in magnitude
to the income cut-off for the top tax bracket scaled by the size of the tax rate increase.12 Thus, under the
current tax code, evaluating the effect of each percentage point increase in the top marginal tax rate for a
single taxpayer requires evaluating the effect of an increase in the unearned income of $5,184 for each year
that an individual's earnings are in the top tax bracket.


3         Event-study design and wealth effect estimates
In this section, we present and apply the event-study design that we use to draw causal inferences about how
individuals and households respond to winning the lottery. This design exploits variation in the timing of
lottery wins, and, thus, can be expressed as a difference-in-differences (DiD) estimator that compares the
early winners to those who win later. We now demonstrate how we arrive at this estimator, assess the threats
to identification, and show that a variety of alternative estimators yield remarkably similar estimates. For
now, we focus on the labor market responses, while we, in Section 6, analyze a wide range of outcomes.


3.1         Parameter of interest and research design
We denote observed economic outcomes by Yi,t . Let Di,t = 1 for individuals who have experienced their
first lottery win by calendar year t, and Di,t = 0 otherwise. Let Yi,t (1) denote the potential economic out-
come of an individual that has experienced her first-observed win, and Yi,t (0) denote the potential economic
outcome of an individual that has not experienced her first-observed win. Potential economic outcomes are
related to observed economic outcomes through Yi,t = Yi,t (0) + Di,t (Yi,t (1) - Yi,t (0)).
         To define the parameter of interest, it is useful to consider a specific cohort of winners who win in
year w. For this cohort, the parameter of interest is the cohort-specific average effect of the lottery win on
outcome Y as measured in post-win year w + ,

                                         w,  E [ Yi,w+ (1) - Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w] .                             (3.1)

The identification challenge is that we do not observe E [ Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w], which is the average out-
come of winners in year w +                  had they, counterfactually, not won. In the rest of the paper, we refer to
E [ Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w] as the counterfactual outcome mean for winners in year w + .
    12
         See Saez (2001) for a concise discussion of this representation.




                                                                     9
First-difference estimator.     One natural approach to recovering our parameter of interest is to use a first-
difference (FD) estimator,

                                       E [ Yi,w+ - Yi,w-s | i won in w],                                     (3.2)
                                         difference over time for winners in w

where w - s is a baseline, pre-win year. This FD estimator is illustrated using our data in Figure 3.1a, which
presents the wage earnings of winners in a randomly drawn year, 2003. In the graph, we adjust for life-cycle
effects on earnings by regressing winner wage earnings on a full set of dummies for each age. On the y -axis,
we report mean annual wage earnings in a given time period. The running variable on the x-axis is event
time, with 0 denoting the year of the lottery win.
    The graphical evidence in Figure 3.1a highlights two important features of our data. First, there is
a sizable, swift, and persistent change in wage earnings from before to after the year of the lottery win.
Second, wage earnings change little if at all in the years prior to winning the lottery. This suggests that
the FD estimator defined in expression (3.2) may produce credible estimates of the effects of winning the
lottery. The reason is that this estimator produces consistent estimates under the assumption that wage
earnings would not have changed from before to after the lottery win in the absence of winning the lottery
(conditional on age). Under this assumption, the FD estimator (using s = -2 as the baseline year) suggests
that the 2003 cohort of lottery winners reduced their wage earnings by $3,211 (approximately 10 percent)
in response to winning the lottery, as illustrated in Figure 3.1a.

Controlling for time effects.    The key threat to the identifying assumption of the FD estimator defined in
expression (3.2) is that economic outcomes may change over time (conditional on age) not only due to the
lottery winnings but also due to other factors, such as contemporaneous aggregate changes in the economy.
There are two ways to address this concern about confounding time effects.
    One possibility is to take advantage of the fact that we observe many cohorts of lottery winners who
win in different calendar years. In Figure 3.1b, we follow this approach, pooling the wage earnings data of
winners across the 2001 to 2016 win years. We re-center the data so that period 0 is the year of win for all
individuals (even if they win in different calendar years) and adjust for time effects in addition to age.
    We report the estimates from this pooled approach in Figure 3.1b, using s = -2 as the baseline year.
Estimates mirror the unadjusted estimates in Figure 3.1a for the subsample of 2003 winners. There is no
evidence of significant changes in earnings prior to the year of win. By contrast, there is a sharp change in
earnings from before to after the year of the lottery win. As illustrated in Figure 3.1b, the FD estimator net
of calendar time effects suggests that lottery winners, on average, reduced their earnings by $3,768 per year
(approximately 12 percent) in response to winning the lottery.

Difference-in-differences estimator.      An alternative approach to address concerns about time effects in-
volves finding a control group that would arguably have experienced the same change in earnings from
before to after the lottery win in the absence of winning the lottery. Such a control group allows one to
difference out time effects by constructing a DiD estimator. A natural candidate for a control group is the


                                                          10
individuals who first win the lottery in later years. Using such a control group, the resulting DiD estimator
between the treatment and control groups for cohort w is

          E [ Yi,w+ - Yi,w-s | i won in w] - E [ Yi,w+ - Yi,w-s | i has not won by w  w + ],              (3.3)
            difference over time for treatment group        difference over time for control group


where w reflects the choice of how much later we look to find a later-winning control group.
    The DiD estimator eliminates unobserved time-invariant individual heterogeneity by comparing winners
before and after they win, while accounting for year and event-time effects by using the later winners as a
control group before they win. As long as the individuals in the treatment and control groups would have
had a common trend between years w - s and w + in the expected potential outcomes in the absence of
the lottery wins Y (0), the DiD estimator defined in expression (3.3) recovers the average impact of lottery
winning for cohort w in year w + for  0.
    In Figure 3.1c, we take this DiD estimator to our data. The dark line shows the mean wage earnings
of the treatment group of lottery winners before and after their own lottery win. The lighter line shows the
mean wage earnings of the control group of later winners (i.e., w = w + ) in the years prior to their own
lottery win. The pre-trends of the two groups are remarkably similar, suggesting that later winners are a
suitable choice of control group. As illustrated in the graph, the DiD estimate is given by the change in
mean wage earnings before and after the win year of the treated individuals, in the treatment group relative
to the control group. In our data, this estimate suggests that individuals, on average, reduce their earnings
by approximately $3,800 per year (approximately 11 percent) in response to winning the lottery, which is
nearly identical to what we found using the FD estimator.
    As an alternative control group, we consider individuals who did not win the lottery during the period
we consider. In Figure 3.1d, we plot the mean earnings of this control group over time. The graph shows
that the DiD estimate does not materially change if we use the never winners as the control group instead of
the later winners.

Graphical comparison of estimators. In sum, we find that whether using a FD estimator (which relies
on the absence of time effects) or a DiD estimator (which relies on a common trend between treatment and
control groups), our conclusions are strikingly similar. The reason is simply that in this context, a control
group is only needed to eliminate time effects. Our data, however, do not show any evidence of strong time
effects on average, and, as a result, both the FD and DiD estimators produce remarkably similar results.
This is true both if we use never winners or all later winners as the control group. We summarize these
findings in Figure 3.2. In this graph, we plot the differences between the treatment and control group (if
any) across event time, while normalizing the level of wage earnings of each group to be zero in event time
s = -2. By examining the pattern of earnings in the years after the win, we can then directly compare
the effects estimates across estimators, and they are remarkably similar. In light of this similarity, we use a
DiD estimator using all available later winners as our preferred approach, given its attractive combination
of flexibility in estimation and maximal use of later winners as control units.



                                                       11
              (a) First-Difference (Single Cohort)                                                 (b) First-Difference (Pooled Across Cohorts)




(c) Difference-in-Differences (Using Later Winners as Controls)                        (d) Difference-in-Differences (Using Non-Winners as Controls)

                              Figure 3.1: Earnings paths across event time for treatment and control groups

         Notes: This figure provides a comparison of various estimators for the effect of winning the lottery on winner wage earnings. In subfigure (a), we
         plot the life-cycle adjusted average wage earnings of the 2003 cohort of winners. We adjust for age effects by regressing winner wage earnings on
         a full set of dummies for each age. We then use the residual from this regression as our measure of earnings net of age effects, and add back in
         the population mean of winner wage earnings to get an intercept with the correct population average earnings level. In subfigure (b), we plot the
         average wage earnings of the pooled 2001-2016 cohort of winners. We adjust for age and time effects by regressing winner wage earnings on a full
         set of dummies for each age as well as a full set of time effects for each calendar year. In subfigure (c), we plot the cohort-weighted average of wage
         earnings of the treated group of winners (dark line) together with the cohort-weighted average of wage earnings of all later winners in the years
         before they win (lighter line). Finally, in subfigure (d), we produce an analog to subfigure (c), but only using individuals with control units who did
         not win the lottery during the period we consider. In each subfigure, we report the corresponding estimate of the effect of winning on winner wage
         earnings.




                                                                                  12
                                               Figure 3.2: Comparison of estimators




Notes: In this figure, we summarize the estimates of the effect of winning the lottery on winner wage earnings at each event time corresponding to
each of the four estimators discussed in Section 3.1. "FD (One Cohort)" corresponds to first-difference estimates using the 2003 cohort. "FD (All
Cohorts)" corresponds to the pooled first-difference estimator using all 2001-2016 cohorts. "DiD (Later Winners)" corresponds to difference-in-
differences estimates where the control group consists of all available later winners. "DiD (Non-Winners)" corresponds to difference-in-differences
estimates where the control group consists of only using individuals who did not win the lottery during the period we consider. For the two
difference-in-difference estimators, we take cohort-size-weighted averages for each event time. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed,
clustering on winner, for the "DiD (Later Winners)". Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                                                                       13
Regression model for the DiD estimator.                  To implement the DiD estimator defined in expression (3.3),
we use a regression to make it easier to include additional covariates and calculate standard errors. For each
cohort w and each event time we create a subsample of the treated individuals who won in period w and
a control group of individuals who have not won by period w or w + , whichever is greater. Using this
subsample, we run the regression

                            w,   w,                 w,
                     Yi,t = 1  + 2  1{i won in w} + 3  1{t = w + } + w, Zi,t + uw,
                                                                                i,t                                             (3.4)

                                                                              w,
where Zi,t represents the interaction term 1{i won in w} × 1{t = w + }. Here, 1  is the control group
                                         w,                                                           w,
mean in the baseline year (i.e., w - s), 2  is a fixed effect for the treated individuals (cohort w), 3  is
a time effect for event time , and w, is an interaction effect and our parameter of interest as defined in
expression (3.1). We estimate the model separately for each cohort w and then take a weighted average of
the estimates for each event time , where the weights are determined by the cohort-size.13
       To control for age composition, we include a full set of dummies for each age in regression model (3.4).14
These controls adjust for the fact that current winners are slightly older than later winners in year w, which
is to be expected if the timing of win is as good as random. For other observables, current and later winners
have very similar pre-win characteristics. This is shown in Table 3.1, where we report a set of key summary
statistics for the treatment-control sample. For each cohort w, we compute the average characteristics of
individuals in the treatment and control group in the baseline year w - s and report cohort-size-weighted
averages of those values. In addition, we report the cohort-weighted average size of the lottery win in each
group. Table 3.1 shows that current and later winners (i.e., individuals in the treatment and control groups)
have very similar pre-win characteristics, except current winners are slightly older. This is reassuring if one
is worried that the changes in earnings over time could differ depending on the characteristics of individuals.
  13
      By first estimating the parameter w, separately for each cohort w and then averaging these parameters across cohorts, we
avoid the problems pointed out by de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2018), Calloway and Sant'Anna (2020), and Sun and
Abraham (2020), and we ensure that our event-study regressions produce positively-weighted averages of causal effects under the
standard common trends assumption. To arrive at a joint variance-covariance matrix for all cohort-by-event time estimates, we
estimate the model in a single, fully-interacted step.
   14
      Including a full set of dummies for each age in our regression specification allows for parsimonious control for age differences
between current and later winners, as well as potentially underlying life-cycle trends in earnings. In Appendix Figure B.1, we
compare the results of our main specification to an non-parametric estimator due to Calloway and Sant'Anna (2020) which adjusts
for age differences between current and later winners through an inverse-probability-weighted (IPW) DiD estimator. Results from
both approaches are essentially identical.




                                                                 14
                                  Table 3.1: Summary statistics of treatment-control sample


                                                 Treatment Group (Current Winners)                    Control Group (Later Winners)
                                                                        (1)                                               (2)
  Covariate                        Statistic
  Wage Earnings                      Mean                            $34,649                                           $34,278
  Employment                         Prop.                             0.80                                              0.80
  Age                                Mean                             43.94                                             41.84
  Female                             Prop.                             0.39                                              0.39
  Married                            Prop.                             0.45                                              0.45
  Homeowner                          Prop.                             0.45                                              0.44
  Size of the Lottery Win            Mean                           $182,902                                          $184,184

Notes: This table presents a summary of the descriptive statistics in our treatment-control sample. All monetary values are reported in 2016 U.S.
dollars, using the Consumer Price Index to adjust for inflation. The treatment group is the collection of all cohorts of working-age winners in our
sample with later-treated cohorts that can serve as a control group. The control group is the collection of all control units used across all treated
units. All values are measured two years prior to the treated group's win year with the exception of the size of the lottery win, which is measured in
each individual's win year.



3.2     Average effects of lottery winning: Graphical evidence
In Figure 3.3 we plot the estimated coefficients from regression (3.4). For each outcome and each event time
 , we report a cohort-weighted average of regression coefficient w, , with the baseline event time w - 2
normalized to zero. There is no evidence of differential trends between current and later winners in pre-win
event times -7 to -1 for any of the outcomes. This is consistent with the outcomes of current winners and
the later winners evolving in the same way across years in the pre-win period, providing support for the
common trends assumption.
      Figure 3.3 shows that various measures of labor market outcomes fall significantly for lottery winners
(relative to later winners) after they win a lottery. Since our observations are at an annual frequency, it is
difficult to interpret estimates in event time 0 since they are affected by the timing of the win within the
year. For this reason we focus our discussion on years 1 through 5. The wage earnings of the winner fall
on average by $3,572 (approximately 10 percent) in the first year following the lottery win, and continue to
decline slightly in subsequent years. Per-adult wage earnings have a similar pattern to winner wage earnings,
but they decline by slightly less: $3,234 (approximately 10 percent) in the first year after the win. Recall that
per-adult wage earnings for married households is the average wage earnings of the winner and the spouse.
The smaller decrease in per-adult wage earnings compared to winner wage earnings implies that the spouse
of the winner decreases his or her wage earnings by a smaller amount. It is also evident that the winner is
more likely to stop working, and this probability grows over time. This pattern also persists after accounting
for spousal responses.
      Per-adult total labor earnings also include household income from self-employment. Self-employment
income declines following the lottery win, and, as a result, per-adult total labor earnings decline by more
than per-adult wage earnings. The decline in self-employment income rules out substitution towards self-

                                                                         15
employment as a means of offsetting the reduction in wage earnings. By comparison, per-adult capital
income increases in the first year and then slightly declines over time. This pattern is consistent with lottery
winners first expanding their savings and then gradually consuming out of their new wealth. Appendix
Figure B.3 illustrates how various components of capital income such as interest payments, dividends, and
other sources of capital income respond to winning.


3.3      IV estimates of the individual and household responses to increases in wealth
It is difficult to interpret the size of the effects reported in the previous subsection because the treatment
variable captures whether a person wins but not the size of the lottery win. To get economically-interpretable
estimates, we now shift to an IV model that uses variation in the timing of the lottery wins as an instrument
for lottery winnings. The resulting IV estimates tell us individual and household responses per dollar of
lottery winnings, which we will refer to as wealth effects.
       We maintain the conventions and notation from our event-study regression model (3.4) in the prior
subsection. For each cohort w and each event time  0, we estimate the following IV model

                   Xi,t = µw,   w,                  w,
                           1 + µ2 1{i won in w } + µ3 1{t = w + } + 
                                                                     w,
                                                                        Zi,t +               w,
                                                                                             i,t            (3.5)
                             w,       w,                     w,                              w,
                    Yi,t =   1    +   2    1{i won in w} +   3    1{t = w + } +  w, Xi,t +   i,t   .        (3.6)

Starting with the first-stage equation (3.5), the parameters {µw,   w,   w,
                                                               1 , µ2 , µ3 } are cohort and time effects.
The endogenous variable X in our estimation is the lottery winnings in the win year. Thus, the first-stage
coefficient w, , which captures the impact of a lottery win on lottery winnings, does not change over time.
The second-stage equation (3.6) relates our outcome of interest Y to changes in X . Our parameter of interest
is  w, , which measures the average response of outcome Y to changes in X . The reduced form of the IV
model is given by the event-study regression in (3.4).
       Column 1 of Table 3.2 reports estimates of the average annual response to an additional dollar of wealth
in the post-win period across several economic outcomes. The reported estimates are constructed by taking
cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time                {1, ...., 5}, and then taking the average
over event times . Going forward, we will use a similar weighting for other estimates, so we adopt the
convention of referring to them as weighted-average estimates. To ease the interpretation of responses, we
scale earnings and capital income responses by 100 and employment responses by 100,000 dollars in Table
3.2.
       These weighted-average estimates show that for an extra 100 dollars in wealth, winners reduce their
earnings on average by 2.3 dollars in each of the five subsequent years. Per-adult total labor earnings
similarly decrease by 2.3 dollars per 100 dollar of additional wealth. As both the earnings and winnings
measures are per-adult, this 2.3 dollar response coincides with the mean response of total (not normalized
per number of adults) household labor earnings. Capital income increases annually by 0.9 dollars per 100
dollars of additional wealth. Finally, the probability that the winner is employed decreases by 3.7 percentage
points per 100,000 dollars of additional wealth. The response is similar for total employment, which also
accounts for spousal labor supply.


                                                         16
                                         Figure 3.3: Effect of winning across outcomes




                (a) Winner Wage Earnings                                                           (b) Per-Adult Wage Earnings




           (c) Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings                                                      (d) Per-Adult Capital Income




                (e) Winner Employment                                                                  (f) Total Employment

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on six outcomes, based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in
Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are
displayed, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time. In addition to the cohort-size-weighted average effect in
levels (left-hand axis), each subfigure also reports this average effect scaled by the mean of the outcome in omitted event time (right-hand axis)
which can be interpreted as an average percentage change (relative to the baseline pre-win period) in the outcome.




                                                                       17
                                             Table 3.2: Wealth effects across outcomes


                                                                                          Sample

                                                               Quartile 1             Quartile 2             Quartile 3            Quartile 4
                                          Full Sample
               Outcome                                      Pre-Win Income        Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income        Pre-Win Income
                                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)

       Winner Wage Earnings                  -2.2856             -1.4003               -2.2948                -2.6196                -3.0596
              (per $100)                    (0.0571)            (0.0628)               (0.0861)              (0.0935)               (0.1541)

     Per-Adult Wage Earnings                 -2.0245             -1.2514               -2.0422                -2.2590                -2.7035
              (per $100)                    (0.0492)            (0.0589)               (0.0764)              (0.0813)               (0.1311)

  Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings             -2.3394             -1.3339               -2.2720                -2.6450                -3.1298
              (per $100)                    (0.0657)            (0.1051)               (0.0867)              (0.0996)               (0.1820)

     Per-Adult Capital Income                0.8738              0.5784                 0.7626                0.9658                 0.9265
              (per $100)                    (0.0406)            (0.0540)               (0.0784)              (0.0709)               (0.0974)

        Winner Employment                    -0.0368             -0.0517               -0.0444                -0.0350                -0.0231
            (per $100,000)                  (0.0008)            (0.0021)               (0.0019)              (0.0013)               (0.0010)

         Total Employment                    -0.0361             -0.0633               -0.0421                -0.0278                -0.0196
            (per $100,000)                  (0.0008)            (0.0025)               (0.0017)              (0.0010)               (0.0008)


Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on six outcomes. These estimates are calculated by first
estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time
 , then taking the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean wealth effect in the post-win period. Column
1 reports wealth effects for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 to 5, we report wealth effects for subsamples of winners falling into each quartile
of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis),
clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, we scale earnings and capital income responses by $100. In the case of employment responses, we
scale each estimate by $100,000.



Heterogeneity across the income distribution.                             Columns 2-5 of Table 3.2 explore heterogeneity in re-
sponses across the income distribution. To construct these estimates, we use the distribution of adjusted
gross income (AGI) in the baseline pre-win period to assign treated and control individuals into quartiles of
pre-win income, and then estimate our IV model separately for each quartile. As one can see from these
columns, the average wage earnings reduction per dollar of additional wealth is increasing in pre-win in-
come. For example, whereas individuals in the first quartile of pre-win income reduce their own annual
wage earnings by 1.4 dollars per 100 dollars of additional wealth, individuals in the fourth quartile decrease
their annual wage earnings by over twice as much. This pattern does not materially change when we look
at other measures of earnings responses. The lower-income households, however, are more likely to stop
working ­ the reduction in the probability of employment for the winners in the lowest quartile is more
than twice as large as that of the winners in the highest quartile. This difference increases even further after


                                                                          18
accounting for responses in spousal labor supply.
    One consideration with our estimated responses across the income distribution is that individuals with
low pre-win income may have low initial labor force participation, effectively introducing a ceiling on how
much earnings of lower-income individuals can respond to a given lottery prize. To shed additional light on
this, in Appendix Table A.2 we explore heterogeneity in earnings responses in two distinct subsamples of
our data. In one subsample, we restrict attention to only those individuals who had positive wage earnings
in the baseline year. In the second subsample, we restrict attention to only those individuals who had wage
earnings in excess of $15,000 in the baseline year.15 For both subsamples, we find our point estimates to be
slightly larger, but the general pattern of increasing earnings responses with income remains.

Responses over time.           In Figure 3.4 we explore how earnings responses change over time. We aggregate
estimated earnings response coefficients  w, into short-run (corresponding to                           = {1, 2}) and long-run
(corresponding to = {3, 4, 5}) estimates. We report these estimates for our two main measures of earnings
responses: winner wage earnings and per-adult total labor earnings.16 Earnings responses increase over
time, but not substantially so, and the magnitude of the increases is similar across income distribution.
   15
      The $15,000 threshold approximately corresponds to the amount an individual would earn if working full time at U.S. federal
minimum wage.
   16
      Since the first-stage coefficient is essentially fixed over time, the time patterns of responses for other measures can be easily
inferred from Figure 3.3 and we omit them for brevity.




                                                                 19
                                                          (a) Winner Wage Earnings




                                                     (b) Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings

                                 Figure 3.4: Wealth effects across time and pre-win income

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on (a) winner wage earnings and (b) per-adult total labor
earnings. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-
size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates for all post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ("Avg (+1
to +5)"), a shorter-run set of post-win event times {1, 2} ("Short Run (+1 to +2)"), and a longer-run set of post-win event times {3, 4, 5} ("Long
Run (+3 to +5)"). In addition, for each temporal average, we report wealth effects for the full analysis sample ("Full Sample") as well as for the
subsample of winners falling in the first ("Quartile 1") and fourth ("Quartile 4") quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross
income. To ease interpretability, we scale earnings responses by $100. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner.



Intensive- and extensive-margin responses.                       Figure 3.3 shows evidence of sizable and persistent earnings
and employment responses to winning the lottery. This raises a natural question: How much of the overall

                                                                       20
earnings response is attributable to the extensive margin? To address this question, we decompose the earn-
ings response into extensive- and intensive-margin contributions. Concretely, we take a standard statistical
intensive-extensive decomposition of cross-sectional earnings effects (as in, e.g., Angrist, 2001) and adapt
it to a DiD estimator (see Appendix D). Table 3.3 shows the share of the observed earnings response that
is attributable to the extensive-margin response. In aggregate, we find that the extensive margin explains
roughly half of the winner wage earnings response and 40 percent of the per-adult total labor earnings re-
sponse. The importance of the extensive margin, however, decreases with pre-win income. For example,
whereas the extensive margin explains 58% of the observed per-adult total labor earnings response for low-
income households, 36% of the response is explained by employment responses for households in the fourth
quartile.


                                    Table 3.3: Extensive-margin share of earnings response


                                              Quartile 1             Quartile 2             Quartile 3            Quartile 4
                                                                                                                                     Aggregate
               Outcome                    Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income
                                                   (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)                (5)

       Winner Wage Earnings                       0.65                  0.50                   0.52                   0.50               0.53
  Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings                  0.58                  0.41                   0.34                   0.36               0.40


Notes: This table presents the share of the observed earnings responses that is attributable to the extensive margin. For details on the decomposition
see Appendix D.




Heterogeneity by prize size.                 Lastly, we examine heterogeneity in responses by prize size. To concisely
summarize results allowing for variation in prizes, we report, in Figure 3.5, how average wealth effects
on earnings and employment in the full analysis sample compare to a subset of smaller winners (winning
$30,000 up to $300,000), a subset of larger winners (winning $300,000 to $1 million) and a subset of the
largest winners (winning more than $1 million).




                                                                         21
                                        Figure 3.5: Wealth effects by prize size over time




                                                       (a) Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings




                                                              (b) Total Employment

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on a) per-adult total labor earnings and b) total employment.
These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted
averages of  w, for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates for all post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ("Avg (+1 to +5)"), a shorter-
run set of post-win event times {1, 2} ("Short Run (+1 to +2)"), and a longer-run set of post-win event times {3, 4, 5} ("Long Run (+3 to +5)"). In
addition, for each temporal average, we report wealth effects separately by prize size. To ease interpretability, we scale earnings responses by $100.
In the case of employment responses, we scale each estimate by $100,000. 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner.


     We find that wealth effects for both earnings and employment decrease with prize size. For smaller
winners, the average per-adult total earnings reduction per 100 dollars of additional wealth is in excess of


                                                                         22
5.5 dollars, whereas for the largest winners, the reduction is less than 1 dollar per 100 dollars of additional
wealth. This pattern of decreasing effects by prize size raises a natural question: How much of the cross-
prize difference in wage earnings responses is attributable to the extensive labor supply margin? To address
this question, we decompose the difference in per-dollar earnings effects between smaller and larger prize
winners into extensive- and intensive-margin contributions (see Appendix D). In particular, we focus our
decomposition on the difference between the smaller ($30,000 to $300,000) prize bin and the largest ($1
million and up). We summarize the results of this decomposition of differences in Table 3.4. We find
that the extensive margin explains a substantial fraction of the differences in per-dollar responses across
prize size. For example, in aggregate, we find that for per-adult total labor earnings approximately half of
the difference in wealth effects across prize size is attributable to differences along the extensive-margin
response. The share of cross-prize-size differences attributable to the extensive margin declines as we look
across the income distribution, falling from approximately 75% for lower-income (first quartile) winners to
approximately 44% for higher-income (fourth quartile) winners.


        Table 3.4: Extensive-margin share of cross-prize-size difference in earnings response per dollar


                                               Quartile 1             Quartile 2              Quartile 3             Quartile 4
                                                                                                                                        Aggregate
               Outcome                     Pre-Win Income          Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income         Pre-Win Income
                                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                 (5)

        Winner Wage Earnings                       0.66                   0.50                   0.53                   0.49                0.53
    Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings                 0.75                   0.47                   0.42                   0.44                0.48


Notes: This table presents the share of the observed difference in per-dollar earnings responses across prize sizes that is attributable to the extensive
margin. We construct this difference using two prize bins: smaller winners ($30,000 to $300,000) and larger winners ($1 million+). For details on
the decomposition see Appendix D.




4      Propensities to earn and consume out of unearned income
The size of the wealth effects that we estimated in the previous section can be hard to gauge as the observed
responses to windfall gains should vary across individuals depending on a number of factors, such as the
age at which the individual wins, her savings behavior, and the tax rates she faces. This issue motivates our
analyses in this section. We begin by first studying how winning the lottery changes the unearned income
that households allocate to consumption and leisure across years. Next, we estimate the share of yearly
allocated unearned income that is spent on reducing labor versus increasing consumption. In other words,
we estimate both the allocation of the windfall gains over time and the marginal propensities to earn (MPE)
and consume (MPC) out of unearned income in a given period. In Section 6, we broaden this analysis to
study how unearned income affects a wider range of individual and household behaviors.




                                                                          23
4.1     Approaches to allocate windfall gains over time
We start with the household budget constraint. It will be convenient to write it in the following form:

                                  ct = yt - T (yt ) + (1 + r)at-1 - at - Ta (rat-1 ) .                                         (4.1)
                                                                   unearned income  nt

Here ct , yt , and at denote consumption, labor earnings, and assets of the household in period t, r is the
interest rate, and Ta and T are taxes on capital income and labor earnings, respectively. The variable nt
represents the total amount of unearned income used by the household in period t, or unearned income for
short. Lottery winnings provide an exogenous increase in unearned income, and responses of earnings and
consumption to this variation will be informative about the size of income effects.
      There are two popular approaches to inferring the effect of lottery winnings on unearned income: the
annuitization method and the capitalization method.17 Under the annuitization method, one assumes that
winnings are smoothed perfectly over the remaining lifetime. It is easy to show that if a k -year-old individual
decides to smooth her lottery winning L over remaining T - k years of life using a post-tax interest rate
rpost-tax , then unearned income must increase by

                                                                               T -k+1    -1
                                      rpost-tax                    1
                                                      1-                                      L.                               (4.2)
                                    1 + rpost-tax             1 + rpost-tax

Under the capitalization method, one does not make any assumptions a priori about household behavior,
but rather uses observed information about pre-tax capital income rat-1 and rate of return r to impute
("capitalize") the value of wealth at-1 . With this information in hand, one can then compute unearned
income directly.
      The two methods have strengths and weaknesses. The annuitization method has minimal data require-
ments and is easy to implement, but it relies on the assumption that households smooth their winnings
perfectly. The capitalization method makes no assumptions about how agents smooth their winnings, but
the imputation of wealth using asset returns can only be done approximately. Since a priori it is not clear
which method is preferable, we estimate the average effect of winning a lottery on unearned income using
both methods. For the annuitization method, we assume that all individuals live for T = 80 years, and set
rpost-tax = 2.5%, which is close to the average risk-free real interest rate in the U.S. for our period of obser-
vation.18 For the capitalization method, we follow Saez and Zucman (2016) who calculate that the average
pre-tax rate of return on taxable capital and business assets between 1999-2010 is approximately 5.4%. We
observe capital income directly for each household and use it to impute a measure of beginning-of-period t
wealth, at-1 . We calculate capital income taxes by applying the relevant marginal tax rate to each source
of capital income and then summing them up. Using these measures of assets and capital income taxes we
   17
      Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010), and Blundell, Low and Preston (2013) are some examples
of papers that use the annuitization method, while Stewart (1939), Saez and Zucman (2016), and Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020)
are examples of applications of the capitalization method.
   18
      The World Bank, DataBank (2020).                      Real interest rate (%) - United States.                  Retrieved from
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.RINR?locations=US.



                                                                24
construct household-level unearned income, which we then convert to a per-adult measure for consistent
comparison between single and married households.


4.2      Allocation of lottery winnings over time
To study the allocation of lottery winnings over time, we estimate the regression model in equation (3.4)
of Section 3.1, but now with the outcome variable specified as a measure of unearned income. In Figure
4.1a, we report the results of these event-study regressions for each of the two approaches outlined in the
prior subsection. Under the annuitization method, the outcome variable in equation (3.4) is zero in years
prior to the win (as given by equation (4.2)) and equal to the annuitized size of the lottery win after the win.
Under the capitalization method, the outcome variable in equation (3.4) is the imputed unearned income in
all periods.19
       The capitalization approach shows no evidence of differential trends in the allocation of lottery winnings
in the pre-win period (no differential trends is mechanical under the annuitization approach), providing
support for a common trend in unearned income between current and later winners. Looking in the post-win
period, the key finding is that the two approaches produce remarkably similar estimates. On average in the
post-win period, unearned income increases by $7,497 per period using the annuitization method, and $8,265
per period using the capitalization method. This similarity suggests that households smooth their lottery
winnings and that the simple life-cycle model and annuitization method provide a good approximation to
households' savings behavior.20 As expected, standard errors are larger under the capitalization method,
likely because of the measurement error inherent with this approach.
  19
      The values of Yt for t = w - 1 and t = w under the capitalization method are difficult to interpret because the time of the
lottery win within the year is unknown. For this reason, we exclude the corresponding event times in Figure 4.1a.
   20
      Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) find that earnings responses to lump-sum prizes are similar to earnings
responses to installment prizes. This is a complementary approach for assessing the quality of the annuitization method as an
approximation to households' savings behavior. The similarity of responses adds support to modeling lottery winners as behaving
as predicted by textbook models of consumption smoothing.




                                                              25
                         (a) Unearned Income                                             (b) Implied Consumption Expenditure

                          Figure 4.1: Comparing across methods to measure unearned income

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on unearned income (nt ) and implied consumption expenditure (ct ). All estimates
are based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) and reporting cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event
time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. For each of unearned income and implied consumption expenditure,
we plot the estimates for the annuitization and capitalization methods together to facilitate comparison. Due to our capitalization method inferring
the change in wealth, the effect of winning on capital income in the win year (on-impact) directly affects the measure of wealth change in the win
year as well as the prior year. For this reason, when estimating the effect of winning on nt and ct using the capitalization method, we require that
not-yet treated cohorts win later than max{w, w + + 1} rather than max{w, w + }. For the same reason, we omit estimates for = -1 and
  = 0 under the capitalization method.


      Next, we estimate the same event-study regression as above, but replacing the outcome with household
labor earnings taxes, T (yt ). Together with the event-study estimates for labor earnings which we reported
in Section 3, this allows us to impute the effect of winning a lottery on consumption expenditure using
the budget constraint identity (4.1). We report the response of consumption expenditure, imputed under
both capitalization and annuitization methods, in Figure 4.1b. Using the annuitization method, we find
that consumption increases in the first post-win year by $4,862 (approximately 17 percent). This effect
declines slightly over time such that on average in the post-win period, consumption increases by $4,413
(approximately 15 percent) per period. Estimates of the consumption response using the capitalization
method are very similar, with a post-win average increase in consumption of $5,176 (approximately 16
percent) per period.


4.3     Estimates of marginal propensities to earn and consume
Using the IV model introduced in Section 3.3, defined by equations (3.5) and (3.6), we can estimate how an
extra dollar in unearned income translates into an increase in consumption (MPC), a decrease in earnings
(MPE), and a change in labor earnings taxes (MPT). This is done by 2SLS estimation of the two-equation
system with the endogenous variable being the unearned income in a given period, and the outcome variable
being labor earnings, consumption, or labor earnings taxes. Before discussing the results, it is useful to note
that the MPC and the MPE must satisfy the accounting identity,


                                                       MPC - MPE = 1 - MPT,



                                                                        26
and therefore MPC - MPE may exceed one.

Main estimates and heterogeneity across the income distribution. Table 4.1 presents the results both
for the full sample and separately for each income quartile, similarly to Table 3.2. The estimates here are
reported using the annuitization method; point estimates are very similar when we use the capitalization
method and so we relegate them to the appendix (see Appendix Table A.3). Table 4.1 shows that labor
earnings responses to a change in unearned income (i.e., MPEs) are quite large. An extra dollar in unearned
income leads to a 52 cent reduction in labor earnings. Furthermore, there is substantial heterogeneity in
MPEs across the income distribution. The MPE of households in the lowest quartile is -0.31 while the MPE
of those in the highest quartile is -0.67.
     The imputed consumption responses are of similar magnitude to earnings responses, and also display
heterogeneity across the income distribution. Imputed consumption increases, on average, by 58 cents in
response to an extra dollar in unearned income. This response is largest for households in the lowest pre-win
income quartile and it declines with pre-win income. Finally, the reduction in earnings leads to a reduction
in labor earnings taxes of about 11 cents per extra dollar of unearned income.


                    Table 4.1: IV estimates of the effect of exogenous change in unearned income


                                                                                         Sample

                                                                Quartile 1           Quartile 2            Quartile 3           Quartile 4
                                            Full Sample
                Outcome                                     Pre-Win Income        Pre-Win Income       Pre-Win Income       Pre-Win Income
                                                 (1)                (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)

                                              -0.5227            -0.3080              -0.5204               -0.5893              -0.6735
   Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings
                                              (0.0146)           (0.0240)             (0.0197)             (0.0221)              (0.0389)

                                              -0.1063            -0.0395              -0.0700               -0.1254              -0.1725
   Per-Adult Labor Earnings Taxes
                                              (0.0051)           (0.0063)             (0.0075)             (0.0063)              (0.0155)

                                              0.5836             0.7315                0.5496               0.5361                0.4990
  Implied Consumption Expenditure
                                              (0.0198)           (0.0417)             (0.0374)             (0.0339)              (0.0361)


Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a
2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income (ni,t ) as the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we then take cohort-
size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover
the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for the full analysis
sample. In columns 2 to 5, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for subsamples of winners falling into each quartile of the
pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering
on winner.



Heterogeneity by age of the winner.                      Consistent with the life-cycle hypothesis, Appendix Figure B.4
shows that observed earnings responses to windfall gains increase with age. The annuitization method maps
a windfall gain into a per-period flow of additional unearned income. Under the annuitization method, we


                                                                          27
can expect the effects of an additional dollar of unearned income to not vary by age. Figure 4.2 illustrates
how an extra dollar in unearned income translates into changes in earnings and consumption for younger
and older winners. The similarity of the effects between these two groups provides an additional piece of
support for the annuitization method beyond our earlier comparison with the capitalization approach shown
in Figure 4.1.




                                                      (a) Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings




                                                         (b) Consumption Expenditure

                    Figure 4.2: Effects of exogenous change in unearned income by age of winner

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on earnings and consumption expenditure. These
estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income (ni,t ) as the endogenous variable.
For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for all post-
win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ("Avg (+1 to +5)"), a shorter-run set of post-win event times {1, 2} ("Short Run (+1 to +2)"), and a longer-run set
of post-win event times {3, 4, 5} ("Long Run (+3 to +5)").. For each temporal average, we report effects of unearned income for the subsample of
younger winners (age 30 - 46) and older winners (age 47 - 64). 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner.




                                                                         28
5      Economic implications of earnings responses
The labor market responses to exogenous changes in wealth and unearned income are important inputs for
many questions in public finance. Here we illustrate the implications of our findings with two examples: the
evaluation of the effect of introducing a UBI program and an increase in top marginal tax rates.
      This section is organized as follows. In Section 5.1 we briefly review a canonical model of labor supply
that helps us define the notions of income and substitution effects and serves as a point of departure for
our model extensions. In Section 5.2 we present the extended model that we use throughout our analysis,
making clear the exact mapping between our empirical estimates and the theoretical objects of interest. We
then use this mapping to evaluate the impact of the introduction of a UBI program and an increase in the top
marginal tax rate in Sections 5.3 and 5.4, respectively.


5.1     A canonical model of labor supply
A household i chooses consumption ci and earnings yi to solve

                                                   max ui (ci , yi )                                      (5.1)
                                                    ci ,yi


subject to a budget constraint
                                                ci = (1 -  )yi + R.                                       (5.2)

Here  is the tax rate on earnings, R is total unearned income, and ui is a twice-differentiable utility function
that is concave in (c, -y ). We model households as deriving disutility from earnings rather than work hours
since earnings responses will be the key object in our analysis, and this formulation does not require us
taking a stance on how work hours translate into earnings or respond to tax changes. The optimal choice of
this problem, (c                                       
                i , yi ), is unique and, if interior, yi satisfies the first-order condition,

                                                                                  
                        ui,y ((1 -  )yi + R, yi ) = -(1 -  )ui,c ((1 -  )yi + R, yi ),                    (5.3)

where ui,c and ui,y are the derivatives of ui with respect to consumption and earnings, respectively. Equation
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                    ln yi
(5.3) implicitly defines the optimal earnings choice as a function of (1 -  ) and R. Let iu        ln(1- )   and
         
        yi
i       R    be the uncompensated (Marshallian) elasticity of earnings and the income effect, respectively.
These two objects are a convenient way to summarize local properties of the utility function ui at the point
(c     
  i , yi ) (see Appendix H.1 for details). We assume that leisure is a normal good so that i  0.
                                                             (1 - , R) is the Hicksian, or compensated,
      Closely-related to the Marshallian earnings function yi
earnings function hi (1 - , u
                            ¯). This function is the solution to the cost-minimization dual of (5.1) for a given
                              ln h
              ¯. Let ic 
utility level u                   i
                             ln(1- )   be the compensated (Hicksian) elasticity of earnings. The relationship
between the uncompensated and compensated elasticities is given by the Slutsky equation,

                                               ic = iu - (1 -  )i .                                       (5.4)




                                                             29
5.2     A dynamic heterogeneous-agent economy
The canonical model of labor supply lacks many features that are needed to capture key patterns in the data,
including savings, non-linearity in tax schedules, and extensive-margin responses. In this section we present
a richer model that incorporates all of these features, and, therefore, can be taken to the data.
      There is a measure one of heterogeneous households. Each household i lives for T   periods and
solves
                                                               T
                                              max                     t-1 ui (ci,t , yi,t )                                    (5.5)
                                        {ci,t ,yi,t ,ni,t }t
                                                               t=1

subject to a sequence of budget constraints,

                                             ci,t = yi,t - T (yi,t ) + ni,t ,
                                                        ¯)ai,t-1 - ai,t ,
                                            ni,t = (1 + r                                                                      (5.6)

and ai,0 are given initial assets of household i. T (·) is a twice-differentiable tax function with T , T                       0,
and r
    ¯ is the post-tax interest rate that satisfies r
                                                   ¯=           -1      - 1.
      Utility function ui takes the form,
                                                   
                                                   u (c, y )                       if y > 0
                                                    i
                                      ui (c, y ) =                                            ,                                (5.7)
                                                   u (c, y ) + v                   if y = 0
                                                           i                   i


where ui is a twice-differentiable function that is concave in (c, -y ), and vi  0. The parameter vi captures
utility from quitting the labor force and is a simple modeling device to capture extensive-margin responses
(see, e.g., Kleven and Kreiner, 2006; Jacquet, Lehmann and Van der Linden, 2013).
      In this model, households are heterogeneous in their initial wealth levels ai,0 , utility functions ui , and
                                                                                          
benefits of non-working vi . Hence, households have different optimal levels of earnings yi,t                             . However,
                                                                                                                    i,t
because the dynamic problem of the household is stationary,                         
                                                                                   yi,t   is independent of t. This feature of the
model substantially simplifies our arguments and exposition, as we can drop subscripts t from the analysis.
This model specification, however, is not restrictive for our analysis. In Appendix I we consider an overlap-
ping generations model in which households must retire at some fixed age, and show that the results derived
in this section extend directly to that environment as well.
      Let H (y ) be the earnings distribution in any period. We assume that H (y ) has a well-defined density
h(y ). For any variable {xi }i , we use Exi to denote its population average in equilibrium given function
T (·). We use Ey and Ey to denote the average over all households who have earnings yi = y and yi  y,
respectively. Aggregate earnings Y in this economy are

                                                                          
                                            Y  Eyi =                 [Ey yi ]h(y )dy.

      We use a perturbational approach to study the responses of this economy to various policy reforms.
Since we allow for extensive-margin responses, small perturbations of taxes and transfers may have a dis-


                                                                   30
continuous effect on optimal choices of any household i. We assume that the underlying heterogeneity in
preferences is such that the earnings density h(y ) changes smoothly to all perturbations we consider below.
       We do not need to take a stand on whether a household consists of one or two adults. In both cases,
ci and yi correspond to household i's total consumption and labor earnings, respectively. Our theory does
not require us to take a stand on how household earnings and consumption are allocated between the adults
within a two-person household.21
       While our model is substantially richer than the framework presented in Section 5.1, there is a close
connection between maximization problems (5.1) and (5.5). To see this, note that since the utility function
is time-separable, household i's problem (5.5) can be split into two subproblems (see, e.g., MaCurdy, 1983;
Blomquist, 1985; Blundell and Walker, 1986). An outer subproblem characterizes the optimal choice of
unearned income         ni,t       , where ni,t is independent of t given our assumption that 
                                                                                               -1 = 1 + r
                                                                                                        ¯. The
                               t
optimal bundle (c     
                 i , yi ) is determined by the trade-off between the intensive and extensive margins. The
optimal intensive-margin response (cint  int
                                    i , yi ) is the solution to


                                                         max ui (ci , yi )                                                     (5.8)
                                                          ci ,yi


subject to
                                                    ci = yi - T (yi ) + ni.                                                    (5.9)

The choice between intensive and extensive-margin responses is then determined by

                                                               
                                       max ui (cint  int
                                                i , yi ), ui (ni - T (0), 0) + vi .


Importantly, the same properties of ui that are summarized by income and substitution effects in problem
(5.1) also govern the optimal responses to perturbations in problem (5.8). We describe this in more detail
below.

5.2.1     Marginal propensities: MPE and MPT

Before considering specific policy experiments, it will be useful to present the theoretical analogues to MPE
and MPT that we estimated in Section 4. Suppose that wealth of household i increases unexpectedly by the
amount L in period t, and that we set, without loss of generality, to 1. We are interested in the marginal
impact of this windfall. For any equilibrium variable x(Lann ) that is differentiable in Lann , let the marginal
                                                                          x(Lann )-x(0)
effect of this increase, L x, be defined as L x  limLann 0                    Lann      , where Lann is the annuitized value
of L as defined in equation (4.2). We choose this definition             so that L n  i = 1 and all marginal responses are
expressed per dollar increase in unearned income in a given period.
       Since households may respond to a change in wealth along the extensive margin, individual responses,
            , may not be well defined. Instead, we focus on earnings responses averaged over groups of
such as L yi
  21
     Strictly speaking, when considering a two-adult household, one may want to introduce an additional utility benefit v
                                                                                                                        ~i to capture
the possibility that only one of the spouses responds to a given perturbation by quitting work. Extending our theory to this case is
straightforward (and does not change any of our empirical insights), but it requires introducing additional notation that makes our
discussion less transparent.


                                                                   31
households. Let L (y, Lann ) be the fraction of households with earnings y who would stop working if their
unearned income increased by Lann . The parameter L (y )  L L (y, Lann ) is the marginal propensity to
stop working for households with earnings y. Similarly, we extend the definitions of the MPE and MPT for
households with earnings y :

                                                                        
                               MPE(y )  L Ey yi ,     MPT(y )  L Ey T (yi ).

The population averages of these objects are the averages of MPE(y ) and MPT(y ) over the earnings distri-
bution:
                         MPE        MPE(y )dH (y ),        MPT           MPT(y )dH (y ).

These correspond to the moments that we estimated in Section 4.
   The marginal propensity to stop working, L (y ), is well defined because we assume that the earnings
density responds smoothly to all perturbations. This, in turn, implies that the MPE(y ) and MPT(y ) are also
well defined. Lemma 1 presents explicit expressions for their values.

Lemma 1. MPE(y ) and MPT(y ) are well defined for all y and satisfy

                                   MPE(y ) = MPEint (y ) + MPEext (y ),
                                   MPT(y ) = MPTint (y ) + MPText (y ),

where

                               i
            MPEint (y )  Ey          ,                         MPEext (y )  -yL (y ),
                           1 + i ic
                                      i
            MPTint (y )  T (y )Ey          ,                   MPText (y )  - [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y ),
                                  1 + i ic
               )y 
          T (yi
and i           ) .
          1-T (yi
                  i



Proof. See Appendix H.2.

   Lemma 1 shows that the expressions for the MPE(y ) and MPT(y ) consist of two terms, capturing
intensive- and extensive-margin responses. The extensive-margin responses are proportional to L (y ),
which is simply the marginal propensity to stop working of households making y dollars on average. The
intensive-margin responses are proportional to Ey 1+i
                                                    i  c . To understand why they take this form, observe
                                                           i
that an increase in unearned income has two effects. The direct effect is the standard income response
that calls for a reduction in earnings by i . The second effect is indirect, and is driven by the non-
linearity in the tax function T (·). When a household reduces its earnings, the marginal tax rate that it
faces may fall due to tax progressivity. The substitution effect, then, leads to an earnings adjustment in
response to the new marginal tax rate. The post-tax price of earnings (or retention rate) 1 - i increases by
     ) - T (y  -  y int ) = -T (y  ) y int . This change in the marginal price of earnings applies only to
T (yi        i   L i             i  L i
the last, marginal dollar. Therefore, the labor supply response to the marginal price change is governed by


                                                      32
                                                h  i    22
the compensated substitution effect             (1- ) .      Putting these two results together and taking the average over
all households with earnings y implies that the intensive-margin effect is proportional to Ey 1+i
                                                                                                i  c .          i
       One useful special case of Lemma 1 is when the tax function T (·) takes the form T (y ) = y - const. ×
y 1- , where  is a parameter capturing the progressivity in the tax code. It is immediate to verify that if
the tax function takes this form then i =  for all i. This tax function is commonly used in public finance.
Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2017) showed that it is a good approximation of tax rates in the U.S.
and estimated  = 0.18.
       Equipped with Lemma 1, we can now examine the economic implications of various policy reforms.
Before that, however, it is useful to observe a few potential concerns. First, one might be concerned about
extrapolating measures estimated on the set of households who won the lottery to the general population.
Table 2.1 suggests that the winners in our data are broadly comparable to the general population, at least
in terms of observable characteristics. As always, we cannot rule out differences between lottery winners
and the general population in terms of characteristics that we do not observe. However, evidence from
national surveys (e.g., National Opinion Research Center Survey on Gambling and the Gallup Poll) and past
academic work (e.g., Kearney, 2005) find that a little over half of the U.S. population reports participating
in lotteries each year. Second, in the case of a two-adult household, the theoretical MPE is a measure of how
household earnings respond to changes in household wealth. This raises a possible concern that households
respond to lottery winnings as if the change in wealth were exclusive to the winner rather than shared across
household members. If this is the case, it may imply that households respond differentially depending on the
identity of the winner. Empirically, we explore this concern in Section 6.4 and find that winner identity does
not affect household responses. There are two possible explanations for this finding. The first explanation
is legal in nature: in the U.S., lottery winnings are legally treated as shared household wealth in two-adult
households. The second explanation is about the type of model that governs household behavior. Even if
lottery wealth were not split equally among household members, a unitary household model would predict
that labor supply only depends on the total amount of resources at the household's disposal.


5.3       Universal Basic Income
UBI has received a great deal of public interest in recent years (see, e.g., Kearney and Mogstad (2019) and
Hoynes and Rothstein (2019) for an overview). Both policymakers and researchers have advocated for an
unconditional, tax-exempt cash transfer. In this section we consider the implications of the introduction of a
UBI program on tax rates and earnings.
       We model a UBI as a uniform, annual lump-sum transfer of size B to every household. Since there are
few concrete proposals for how a UBI program should be funded, we chose the simplest financing scheme
and assume that it is funded with a proportional surcharge  (B ) on labor earnings. The tax revenues are

                                                                           
                                        R(B ) = E [-B +  (B )yi (B ) + T (yi (B ))] ,                               (5.10)

where  (B ) is set such that R(B ) = R(0), i.e., revenue neutral.
  22
       See also Saez (2001) for a simple graphical proof of this fact.



                                                                   33
                                                                                                      x(B )-x(0)
    Consider the marginal impact of introducing a UBI program in our model. Let B x  limB 0                B
be the marginal impact of UBI on any variable x that is differentiable in B. Differentiating equation (5.10),
we find that the marginal impact on tax revenues is

                                                           
                                  B R = -1 + Y B  + B ET (yi (B )) .                                     (5.11)

The first two terms on the right side of expression (5.11) capture mechanical effects, i.e., the effects on tax
revenues if household earnings were unchanged by the perturbation. There are two types of mechanical
effects. The first type of mechanical effect comes from the transfer itself. Each dollar of UBI decreases
tax revenues by 1 dollar, which is captured by the -1 term on the right side of equation (5.11). The second
type of mechanical effect emerges from the need to increase tax rates to finance the UBI, and is captured by
                                                          (B )), is the behavioral effect, i.e., the change in
Y B  . The last term on the right side of (5.11), B ET (yi
tax revenues due to households' earnings responses to the introduction of the UBI.
                                                                                             (B )) as a
    In a similar fashion to our derivation of the MPT(y ) in Lemma 1, we can express B ET (yi
function of income and substitution effects, extensive-margin responses, and B . Since the UBI is revenue
neutral, we must have B R = 0, which then allows us to find B  from setting the right side of (5.11) to
zero. Revenue neutrality also allows us to determine the total earnings response, B Y. We assume that T (·)
is to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve so that a small increase in marginal tax rates  increases tax
revenues.

Proposition 1. The marginal impact of the UBI is

                                 i        
                                         yi     iu
           
    B ET (yi (B )) = Ei               -               B  -           [T (y ) - T (0)]B (y )dH (y ),      (5.12)
                              1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic
                        1 - E i 1+i  c + [T (y ) - T (0)]B (y )dH (y )
                                   i
                                       i
                B  =                               y    u
                                                                            ,                            (5.13)
                                                  i i
                                           Y - E 1-     i
                                                    i 1+i  ci

                          i        
                                  yi     iu
               B Y = E         -               B  -                 yB (y )dH (y ).                      (5.14)
                       1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic

Moreover, if T (·) is to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve, then B (y )  L (y ) for all y, and B   0.

Proof. See Appendix H.3.
                               (B )) is closely related to the expression for the MPT(y ) in Lemma 1,
    The expression for B ET (yi
with two exceptions. First, there is an additional term that is proportional to iu B , which captures the
intensive-margin response of earnings to higher tax rates. Second, the extensive-margin response depends
on the parameter B (y ), which is the marginal propensity to stop working in response to the UBI. This
propensity is not the same as the marginal propensity to stop working following an increase in wealth,
L (y ), since B (y ) captures extensive-margin responses to both higher unearned income and higher tax
rates. However, since higher marginal tax rates lower the benefits of working relative to not working, we
must have B (y )  L (y ).



                                                       34
       The expression for B Y describes the response of earnings to the introduction of the UBI. There is a
common view that the effect of the UBI on earnings is summarized by the compensated elasticity of labor
supply.23 Lemma 1 shows that this view is correct only if one abstracts from extensive-margin responses
(set B (y ) = 0 for all y ), heterogeneity (y ,  ,  u and  c are all independent of i), and pre-existing taxes
(i = i = 0 for all i). Under such assumptions, if we substitute expression (5.13) into (5.14), we indeed
obtain that B Y =  -  u = - c . However, if any of these simplifying assumptions do not hold, there is
no simple link between the earnings response B Y and any single notion of elasticity.
       The responses characterized in Proposition 1 depend on parameters {B (y )}y and {iu }i which cannot
be estimated using the variation in unearned income that we used in the empirical part of our paper. How-
ever, we can use Proposition 1 to establish bounds on earnings and tax responses. There is considerable
disagreement in the literature about the values of uncompensated elasticities, but the prevailing consensus
seems to be that the uncompensated elasticity is positive. For example, Saez (2001), in his analysis of the
optimal tax system, considers [0, 0.5] to be a plausible range for iu . If we only assume that the uncom-
pensated elasticity is non-negative, we can calculate bounds on tax rate and earnings responses as simple
functions of the MPT and MPE.

Corollary 1. Suppose iu  0 for all i. Then

                                                                             1 - MPT
                                           B Y  MPE,               B                 .
                                                                                Y

Proof. See Appendix H.4.

       The formulas derived in Corollary 1 provide simple expressions that relate the estimated quantities from
Section 4 to the impact of the introduction of UBI on tax rates and earnings. These bounds are obtained
by abstracting from any potential disincentives for earnings from higher marginal tax rates themselves, and
purely focus on the contribution of transfers. Not surprisingly, each dollar of transfers reduces average
household earnings, B Y , by the MPE. The expression for B  captures both mechanical and behavioral
effects. Each dollar of UBI would require an increase in marginal tax rates of 1/Y percentage points, which
is the mechanical effect. In response, households reduce their earnings and therefore tax revenues for the
government. This is the behavioral effect, and Corollary 1 shows that it is equal to -MPT/Y .
       We can use the estimates from Table 4.1 to evaluate these expressions. As shown in Table 4.1, the
average MPE is slightly less than -0.5, while the MPT is slightly less than -0.1. Thus, each dollar of UBI
will reduce earnings by slightly over 50 cents, and require an increase in tax rates that is roughly 10 percent
higher than what would have been in the absence of any behavioral earnings responses. Average household
earnings are roughly $50,000. Thus, a UBI of $12,000 a year24 would reduce average household earnings
  23
      For example, Keane (2011) in his widely-cited survey says (p. 969) "To a first order approximation (ignoring heterogeneity in
wages/earnings in the population) the Hicks elasticity is the correct concept to use in evaluating the labor supply effects of such a
policy change [i.e. a UBI financed by a flat rate tax on earnings]."
   24
      The number $12,000 is a popular suggested amount of UBI (see, e.g., Stern, 2016, Lowrey, 2018, and Yang, 2018). If anything,
our calculation understates the impact of such proposals since some of them suggest a transfer of this amount to each adult, rather
than each household. Also, for comparison, the average annuitized lottery win in our data is $7,500 per adult.




                                                                35
by more than $6,000, and require an earnings surcharge of approximately 27 percent on all households, out
of which 2.5 percentage points is due to the behavioral response.
       We can further build on Proposition 1 to study how various assumptions about the strength of the disin-
centive effect from higher marginal tax rates affect tax rates and earnings responses. To this end, we assume
that there is no heterogeneity in elasticities, iu =  u for all i, and simply use the expressions in Proposition
1 together with B (y )  L (y ) to establish bounds on B  and B Y for an arbitrary value of  u . While it is
not necessary for the analysis, we derive this bound under the assumption of log-linear taxation, consistent
with Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2017). This implies that i =  for all i, which both simplifies
the expressions and is consistent with empirical studies of U.S. tax rates.

Corollary 2. Suppose iu =  u and i =  for all i. Then

                                                   1 - MPT
                              B              u
                                                                           ,
                                      Y -   1+ u      T (y )D(y )dH (y )
                                                                     u
                                                                   1+ u        D(y )dH (y )
                              B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                  u
                                                                                                    ,
                                                             Y -   1+ u        T (y )D(y )dH (y )

                      y
where D(y )        1-T (y )   + y MPEint (y ).

Proof. See Appendix H.5.

       The new terms that appear in the expressions derived in Corollary 2 are proportional to the uncom-
pensated elasticity  u . This is not surprising, since this elasticity governs the response of earnings to the
surcharge B  . Corollary 2 shows that income effects, proportional to MPEint (y ), also interact with the
uncompensated elasticity. To understand why, recall that the earnings response to changes in tax rates is
                    u
proportional to    1+ c ,   and the gap between compensated and uncompensated elasticities,  c -  u , is pinned
down by the intensive-margin income effect due to Slutsky equation (5.4), which depends on MPEint (y ).
Using Table 3.3, we see that the intensive-margin earnings response accounts for about 60% of the total
MPE(y ) except for lower-income (first quartile) households.
       In Figure 5.1 we plot the bounds derived in Corollary 2 for various values  u .25 Not surprisingly, higher
uncompensated elasticities imply a larger reduction in earnings and therefore a larger increase in tax rates.
Our estimated income effects increase taxes by 0.2 percentage points and reduce earnings by around 500
dollars per 1,000 dollars of UBI payments relative to the case of no income effect, consistent with our
discussion following Corollary 1. Beyond a value of approximately 0.3 for the uncompensated elasticity,
the upper bound on the earnings response B Y is smaller than -1, which implies that the UBI crowds out
earnings by more than one-for-one.

  25
     Since  u and  c are linked through the income effect, one can also do an alternative thought experiment by obtaining bounds
for a given compensated elasticity  c . We report these expressions in Appendix H.6 and plot bounds in Appendix Figure B.10.




                                                              36
                           (a) Marginal tax rates                                              (b) Total labor earnings

     Figure 5.1: The effect of an unconditional cash transfer on marginal tax rates and total labor earnings
Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our analysis of the effects of introducing a UBI program on a) marginal tax rates and b) total labor
earnings. In both figures, the x-axis corresponds to a value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity,  u . In a), the dependent variable is a
measure of the change in marginal tax rates due to the introduction of a marginal UBI, scaled by $1,000. In b), the dependent variable is the change
in total labor earnings due to the introduction of a marginal UBI. The darker line in both figures corresponds to the value of the dependent variable
recovered using our estimated earnings responses for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity. The lighter line in both figures
corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity assuming no income
effects.



5.4     Top income tax rates
We now consider effects of increasing the top marginal tax rate. In order to study top marginal tax rates, we
                                                                                                                                        yi
assume that T (y ) converges to some level                                        ¯. Let a  Ey
                                           ¯ for all incomes above some threshold y          ¯                                           y
                                                                                                                                         ¯   be the
average earnings of households in the top bracket, normalized by y
                                                                 ¯.
      We define  x to be the marginal impact on variable x from an increase in the top rate ¯, similarly to
our earlier definitions of L and B . The impact on tax revenues is given by

                                                                              
                                       R = (1 - H (¯      ¯ (yi - y
                                                   y )) [Ey              ¯T (yi )] .
                                                                  ¯) +  Ey                                                                   (5.15)

                                                     
                               ¯ (yi - y
The terms in square brackets, Ey                ¯T (yi ), correspond to mechanical and behavioral
                                       ¯) and  Ey
effects, respectively. Following the same steps as in the proof of Proposition 1, we can establish Proposition
2.

Proposition 2. The marginal impact of higher top marginal tax rates on tax revenues is
                                                                                    
                                                              yi                                                    dH (y )
                    ¯T (yi ) = Ey
                   Ey           ¯   ¯i -
                                  ¯ y                             u -                  [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )                ,               (5.16)
                                                             1-  ¯ i            y
                                                                                ¯                                  1 - H (¯
                                                                                                                          y)

where  (y )  0 is the marginal propensity to stop working in response to an increase in the top rate ¯.

Proof. See Appendix H.7.

      The two terms on the right side of Proposition 2 capture the reduction in taxes due to adjustments in

                                                                        37
earnings along the intensive and extensive margins. To understand why the intensive-margin response takes
this form, it is useful to review the intuition presented in Saez (2001). One can show (see, for example,
Figure 1 in Saez, 2001) that from the point of view of a household with earnings y  y
                                                                                    ¯, a 1 percentage point
increase in the marginal tax rate on earnings above threshold y
                                                              ¯ is equivalent to a 1 percentage point increase
in marginal tax rates on all earnings together with an increase in unearned, or virtual, income of 0.01   ×y ¯
dollars. Parameters iu and i govern the intensive-margin earnings responses to each of these changes.
   While we cannot recover  (y ) from variation in unearned income, we know the sign of this parameter
which allows us to establish bounds on revenue and earnings responses, similarly to those in Corollaries 1
and 2.
                       int         int
Corollary 3. Let MPE          Ey
                               ¯MPE (y ).
                                     y
   (a) If iu  0 for all i who earn yi ¯, then

                                                                 int
                                      Y  (1 - H (¯    ¯ × MPE ,
                                                 y )) y                                                (5.17)
                                                                                  int
                                      R  (1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                                 y )) y     ¯ × MPE                     .              (5.18)

   (b) If iu = ¯u for all i who earn y   y
                                         ¯, then
                                      i


                                                      int
                                                                  ¯u
                                                                  
                              Y  (1 - H (¯
                                         y )) y
                                              ¯ MPE         -a         ,                               (5.19)
                                                                 1-  ¯
                                                                       int
                                                                                   ¯u
                                                                                   
                          R  (1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                     y )) y     ¯ MPE                        -a             .          (5.20)
                                                                                  1-  ¯

Proof. See Appendix H.8.

   Corollary 3 establishes upper bounds on revenue and total earnings responses from a marginal increase
in the top tax rate. The inequalities in Corollary 3 become equalities if an increase in the top marginal
rates leads to no extensive-margin response. All the expressions are per 100 percentage points tax increase.
To understand these expressions and get an idea about their quantitative magnitude, consider expression
(5.17). Each additional percentage point in top marginal tax rates raises the virtual income of households
in the top bracket, conditional on them continuing to work, by 0.01 × y
                                                                      ¯. Since they continue to work, their
                                                                              int
average response to this increase in virtual income is governed by MPE . We saw in Table 4.1 that for the
households in the highest bracket, the total MPE is -0.67, with the intensive-margin response accounting for
                                                      int
about 60 percent as shown in Table 3.3. Thus MPE             -0.4. This implies that if the top marginal tax
rates are increased for households earning over $500K (which is approximately the top 1% of households),
their virtual income will increase by $5,000 for each percentage point of rate increase, and earnings would
fall by at least $2,000 per household. This implies that average household earnings  Y would reduce by
approximately (1 - H (¯
                      y )) × $2, 000 = $20, or approximately 0.04 percent.
   Similarly, expression (5.18) captures the effect on tax revenues of the increase in virtual income implied
                                                                             ¯ (a - 1), while the behavioral
by the tax reform. The mechanical effect of this increase is proportional to y
                               int
effect is given by y
                   ¯ ¯ × MPE . In the data, a is approximately 3 and the top marginal tax rates are approxi-


                                                      38
mately 0.5.26 This implies that the behavioral effect from higher virtual income is roughly 10 percent of the
mechanical effect, and a 1 percentage point increase in top rates increases tax revenues by approximately
$9,000 from each household in the top 1 percent, or by about $90 dollars per household. Since average
tax revenues per household are approximately $13,000 in our data, the upper bound on the increase in tax
revenues is roughly 0.6 percent for each percentage point of increase in the top rates.
        All of the calculations above only include effects from the change in virtual income, and abstract away
from any disincentive effects from higher tax rates themselves. Part (b) of Corollary 2 shows how these
disincentive effects can be incorporated into the analysis. In Figure 5.2, we use these formulas to plot
 Y and  R, where everything is normalized per 1 percentage point increase in top marginal tax rates.27
To highlight the contribution of the income effect, we also plot the earnings and revenue responses if we
            int
set MPE           = 0. If the uncompensated elasticity takes values in the [0, 0.5] interval, a 1 percentage point
increase in top tax rates increases revenues between 0.1 and 0.6 percent, and reduces earnings between 0.04
and 0.34 percent, with income effects contributing about 0.1 and 0.04 percentage points to these responses,
respectively.




                    (a) % change in total earnings (Y )                                      (b) % change in revenues (R)

        Figure 5.2: The effect of a 1 pp increase in the top tax rate on total labor earnings and tax revenues
Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our analysis of the effects of an increase in top marginal tax rates on a) total labor earnings and b)
total revenues. In both figures, the x-axis corresponds to a value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity,  u . In a), the dependent variable is a
measure of the percentage change in total labor earnings due to an increase in top marginal tax rates. In b), the dependent variable is the percentage
change in total revenues due to an increase in top marginal tax rates. In both figures, we scale the dependent variable by 0.01, and so the units are
the percentage change due to a 1 percentage point increase in the top marginal tax rate. The darker line in both figures corresponds to the value of
the dependent variable recovered using our estimated earnings responses for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity. The lighter
line in both figures corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity
assuming no income effects.


        Finally, we note that there is a close connection between the formula derived in expression (5.20) and
popular formulas for the optimal top marginal tax rates (see, e.g., Saez, 2001 and Diamond and Saez, 2011).
If the social planner puts no weight on the utility of households at top of the income distribution, a common
   26
    In 2016 tax returns, a is 2.92 and ¯ = 39.6% (federal) + 11.3% (state, California).
   27
    As in the UBI application, we also obtain bounds for a given compensated elasticity  c . We report these expressions in Ap-
pendix H.9 and plot bounds in Appendix Figure B.11.


                                                                          39
assumption in the literature, then the optimal top marginal tax rate is the one that maximizes tax revenues,
i.e., sets  R = 0. Furthermore, if the increase in the top marginal tax rates has no extensive-margin effects,
then the optimal top tax rate, ¯ , satisfies

                                                                         int
                                                                                      ¯u
                                                                                      
                                            a¯ - 1 + ¯ MPE¯ - a¯
                                                                                       ¯
                                                                                       
                                                                                                   = 0,                                      (5.21)
                                                                                     1-  ¯

where we use subscripts ¯ to emphasize that all of the parameters should be measured under optimal tax
rate ¯ rather than the current tax rate ¯ that we used in expression (5.20). The optimal tax rate used in
Diamond and Saez (2011) is the solution to equation (5.21).
     To make this formula operational one needs to assume how various economic parameters vary with ¯.
In applications, authors typically use estimates of parameters obtained under the current system directly in
the optimal tax formula, implicitly assuming the these parameters are policy invariant.28 To illustrate the
                                                                                                                                           int
implications of equation (5.21) under this policy-invariance assumption, we assume that a¯ , MPE ¯ , and
¯u all take the same values as we estimate under the current system, and compute 
                                                                                 ¯ which solves equation
 ¯
(5.21). We plot optimal values of ¯ obtained using this approach in Figure 5.3, where we also compare
                                                       int
                                           29 One insight from Figure 5.3 is that the importance of
how the results change if we set MPE¯ = 0.
income effects in the top marginal tax rate formula depends on the value of the uncompensated elasticity. If
that elasticity is zero, the mechanical effect from raising tax rates always exceeds the behavioral effect, and
thus the revenue-maximizing top marginal tax rate is 100 percent. For higher values of the uncompensated
elasticity of earnings, the importance of income effects increases, lowering optimal top tax rates.




                  Figure 5.3: Revenue-maximizing top tax rates (with and without income effects)
Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our application of the optimal tax formula of Diamond and Saez (2011), taking expression (5.20)
and assuming policy invariance to recover revenue-maximizing tax rates using equation (5.21). In the figure, the x-axis corresponds to a value of
the uncompensated labor supply elasticity,   ¯u  . The darker line corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered using our estimated
                                              ¯
earnings responses for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity. The lighter line corresponds to the value of the dependent variable
recovered for a given value of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity assuming no income effects.
  28
     Strictly speaking, it is impossible for  u ,  , and  c to all be independent of ¯ as a quick glance at the Slutsky equation (5.4)
confirms.
  29
     We produce a version of this figure for a given compensated elasticity  c in Appendix Figure B.12.



                                                                         40
6      Other empirical insights from lottery winnings
So far, the analysis has been centered around the earnings responses to exogenous changes in household
wealth and unearned income. We now broaden the analysis to address a number of other key economic
questions: To what extent does low wealth prevent households from moving to better neighborhoods? Are
certain types of households more likely to move than others, and what type of neighborhood do they move
to? Does a rise in unearned income make individuals more likely to choose jobs with lower wages in ex-
change for more favorable non-wage attributes? Are wealth effects important for retirement decisions and
the design of public pension systems? Does a lack of wealth constitute an important barrier to entrepreneur-
ship? How does an increase in household wealth affect the incentives to marry or divorce? What can we
learn about models of household behavior from a comparison of earnings responses of the winner and her
spouse?
      Below, we investigate these questions. In cases where the literature emphasizes the role of fixed costs
of adjustment or financial constraints, we present estimates of wealth effects in the main text, and report
estimated effects of unearned income in the appendix. Conversely, in cases where existing work primar-
ily focuses on exogenous changes in unearned income, we present estimated effects of unearned income
in the main text, and relegate estimates of wealth effects to the appendix. In both cases, we also report
the counterfactual mean of the outcome of interest (i.e., the average outcome if counterfactually not win-
ning the lottery) and the percentage change in the outcome implied by the size of the effect relative to the
counterfactual outcome mean.


6.1     Geographic mobility
In this section, we study the effects of changes in wealth on geographic mobility and neighborhood choice. A
large body of evidence has documented substantial and persistent geographic disparities in living standards,
local labor market outcomes, and intergenerational mobility.30 These descriptive findings raise the question
of why more households do not move in order to improve the local area that they and their families are
exposed to. This pattern of immobility even arises when relatively short-distance moves would result in
greater access to opportunity (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020).
      Existing work in this literature has considered three distinct forces which may play a role in the apparent
lack of moving to higher-quality neighborhoods. First, there may be preference-based explanations for the
pattern of geographic sorting. For example, the presence of natural amenities (such as proximity to oceans,
hills, and lakes) or lower costs of living may compensate residents in locations of lower quality in other
dimensions. Second, households that are willing and able to move to a better neighborhood may not due
to lack of information on the attributes of other neighborhoods, or on the potential benefits of moving to
higher-quality locations (Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz and Palmer, 2020; Bergman, Chan and
Kapor, 2020). Lastly, households may wish to move to higher-quality neighborhoods, but face financial
or non-financial frictions preventing them from doing so. For example, past work on internal migration in
  30
     See for example Wilson (1987), Rosenbaum (1995), Ludwig, Liebman, Kling, Duncan, Katz, Kessler and Sanbonmatsu (2008);
Ludwig, Duncan, Gennetian, Katz, Kessler, Kling and Sanbonmatsu (2013), Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016a), De La Roca and
Puga (2016), Chetty and Hendren (2018), Chyn (2018) and Aliprantis and Richter (2020).


                                                            41
the U.S. argues that moving costs must be on the order of hundreds of thousands of dollars for the average
household in order to rationalize the persistent differences in wages across places (Davies, Greenwood and
Li, 2001; Kennan and Walker, 2011; Bayer and Juessen, 2012).
     Our data has two advantages that allow us to contribute to this literature. First, we have a long and large
panel data set of households. This enables us to study who moves and where, including features of both
the origin and destination of the moves. Second, the lottery winnings allow us to infer how a change in
wealth, in and of itself, affects geographic mobility. This variation allows us to isolate the effects of changes
in wealth, holding fixed other determinants of mobility such as prices, preferences, information sets, and
local economic conditions. In contrast to place-based policies and mobility vouchers, the variation in wealth
induced by lottery winnings is specific to a household and not tied to geographic relocation.

Effect of wealth on geographic mobility.                       To measure geographic mobility, we use year-to-year changes
in a household's Census tract. Our outcome of interest is a binary indicator equal to 1 if the household's
Census tract in year t is different from that in year t - 1, and 0 otherwise. We study the effects of winning
the lottery on geographic mobility by estimating regression model (3.4). The estimated coefficients of this
regression are summarized in Figure 6.1. We find no evidence of differential trends in geographic mobility
between current and later winners in years prior to winning. Winning the lottery leads to an immediate and
sharp increase in the annual moving rate of approximately 3.5 percentage points (approximately 25 percent).
As of the second year post-win, however, the effect of winning on annual moving rates largely dissipates,
although annual moving rates of lottery winners remain elevated relative to those who have not yet won the
lottery. Taken together, this temporal pattern suggests that winning the lottery induces households to move
once shortly after winning.


                                              Figure 6.1: Effect of winning on moving




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on the propensity to move across Census tracts, based on estimating a version of
equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1). The outcome is a binary indicator equal to 1 if the household has moved from their Census tract in that
year (i.e., that the current Census tract is different from that in the prior year), and 0 otherwise. We then take cohort-size-weighted averages of w,
for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time. In
addition to the cohort-size-weighted average effect in levels (left-hand axis), we also reports the average effect scaled by the mean of the outcome
in omitted event time (right-hand axis) which can be interpreted as an average percentage change (relative to the baseline pre-win period) in the
outcome.



                                                                         42
     To study the importance of wealth for geographic mobility, we turn to estimating the IV model that we
describe in Section 3.3. The resulting IV estimates are reported in Figure 6.2, where we scale responses
per 100,000 dollars of additional wealth. The estimated effects mirror the temporal pattern discussed above:
moving responses predominantly occur immediately after winning. Focusing on the first year post-win,
we find that the propensity to move increases by approximately 2 percentage points for an extra 100,000
dollars in wealth. However, this average wealth effect masks a striking difference between households
across the income distribution. Lower-income households are much more likely to move: the increase in the
probability of moving for winners in the lowest quartile is around five times as large as that of the winners
in the highest quartile for an extra 100,000 dollars in wealth.


                                       Figure 6.2: Effect of wealth on geographic mobility




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on the propensity to move Census tract. The estimates are
calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3 for the binary outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of
 w, for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates for all post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ("Avg (+1 to +5)"), a shorter-run set
of post-win event times {1} ("Short Run (+1)"), and a longer-run set of post-win event times {2, 3, 4, 5} ("Long Run (+2 to +5)"). In addition,
for each temporal average, we report wealth effects for the full analysis sample ("Full Sample") as well as for the subsample of winners falling in
the first ("Quartile 1") and fourth ("Quartile 4") quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. To ease interpretability, we
scale moving responses by $100,000.


     Next, we explore the spatial dimension of the induced moves. We use the fact that Census tracts are
nested within Census counties, and Census counties are nested within U.S. state boundaries. We use these
three levels of geography to summarize the distance of a typical move. Let d  {1, 2, 3} denote three
mutually exclusive and exhaustive types of moves, with d = 1 corresponding to a move across tracts but
within county, d = 2 corresponding to a move across counties but within state, and d = 3 corresponding to
a move across states. Let Mi,t be a binary indicator equal to 1 if the household's Census tract in year t is
                                                                      d denote an indicator corresponding
different from that in year t - 1, and 0 otherwise. Furthermore, let Mi,t




                                                                          43
to a move of type d. By definition, we can decompose the total probability of moving as follows:

                                                      1                                     2                                    3
             P [Mi,t = 1]               =          P Mi,t =1                  +          P Mi,t =1                 +          P Mi,t =1
           total prob. of moving
                                                    prob. of moving                       prob. of moving                      prob. of moving

                                              across tract & within county         across county & within state                  across states


It is straightforward to show that the total effect of winning on geographic mobility can be decomposed into
the effect on each of the move types.31
        In Figure 6.3 we focus on the first year post-win and quantify the contribution of each type of move d on
the total effect of winning on geographic mobility. On average and across the income distribution, we find
that more than 80 percent of moves are within state, and the majority of moves occur across quite nearby
locations, i.e., across tracts within the same county.


                          Figure 6.3: Decomposition of the moving response by geographic unit




Notes: This figure presents a decomposition of the impact of winning on the propensity to move Census tracts in terms of the distance moved.
Given that Census tracts are nested within Census counties, and Census counties are nested within U.S. states, we decompose overall Census tract
moving into a) moves across Census tract but within Census county, b) moves across Census county but within state, and c) moves across state. For
each, we define a corresponding binary outcome and estimate a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1), focusing on effects in the
first year post-win. We then divide each estimate by the total effect on across-tract moving, as reported in Figure 6.1, to arrive at the share of the
total moving effect. We report this decomposition separately for the full analysis sample ("Full Sample") as well as for the subsample of winners
falling in the first ("Quartile 1") and fourth ("Quartile 4") quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. Next to each share,
we also summarize the statistical significance of the underlying estimate, with           for significance at the 99% level,    for significance at the 95%
level, and for significance at the 90% level.


        Taken together, the above results suggest that winning the lottery leads to a sizable, swift, and non-
recurring moving response, especially among lower-income households. Among these moves, the vast
majority takes place across locations close to the winner's current home. This observation guides the sub-
sequent analysis in two ways. First, it motivates our choice of Census tract as the main geographic unit of
interest when defining the relevant characteristics of a local area. Second, it sharpens our focus on the first
   31
        See Appendix F for a formal discussion of this decomposition.


                                                                           44
year following the lottery win, corresponding to the period in which households predominantly respond to
the change in wealth.

Who moves?         Are certain types of households more likely to move than others in response to a wealth
shock? Motivated by empirical evidence that suggests a relationship between certain demographic charac-
teristics and moving costs and attitudes (see, e.g., Ko¸
                                                       sar, Ransom and van der Klaauw, 2021), we estimate
the IV model introduced in Section 3.3 separately by demographic groups.
    Figure 6.4a presents the IV estimates that correspond to the first year post-win. As discussed above, we
find that lower-income households are about five times more likely to move than higher-income households
in response to an unexpected change in wealth. Closely related, households without a strong attachment to
the work force are also significantly more likely to move.
    Motivated by the literature on the impact of neighborhoods on long-term economic outcomes of young
children (Chetty, Hendren and Katz, 2016b; Chetty and Hendren, 2018), we also explore whether the pres-
ence of young children leads to differential moving responses. Figure 6.4a shows that additional wealth
makes parents with young children slightly more likely to move compared to other parents, but the differ-
ence is not significant at conventional levels.
    Past work has found that young households are more mobile, suggestive of moving costs that increase
with age (Molloy, Smith and Wozniak, 2011; Ko¸
                                             sar, Ransom and van der Klaauw, 2021). When we compare
young and old winners, we find that young winners tend to be slightly more responsive, but the difference
is not statistically significant. Lastly, we find that renters are more than 3 times more likely to move their
location in response to an additional dollar of wealth, in line with evidence that suggests that moving costs
are considerably higher for homeowners (Oswald, 2019).

Where do they move?               Are households moving to places with higher quality than their previous locations?
How do local labor market attributes of the destination compare to their origin location? We conduct a
decomposition of the moving response using origin and destination characteristics to shed light on these
questions.
    Let Ci,t denote a continuous-valued attribute of household i's tract in t. As a convention, we will refer to
moves to tracts with lower C as downward moves, and moves to tracts with the same or higher C as upward
moves. By definition, we can decompose the total probability of moving as follows:

        P [Mi,t = 1]          =     P [Mi,t = 1  Ci,t  Ci,t-1 ]         +   P [Mi,t = 1  Ci,t < Ci,t-1 ] .     (6.1)
      total prob. of moving               prob. of moving upward                 prob. of moving downward


For each characteristic C , we estimate the IV model introduced in Section 3.3 for each component in ex-
pression (6.1), allowing us to quantify the contribution of each to the total moving effect and thereby address
whether the overall moving response is driven by moves upward versus moves downward.
    In Figure 6.4b we report the results of this decomposition for various attributes of local labor markets.
Overall, we find some evidence that households are moving increasingly to less densely-populated areas,
and local labor markets that are characterized by a longer typical commute from home to work and fewer


                                                                   45
jobs. For instance, close to 65% of the increase in moving propensity is due to moves to locations with a
longer typical commute to work, whereas more than 60% is due to moves to less densely-populated areas.
Overall, this pattern is suggestive of households moving towards less urban areas.




                    (a) Winner Characteristics                                    (b) Destination Characteristics: Local Labor Market




    (c) Destination Characteristics: Neighborhood Quality                       (d) Neighborhood Quality for Winners with Young Kids

                          Figure 6.4: Decomposition of the moving response by characteristics
Notes: Subfigure (a) presents an analysis of heterogeneity in the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on moving by characteristics of the
winner. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, separately for each demographic group.
The dependent variable is a binary indicator for moving Census tract. We then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for event time = 1.
To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $100,000. Subfigures (b) and (c) show a decomposition of the overall effect of winning on
moving by characteristics of the destination. These estimates are calculated by estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1),
focusing on effects in the first year post-win. The dependent variables are binary indicators for moving Census tract and moving upwards and
moving downwards along a given measure of local labor market attribute or neighborhood quality. The resulting estimates are then scaled by the
total moving response. Subfigure (d) shows a comparison between winners with and without young kids in terms of the share of the total moving
response that is due to a move upward.


     In Figure 6.4c we explore whether the overall moving response is driven by a reallocation to to neigh-
borhoods that are typically-measured as having higher quality. We judge the quality of neighborhoods
based on measures used explicitly in past work, such as the Opportunity Atlas (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren,
Jones and Porter, 2020), Childhood Opportunity Index (Noelke, McArdle, Baek, Huntington, Huber, Hardy


                                                                        46
and Acevedo-Garcia, 2020; Aliprantis and Martin, 2020), Area Deprivation Index (Kind and Buckingham,
2018), poverty rate (Wilson, 1987), and college attainment (Couture, Gaubert, Handbury and Hurst, 2019)
among others. Overall, we do not find strong evidence that the overall moving response is driven by moves
to higher-quality neighborhoods. In Figure 6.4d, we shift attention to parents with young kids which is a
group of particular interest given past research on the impact of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobil-
ity. We find that, if anything, they are even less likely to move to a higher-quality neighborhood than the
other winners without young kids. Taken together, the evidence on geographic mobility of lottery winners
suggests that pure unconditional cash transfers do not lead households to systematically move to locations
of higher quality, consistent with the argument in Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz and Palmer
(2020) on the importance of non-financial barriers to moving to better neighborhoods.


6.2     Labor market dynamics
In this section, we study the effects of changes in wealth or unearned income on dynamics in the labor
market. We begin by estimating retirement responses, and then turn to studying the effects on the propensity
to start a business and job mobility.

Take-up of retirement benefits and labor market exit.          Assuming leisure is a normal good, economic
theory predicts that an unanticipated increase in wealth or unearned income leads to a reduction in lifetime
labor supply and accelerates retirement. Understanding the magnitude of this effect is key to assess the
effects of public policy, such as reforms of the tax and public pension system. Existing work in this area
has studied the wealth effect on retirement by focusing on changes in wealth stemming from inheritances
(Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen, 1993; Brown, Coile and Weisbenner, 2010), stock market performance
(Hurd, Reti and Rohwedder, 2009; Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai, 2010), and house prices (Disney
and Gathergood, 2018; Begley and Chan, 2018).
      This literature faces two main challenges. The first challenge is that it may be difficult to empirically
isolate variation in wealth that is unanticipated. Isolating unanticipated changes in wealth is important
because individuals adjust their behavior prior to an expected change in wealth. Ignoring this behavioral
response and treating all wealth changes as unexpected will tend to understate the true effect of wealth on
retirement behavior. The second challenge is the endogeneity problem arising from the contemporaneous
correlation between asset prices and labor market conditions. We address both challenges by studying
retirement responses to lottery winnings, which are an idiosyncratic change to wealth that is difficult to
anticipate and plausibly exogenous.
      In our analysis we focus on winners aged 62 - 64 and follow two distinct approaches to define entry into
retirement. The first approach is centered around the receipt of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI)
benefits, commonly known as Social Security retirement benefits. Depending on year of birth, Americans
are eligible for full retirement benefits as early as age 65 or as late as age 67. However, early retirement
is common among Americans even though actuarial calculations suggest that there are strong financial
disincentives to drawing benefits before the full retirement age. One possible explanation for this behavior
is liquidity constraints: individuals may decide to claim benefits before the full retirement age due to a lack


                                                       47
of alternative funds to finance early retirement. Winning the lottery eases these financial constraints, so
the effect of winning on receiving benefits is ambiguous. For this reason, our second approach to defining
entry into retirement is based on the level of earnings rather than the receipt of benefits. Specifically, we use
consecutive years with zero total labor earnings as a proxy for an exit from the labor force in our analysis of
retirement responses to lottery winnings.
       In Appendix Figure B.7a and B.7b we plot the estimated coefficients from regression (3.4), where the
dependent variables are binary indicators for the receipt of OASI benefits and labor force exit respectively.32
There is no evidence of differential trends in these outcomes between current and later winners aged 62
- 64 in pre-win event times.33 We find a small positive effect of winning the lottery on the propensity to
receive OASI benefits in the first year post-win, but this effect does not persist over time. In contrast, we
find significant positive effects on the propensity to exit the labor force, and these effects increase over time.
       To quantify the effects of additional wealth on retirement behavior, we estimate the IV model from
Section 3.3. Table 6.1 reports the resulting IV estimates which inform us about the propensity to retire in
response to an extra 100,000 dollars in wealth.34 We find a small positive, but statistically insignificant,
effect of additional wealth on the propensity to claim OASI benefits. For an extra 100,000 dollars in wealth,
the propensity to claim OASI benefits increases by around 1.1 percentage points on average. In contrast,
the propensity to leave the labor force for at least one, two or five consecutive years increases by around
5 percentage points per $100,000 of additional wealth on average. These average effects correspond to an
11-14 percent increase in the propensity to leave the labor force, similar to the wealth effects reported in
Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1993) and Brown, Coile and Weisbenner (2010).
  32
      Results that do not condition on no receipt of Social Security retirement benefits pre-win are very similar as Social Security
retirement benefit receipt in this older population is essentially always an absorbing state.
   33
      Our design, which uses later winners as a control group, necessarily means that holding aged fixed, earlier winners can leave
the sample through mortality whereas later winners cannot until they win. For older winners, where this might be meaningful, we
restrict the sample to the living and include individual fixed effects to account for compositional differences.
   34
      Effects of unearned income on retirement behavior are reported in Appendix Table A.4.




                                                                48
                 Table 6.1: Effects of wealth on take-up of retirement benefits and labor market exit

                                                                                                   Quartile 1                  Quartile 4
                                                                           Full Sample
             Outcome                                Value                                       Pre-Win Income              Pre-Win Income
                                                                                  (1)                 (2)                         (3)
                                                                                        Take-Up of Retirement Benefits
                                               Estimate                         0.0114                 0.0224                     0.0077
                                            Standard Error                     (0.0041)               (0.0122)                   (0.0077)
  Claiming OASI Benefits
                                         Counterfactual Mean                     0.77                   0.74                       0.73
                                          Percentage Change                       1.5                    3.0                        1.1
                                                                                                 Labor Market Exit
                                               Estimate                         0.0489                 0.0361                     0.0392
                                            Standard Error                     (0.0053)               (0.0095)                   (0.0103)
         One-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                     0.43                   0.63                       0.33
                                          Percentage Change                      11.3                    5.8                       11.7
                                               Estimate                         0.0536                 0.0477                     0.0457
                                            Standard Error                     (0.0058)               (0.0106)                   (0.0111)
         Two-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                     0.40                   0.58                       0.30
                                          Percentage Change                      13.4                    8.3                       15.0
                                               Estimate                         0.0490                 0.0599                     0.0195
                                            Standard Error                     (0.0098)               (0.0265)                   (0.0170)
         Five-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                     0.35                   0.48                       0.31
                                          Percentage Change                      14.0                   12.6                        6.4

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on take up of retirement benefits and labor market exit for winners
aged 62-64. The dependent variables are binary indicators for the receipt of OASI benefits and labor force exit respectively. These estimates are
calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w,
for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean wealth effect in the post-win
period. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of
an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross
income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate
is scaled by $100,000. The counterfactual means correspond to the fraction of winners that would have taken up retirement benefits or exited the
labor market in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage
change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.



Entrepreneurship and self-employment. A lack of personal wealth and the existence of financial con-
straints are potentially important barriers to entrepreneurship. Many studies have therefore explored the
relationship between wealth and business creation. For example, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1994)
and Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) find that changes in wealth stemming from inheritance and gifts in-
crease the probability of becoming self-employed. Lindh and Ohlsson (1996) reach similar conclusions
using windfall gains from inheritances and lotteries from Sweden.35 These findings are often interpreted as
evidence of the existence and importance of liquidity constraints, and as such provide potential justification
   35
   See also Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989), Fairlie (1999), Taylor (2001), Hurst and Lusardi (2004),
Nykvist (2008), and Fairlie and Krashinsky (2012).


                                                                          49
for many government policies that support the financing of start-ups.36
        We contribute to this literature by studying the role of wealth in the transition from paid employ-
ment to low- and high-paying self-employment in the U.S. We distinguish between these two types of
self-employment by defining two binary indicators. One for receiving income from self-employment of
$15,000 or less, the other one indicates profits above $15,000. Appendix Figure B.7c shows the estimated
coefficients from regression (3.4) with the two indicators as dependent variables. We find no evidence of
differential trends in both of these outcomes between current and later winners in pre-win event times. The
event study shows that the propensity to start a low-paying business increases significantly in the years fol-
lowing the lottery, whereas winning the lottery appears to have no effect on the propensity to start a business
with annual profits of at least $15,000.


                          Table 6.2: Effects of wealth on entrepreneurship and self-employment


                                                                                                          Quartile 1                  Quartile 4
                                                                                  Full Sample
                 Outcome                                   Value                                       Pre-Win Income              Pre-Win Income
                                                                                         (1)                 (2)                         (3)
                                                      Estimate                        0.0047                  0.0037                      0.0053
                                                   Standard Error                    (0.0003)                (0.0010)                    (0.0004)
  Transition to Low-Paying SE
                                                Counterfactual Mean                    0.03                    0.05                        0.03
                                                 Percentage Change                     13.7                     6.8                        19.4
                                                      Estimate                       -0.0002                 -0.0005                     -0.0005
                                                   Standard Error                    (0.0002)                (0.0005)                    (0.0003)
 Transition to High-Paying SE
                                                Counterfactual Mean                    0.01                    0.01                        0.02
                                                 Percentage Change                     -1.3                    -3.2                        -3.0

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on the propensity to start a business associated with annual profits
of $15,000 or less (low-paying SE), or a business with profits of more than $15,000 (high-paying SE). The estimation sample is restricted to winners
and not-yet winners in paid-employment at event time w - 2. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described
in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates
for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean wealth effect in the post-win period. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar
of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling
into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors
(reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $100,000. The counterfactual means correspond
to the fraction of employed winners that would have received income from self-employment in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details).
The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


        To quantify the role of wealth in business creation, we now shift to the estimates of the IV model de-
scribed in Section 3.3. Table 6.2 reports the effects of an additional $100,000 in wealth on the propensity
to start a business.37 On average we find an increase of around 0.5 percentage points (a change of ap-
proximately 14 percent) in the probability of transitioning from employee to self-employed with income of
$15,000 or less. In contrast, we find no effect on the probability to start a business associated with annual
   36
        See OECD (2010) for an overview of policies across several countries.
   37
        Effects of unearned income on the propensity to become self-employed are reported in Appendix Table A.5.


                                                                          50
profits of more than $15,000. This finding may be suggestive that the marginal entrepreneur may be of lower
quality (Andersen and Nielsen, 2012).

Job mobility. Non-wage job characteristics are important determinants of job mobility. In addition to their
wage, jobs differ in their non-wage attributes, such as the level of fringe benefits, flexibility of work sched-
ules, the type of tasks performed, and the amount of effort required. Workers treat these as consumption
goods, and thus face a trade off between the wage- and non-wage attributes in their labor supply decision.38
Employers with undesirable working conditions then must pay a compensating wage premium in order to
attract labor, whereas employers that offer favorable job amenities can attract labor at lower than average
wages. Differences in wages between otherwise identical workers then reflect differences in the value of
non-wage characteristics between different jobs in a competitive labor market (Rosen, 1986).
       Assuming that job amenities are a normal good, we would expect an increase in wealth or unearned
income to induce workers to move to employers that pay lower wages on average, but offer more favorable
job amenities in exchange. We explore this channel by studying the job mobility decisions of individuals
who were employed prior to winning the lottery and continue to be employees post-win. To study the effect
of winning on the job mobility rate, we define an indicator Ji,t equal to 1 if household i's employer in year
t is different from the employer in year w - 2, i.e. two years prior to winning the lottery, and 0 otherwise.
In order to explore the effect of winning on the direction of job moves, we rank employers according to
the mean wage paid to their employees.39 By definition, we can then decompose the total probability of
changing jobs as follows:

            P [Ji,t = 1]            =   P [Ji,t = 1  i,t  i,w-2 ]          +     P [Ji,t = 1  i,t < i,w-2 ] ,                (6.2)
        total prob. of job change           prob. of upward job move                   prob. of downward job move


where i,t denotes the wage rank of household i's employer in year t.
       Appendix Figure B.7d shows the estimated coefficients from regression (3.4) for the total moving proba-
bility and each of its components. We find no evidence of differential trends in all of these outcomes between
current and later winners in pre-win event times.40 The event study shows a small decline in the probability
of having changed job by the first year post-win, but this effect does not persist over time. Interestingly, we
find an increase in the probability of a downward job move in the first year post-win, whereas the probabil-
ity of an upward job move declines. The gap between the estimated effects is growing over time, which is
consistent with frictional labor markets in which moving to the preferred job takes time.
  38
      For example, survey and experimental evidence shows that workers are willing to take lower pay in exchange for more job
flexibility, e.g., Hamermesh (1999), Eriksson and Kristensen (2014), Mas and Pallais (2017), Wiswall and Zafar (2017), Maestas,
Mullen, Powell, von Wachter and Wenger (2018), Katz and Krueger (2019) and Chen, Ding, List and Mogstad (2020).
   39
      Specifically, we calculate a time-invariant measure of firm-level mean wages per employee by taking raw mean wage earnings
per employee and removing aggregate time effects to construct residual mean wage earnings for each firm in each calendar year.
We then take an average of the residuals for each firm across calendar years. Our results barely change if we do not adjust for
aggregate time effects in the construction of time-invariant firm-level mean wages.
   40
      By construction of the outcome variables, P [Ji,w-2 = 1] = 0 for both current and later winners. To allow for potentially
different annual job-to-job transition rates between current and later winners, we then normalize the effect in event time w - 1 to
be zero in these regressions.




                                                                  51
                                     Table 6.3: Effects of unearned income on job mobility


                                                                                                  Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                          Full Sample
               Outcome                             Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                                (1)                  (2)                        (3)
                                             Estimate                        0.0010                  0.0081                     -0.0094
                                          Standard Error                    (0.0042)                (0.0127)                    (0.0066)
        Any Job-to-Job Move
                                       Counterfactual Mean                    0.46                    0.67                        0.36
                                        Percentage Change                      0.2                     1.2                        -2.6
                                             Estimate                        0.0222                  0.0305                      0.0025
                                          Standard Error                    (0.0039)                (0.0131)                    (0.0058)
          Downward Move
                                       Counterfactual Mean                    0.23                    0.31                        0.19
                                        Percentage Change                      9.8                     9.9                         1.3
                                             Estimate                       -0.0212                 -0.0224                     -0.0118
                                          Standard Error                    (0.0037)                (0.0127)                    (0.0052)
            Upward Move
                                       Counterfactual Mean                    0.24                    0.36                        0.17
                                        Percentage Change                     -9.0                    -6.2                        -6.9

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on the frequency and direction of job-to-job moves.
The estimation sample is restricted to winners and not-yet winners in paid-employment pre- and post-win. Outcomes are defined as binary and
equal to 1 if the firm is either different from, or higher or lower ranked than the firm prior to winning the lottery. Firms are ranked by the mean wage
paid to its employees. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income as
the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean
across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean
effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned
income for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the
delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $10,000.
The counterfactual means correspond to the job mobility rates that would have occurred in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details).
The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $10,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


        To study the effects of changes in unearned income, we estimate the IV model described in Section
3.3, only now using unearned income as the endogenous variable. In Table 6.3 we report the estimated
effects of an additional $10,000 in unearned income on both the frequency and the direction of job moves.41
On average and across the income distribution, we do not find an effect on the frequency of job moves.
However, we find a significant increase of around 2 percentage points (roughly a 10 percent change) in the
probability of moving to an employer that pays lower wages on average, whereas the probability of moving
to an employer that pays higher wages on average decreases by around the same amount. This finding is
suggestive that job amenities are a normal good. Looking across the income distribution, we find that high-
earning individuals respond to changes in unearned income by reducing their efforts to move upward rather
than increasingly moving downward.
   41
        Wealth effects on job mobility are reported in Appendix Table A.6.




                                                                          52
6.3      Gender, marital status and family stability
In this section, we begin by studying heterogeneity in the earnings responses by gender and marital status,
and then turn to estimating the effect of an extra dollar of wealth on the propensity to marry and divorce.

Heterogeneity in responses by gender and marital status.            We begin by studying how the earnings
responses to exogenous changes in wealth and unearned income vary by gender. Appendix Figure B.7
shows the estimated coefficients from the earnings regression (3.4) when we split the sample by the gender
of the winner. We find no evidence of differential trends between current and later winners in pre-win event
times. The event study shows a sizable, swift, and persistent change in earnings for both male and female
winners. However, the earnings of male winners tend to decrease more compared to female winners.
       To study gender differences in the earnings response to an extra dollar of unearned income, we estimate
the IV model described in Section 3.3 separately by gender of the winner. In Table 6.4 we report these
estimates.42 On average we find that labor earnings responses are larger for males. An extra dollar of
unearned income leads to a 60 cent reduction in total labor earnings for male winners, whereas female
winners reduce their total labor earnings by 38 cent. A similar discrepancy in responses has also been
reported in Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) and Picchio, Suetens and van Ours (2018).
However, taking into account that earnings of females in the absence of winning are substantially lower
on average, we find that the relative earnings responses are similar across gender. Just as in Table 4.1, we
continue to find substantial heterogeneity in MPEs across the income distribution: the earnings reduction
due to an extra dollar of unearned income is increasing in pre-win income regardless of the winner's gender.
  42
       Wealth effects are reported in Appendix Table A.7.




                                                            53
                      Table 6.4: Effects of unearned income on earnings by gender of the winner


                                                                                             Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                     Full Sample
               Group                          Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                           (1)                  (2)                        (3)
                                                                              Winner Wage Earnings (per dollar)
                                         Estimate                       -0.5733                 -0.3934                    -0.6839
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0186)                (0.0197)                   (0.0442)
           Male Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 38235.23                14288.29                   66641.39
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.5                    -2.8                       -1.0
                                         Estimate                       -0.4113                 -0.2277                    -0.6936
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0144)                (0.0179)                   (0.0436)
         Female Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 26576.05                10946.22                   47967.19
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.5                    -2.1                       -1.4
                                                                       Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings (per dollar)
                                         Estimate                       -0.6031                 -0.4047                    -0.7683
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0190)                (0.0290)                   (0.0437)
           Male Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 36131.60                15015.03                   62948.19
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.7                    -2.7                       -1.2
                                         Estimate                       -0.3817                 -0.1905                    -0.5588
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0234)                (0.0442)                   (0.0856)
         Female Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 31112.13                12875.22                   58251.54
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.2                    -1.5                       -1.0

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on earnings separately by gender of the winner. These
estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income as the endogenous variable. For
each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win
event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of
unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for subsamples of
winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate
standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means correspond to the average earnings the winner would have
received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $1,000 in percentage change
terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


     We now turn to possible differences in earnings responses by marital status. Appendix Figure B.7 shows
the estimated coefficients from the earnings regression (3.4) when we split the sample by the marital status
of the winner. As before, we find no evidence of differential trends between current and later winners in
pre-win event times. The event studies show a sharp and persistent change in earnings for both single and
married winners.




                                                                         54
                  Table 6.5: Effects of unearned income on earnings by marital status of the winner


                                                                                             Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                     Full Sample
                 Group                        Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                            (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                                                              Winner Wage Earnings (per dollar)
                                         Estimate                       -0.6376                 -0.5456                    -0.6728
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0254)                (0.0471)                   (0.0633)
           Married Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 38275.25                11892.97                   62152.53
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.7                    -4.6                       -1.1
                                         Estimate                       -0.4579                 -0.2982                    -0.6507
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0138)                (0.0147)                   (0.0375)
            Single Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 29816.89                13198.26                   57815.81
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.5                    -2.3                       -1.1
                                                                        Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings (per dollar)
                                         Estimate                       -0.6009                 -0.4818                    -0.6892
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0300)                (0.1096)                   (0.0759)
           Married Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 38033.72                12365.40                   63576.97
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.6                    -3.9                       -1.1
                                         Estimate                       -0.5051                 -0.3117                    -0.6836
                                      Standard Error                   (0.0158)                (0.0222)                   (0.0408)
            Single Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                 30994.56                14686.77                   58302.67
                                    Percentage Change                     -1.6                    -2.1                       -1.2

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on earnings separately by marital status of the winner.
These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income as the endogenous variable.
For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win
event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of
unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for subsamples of
winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate
standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means correspond to the average earnings the winner would have
received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $1,000 in percentage change
terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


        To interpret the magnitudes of these event-study estimates, we estimate the IV model described in Sec-
tion 3.3. As shown in Table 6.5, we find that married winners reduce their earnings by more than single
winners for every additional dollar of unearned income.43 For example, whereas married individuals reduce
their own annual wage earnings by 64 cents for an extra dollar of unearned income on average, singles
decrease their annual wage earnings by 46 cents for an extra dollar of unearned income. However, taking
into account that earnings of singles in the absence of winning are around 20 percent lower on average, we
   43
        Wealth effects are reported in Appendix Table A.8.


                                                                         55
find that the relative earnings responses are similar across single and married winners. Irrespective of the
marital status of the winner, the earnings reduction due to an extra dollar of unearned income is increasing
in pre-win income.

Effects on family formation and stability.     Changes in unearned income or wealth can affect the likeli-
hood of marriage and divorce for a number of reasons. While an increase in wealth makes singles more
attractive as potential marriage partners, it also increases the option value of remaining single. Additional
wealth can have a stabilizing effect on existing marriages, but may also help to cover the legal costs of a
divorce for otherwise financially constrained households (see Burstein, 2007; Hankins and Hoekstra, 2011).
Building on Hankins and Hoekstra (2011), we use changes in wealth due to lottery winnings to analyze the
extent to which a change in economic resources affects the likelihood of marriage and divorce.
   To study the effect of winning the lottery on marriage, we restrict our sample to tax filers that were
unmarried 2 years prior to winning the lottery. Our outcome of interest is a time-varying indicator equal
to 1 if the winner is married. Similarly, we restrict our sample to tax filers that were married 2 years prior
to winning the lottery and study the effect of winning the lottery on a binary outcome variable indicating
singlehood. Appendix Figure B.8 shows the estimated coefficients from regression (3.4). We find no evi-
dence of differential trends in both of these outcomes between current and later winners in pre-win event
times. The event study shows that winning the lottery increases the propensity to get married for single
lottery winners (relative to single non-yet-winners), while the likelihood for married winners to get divorced
(relative to married non-yet-winners) decreases on average.




                                                     56
                                     Table 6.6: Effects of wealth on marriages and divorce


                                                                                            Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                    Full Sample
               Outcome                       Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                           (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                        Estimate                        0.0077                  0.0167                     0.0006
                                     Standard Error                    (0.0008)                (0.0024)                   (0.0013)
            New Marriage
                                  Counterfactual Mean                    0.14                    0.14                       0.15
                                   Percentage Change                      5.5                    11.7                        0.4
                                        Estimate                       -0.0067                 -0.0146                    -0.0058
                                     Standard Error                    (0.0010)                (0.0041)                   (0.0015)
                Divorce
                                  Counterfactual Mean                    0.11                    0.17                       0.09
                                   Percentage Change                     -5.9                    -8.6                       -6.3

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on the propensity to enter or leave marriage. The estimation
sample is restricted to winners and not-yet winners that are tax filers. When we study the effect on new marriages (divorce), we further restrict the
sample to individuals that were not married (married) in w - 2. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described
in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , then taking the mean across estimates
for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean wealth effect in the post-win period. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar
of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling
into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors
(reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $100,000. The counterfactual means correspond
to the marriage and divorce rates that would have occurred in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change"
reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


        To quantify the role of an increase in wealth on family formation and stability, we estimate the IV
model from Section 3.3. Table 6.6 shows that for every $100,000 of additional wealth, the propensity to
marry increases by around 0.8 percentage points, while the likelihood of divorce decreases by around 0.7
percentage points on average.44 Especially for lower-income households we find that additional wealth leads
to an increase in marriages and family stability.


6.4       Within-household responses
In this section we document differences in earnings responses between winners and their spouses, and
discuss the implications for models of household behavior.

Heterogeneity in responses between winner and spouse. We focus on married couples and begin by
estimating regression (3.4) separately for wage earnings of the winner and his or her spouse. As shown by
the event studies in Appendix Figure B.9, we find no evidence of differential trends between current and
later winners in the years before the lottery win. This finding holds whether we look at winners or their
spouses. The event studies show a sharp and persistent decline in wage earnings in response to winning,
with winner wage earnings decline by more than spousal wage earnings.
   44
        The effects of changes in unearned income on family formation and stability are reported in Appendix Table A.9.


                                                                         57
                Table 6.7: Effects of unearned income on wage earnings of winners and their spouse


                                                                                      Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                              Full Sample
                Group                   Value                                      Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                     (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                   Estimate                      -0.6376                 -0.5456                    -0.6728
                                Standard Error                  (0.0254)                (0.0471)                   (0.0633)
                Winner
                             Counterfactual Mean                38275.25                11892.97                   62152.53
                              Percentage Change                    -1.7                    -4.6                       -1.1
                                   Estimate                      -0.2249                -0.0706                     -0.3706
                                Standard Error                  (0.0221)                (0.0452)                   (0.0668)
                Spouse
                             Counterfactual Mean                27141.85                6727.89                    46890.46
                              Percentage Change                    -0.8                   -1.0                        -0.8

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on wage earnings for winners and non-winning
spouses. The estimation sample is restricted to married couples. Estimates are calculated by first estimating separate regressions for the first-
and second-stage model as described in Section 3.3, only now using unearned income as the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we then
take cohort-size-weighted averages of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and then form the ratio to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an
extra dollar of unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income
for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta
method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means correspond to the average earnings
the winner and spouse would have received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect
per $1,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.


        We examine differences in earnings responses between winners and their spouses by estimating the
IV model described in Section 3.3 separately for each household member. The estimated wage earnings
responses are reported in Table 6.7. For an additional dollar of unearned income, winners decrease their
wage earnings by 64 cents on average, whereas the non-winning spouse reduces his wage earnings by
only a third of that amount. These findings are broadly similar to those reported in Cesarini, Lindqvist,
Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) using Swedish data.

Implications for models of household behavior. Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017)
argue that differential responses of winners and their non-winning spouses, such as those reported in Table
6.7, are seemingly at odds with the unitary model of the household.45 However, as recognized by Cesarini,
Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017), this argument implicitly relies on the assumption that lottery
winnings are not only as good as randomly assigned across households, but also across members within
a household (see Appendix G for details). Otherwise, differences in earnings responses between winners
and non-winning spouses may be due to either non-random assignment of winning within households or a
violation of the unitary model.
        To investigate this, we explore whether the winner within a family is systematically different from the
   45
        For a recent overview of models of household behavior see Chiappori and Mazzocco (2017).



                                                                        58
non-winner. As shown in Appendix Table A.11, we find that household members who win the lottery are
significantly more likely to be male, employed, and primary earners of the household. Consistent with this
finding, Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017, Table A.6) also provide evidence for non-
random assignment of winning across household members in Swedish data.
        In the absence of random assignment of winning across household members, we can still test a key
prediction of the unitary model that all incomes from different sources are pooled. Under the income pooling
hypothesis, it is only the total amount of resources, and not its distribution across household members, that
matters for aggregate household behavior.46 This, in turn, implies that the identity of the winner cannot
make a difference in terms of household labor supply. To shed additional light on this, we restrict ourselves
to two-earner households, consistent with the theory outlined in Appendix G, and split the sample by the
identity of the winner. We then estimate the IV model described in Section 3.3 separately by the identity of
the winner.

                        Table 6.8: Effects of unearned income on earnings by identity of winner


                                                               Gender of Winner                   Relative Wage Earnings of Winner
          Conditioning                  Value           Male Winner          Female Winner        Primary Earner          Secondary Earner
                                                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                      (4)

                                      Estimate              -0.7829              -0.7882               -0.7437                  -0.8698
  Two-Earner Household
                                  Standard Error           (0.0409)             (0.0557)               (0.0425)                (0.0519)

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect for an extra dollar of unearned income on total per-adult labor earnings by identity of the
winner. The estimation sample is restricted to two-earner households. Estimates are calculated by first estimating separate regressions for the
first- and second-stage model as described in Section 3.3, only now using unearned income as the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we
then take cohort-size-weighted averages of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and then form the ratio to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Columns 1 and 2 report the mean effects of
an extra dollar of unearned income depending on the gender of the winner. Columns 3 and 4 report the mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned
income depending on the relative earnings status of the winner within the household. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported
in parenthesis), clustering on winner.


        Table 6.8 reports the estimated household earnings responses separately by the identity of the winning
household member. We find that household earnings responses do not vary materially and are never sig-
nificantly different by gender or earnings status of the winner. These findings are broadly similar to those
reported in Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017, Table A.7) and provide no evidence against
the unitary model.

   46
     There is a large literature that has tested the income pooling hypothesis, e.g., Schultz (1990), Bourguignon, Browning, Chiap-
pori and Lechene (1993), Fortin and Lacroix (1997) and Attanasio and Lechene (2002).




                                                                        59
7    Conclusion
The goal of this paper was to study how Americans respond to idiosyncratic and exogenous changes in
household wealth and unearned income. Our analyses combined administrative data on U.S. lottery winners
with an event-study design that exploits variation in the timing of lottery wins. Our first contribution was to
estimate the earnings responses to these windfall gains, finding significant and sizable wealth and income
effects. On average, an extra dollar of unearned income in a given period reduces pre-tax labor earnings
by about 50 cents, decreases total labor taxes by 10 cents, and increases consumption by 60 cents. These
effects are heterogeneous across the income distribution, with households in higher quartiles of the income
distribution reducing their earnings by a larger amount.
    Our second contribution was to develop and apply a rich life-cycle model in which heterogeneous house-
holds face non-linear taxes and make earnings choices along both intensive and extensive margins. By map-
ping this model to our estimated earnings responses, we obtained informative bounds on the impacts of two
policy reforms: an introduction of UBI and an increase in top marginal tax rates.
    Our last contribution was to study how additional wealth and unearned income affect a wide range of
behavior, including geographic mobility and neighborhood choice, retirement decisions and labor market
exit, family formation and dissolution, entry into entrepreneurship, and job-to-job mobility. In our analyses,
we described the key identification and measurement challenges that arise, motivated how lottery winnings
as a source of variation in wealth or unearned income can address these challenges, and discussed how our
findings relate and contribute to existing work.




                                                      60
References
A LIPRANTIS , D.    AND   H. M ARTIN (2020): "Neighborhood sorting obscures neighborhood effects in the
  Opportunity Atlas," .

A LIPRANTIS , D.    AND   F. G.-C. R ICHTER (2020): "Evidence of Neighborhood Effects from Moving to
  Opportunity: Lates of Neighborhood Quality," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 102(4), 633­647.

A LTIG , D., A. J. AUERBACH , L. J. KOTLIKOFF , E. I LIN      AND   V. Y E (2020): "Marginal Net Taxation of
  Americans' Labor Supply," Working Paper 27164, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A NDERSEN , S.     AND   K. M. N IELSEN (2012): "Ability or Finances as Constraints on Entrepreneurship?
  Evidence from Survival Rates in a Natural Experiment," The Review of Financial Studies, 25(12), 3684­
  3710.

A NGRIST, J. D. (2001): "Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models With Dummy Endogenous
  Regressors," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 19(1), 2­28.

ATTANASIO , O.     AND   V. L ECHENE (2002): "Tests of Income Pooling in Household Decisions," Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 5(4), 720­748.

AUCLERT, A., B. BARDÓCZY            AND   M. ROGNLIE (2020): "MPCs, MPEs and Multipliers:A Trilemma for
  New Keynesian Models," Working paper.

AUCLERT, A. AND M. ROGNLIE (2020): "Inequality and Aggregate Demand," Working paper.

BAKIJA , J. (2019): "Documentation for a Comprehensive Historial U.S. Federal and State Income Tax
  Calculator Program," Discussion paper.

BAYER , C.   AND   F. J UESSEN (2012): "On the dynamics of interstate migration: Migration costs and self-
  selection," Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(3), 377­401.

B EGLEY, J. AND S. C HAN (2018): "The effect of housing wealth shocks on work and retirement decisions,"
  Regional Science and Urban Economics, 73, 180­195.

B ENGTSSON , N. (2012): "The Marginal Propensity to Earn and Consume out of Unearned Income: Evi-
  dence Using an Unusually Large Cash Grant Reform," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 114(4),
  1393­1413.

B ERGMAN , P., E. C HAN       AND   A. K APOR (2020): "Housing Search Frictions: Evidence from Detailed
  Search Data and a Field Experiment," Working Paper 27209, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ERGMAN , P., R. C HETTY, S. D E L UCA , N. H ENDREN , L. F. K ATZ       AND   C. PALMER (2020): "Creating
  Moves to Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice," Working Paper.

B LANCHFLOWER , D. G.        AND   A. J. O SWALD (1998): "What Makes an Entrepreneur?," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 16(1), 26­60.

                                                       61
B LOMQUIST, N. S. (1985): "Labour Supply in a Two-Period Model: The Effect of a Nonlinear Progressive
  Income Tax," The Review of Economic Studies, 52(3), 515.

B LUNDELL , R., H. L OW AND I. P RESTON (2013): "Decomposing changes in income risk using consump-
  tion data," Quantitative Economics, 4(1), 1­37.

B LUNDELL , R.   AND   T. M ACURDY (1999): "Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative Approaches," in
  Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, pp. 1559­1695. Elsevier.

B LUNDELL , R., L. P ISTAFERRI AND I. P RESTON (2008): "Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,"
  American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887­1921.

B LUNDELL , R.   AND   I. WALKER (1986): "A Life-Cycle Consistent Empirical Model of Family Labour
  Supply Using Cross-Section Data," The Review of Economic Studies, 53(4), 539.

B OURGUIGNON , F., M. B ROWNING , P.-A. C HIAPPORI           AND   V. L ECHENE (1993): "Intra Household Al-
  location of Consumption: A Model and Some Evidence from French Data," Annales d'Économie et de
  Statistique, (29), 137­156.

B REWER , M., E. S AEZ    AND   A. S HEPHARD (2010): "Means-Testing and Tax Rates on Earnings," in Di-
  mensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review, ed. by S. J. Mirrlees, pp. 90­173. Oxford University Press,
  London.

B ROWN , J. R., C. C. C OILE     AND   S. J. W EISBENNER (2010): "The Effect of Inheritance Receipt on
  Retirement," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 425­434.

B ULMAN , G., R. FAIRLIE , S. G OODMAN        AND   A. I SEN (2021): "Parental Resources and College Atten-
  dance: Evidence from Lottery Wins," American Economic Review, 111(4), 1201­40.

B URSTEIN , N. R. (2007): "Economic influences on marriage and divorce," Journal of Policy Analysis and
  Management, 26(2), 387­429.

C ALLOWAY, B.    AND   P. H. S ANT 'A NNA (2020): "Difference-in-Differences with Multiple Time Periods,"
  Working Paper.

C ESARINI , D., E. L INDQVIST, M. J. N OTOWIDIGDO          AND   R. Ö STLING (2017): "The Effect of Wealth on
  Individual and Household Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish Lotteries," American Economic Review,
  107(12), 3917­3946.

C HEN , K.-M., C. D ING , J. A. L IST   AND   M. M OGSTAD (2020): "Reservation Wages and Workers' Val-
  uation of Job Flexibility: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment," Working Paper 27807, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

C HETTY, R., J. F RIEDMAN , N. H ENDREN , M. R. J ONES AND S. P ORTER (2020): "The Opportunity Atlas:
  Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," .


                                                      62
C HETTY, R., J. N. F RIEDMAN , N. H ILGER , E. S AEZ , D. W. S CHANZENBACH           AND   D. YAGAN (2011):
  " How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star ," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1593­1660.

C HETTY, R., J. N. F RIEDMAN , T. O LSEN         AND   L. P ISTAFERRI (2011): " Adjustment Costs, Firm Re-
  sponses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records *," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749­804.

C HETTY, R.   AND   N. H ENDREN (2018): "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I:
  Childhood Exposure Effects*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1107­1162.

C HETTY, R., N. H ENDREN        AND   L. F. K ATZ (2016a): "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
  on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment," American Economic Review,
  106(4), 855­902.

         (2016b): "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the
  Moving to Opportunity Experiment," American Economic Review, 106(4), 855­902.

C HIAPPORI , P.-A.    AND   M. M AZZOCCO (2017): "Static and Intertemporal Household Decisions," Journal
  of Economic Literature, 55(3), 985­1045.

C HYN , E. (2018): "Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition on Chil-
  dren," American Economic Review, 108(10), 3028­56.

C ILKE , J. (1998): "A Profile of Non-Filers," Discussion paper.

C OUTURE , V., C. G AUBERT, J. H ANDBURY AND E. H URST (2019): "Income growth and the distributional
  effects of urban spatial sorting," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

DAVIES , P. S., M. J. G REENWOOD         AND   H. L I (2001): "A Conditional Logit Approach to U.S. State-to-
  State Migration," Journal of Regional Science, 41(2), 337­360.

DE   C HAISEMARTIN , C.      AND   X. D'H AULTFOEUILLE (2018): "Fuzzy Differences-in-Differences," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 85(2), 999­1028.

D E L A ROCA , J.   AND   D. P UGA (2016): "Learning by Working in Big Cities," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 84(1), 106­142.

D E VANE V. D E VANE (1995):. 280 N.J. Super. 488 (N.J. Super.).

D IAMOND , P.   AND   E. S AEZ (2011): "The Case for a Progressive Tax: From Basic Research to Policy
  Recommendation," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), 165­190.

D ISNEY, R. AND J. G ATHERGOOD (2018): "House Prices, Wealth Effects and Labour Supply," Economica,
  85(339), 449­478.



                                                        63
DYRDA , S.     AND   M. P EDRONI (2018): "Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Model with Uninsurable Idiosyncratic
  Shocks," Working paper.

E RIKSSON , T.   AND   N. K RISTENSEN (2014): "Wages or Fringes? Some Evidence on Trade-Offs and Sort-
  ing," Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4), 899­928.

E VANS , D. S. AND B. J OVANOVIC (1989): "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under Liquidity
  Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808­827.

E VANS , D. S. AND L. S. L EIGHTON (1989): "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship," The American
  Economic Review, 79(3), 519­535.

FAGERENG , A., M. B. H OLM         AND   G. J. NATVIK (2020): "MPC Heterogeneity and Household Balance
  Sheets," Working paper.

FAIRLIE , R. W. (1999): "The Absence of the African-American Owned Business: An Analysis of the
  Dynamics of Self-Employment," Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1), 80­108.

FAIRLIE , R. W.      AND   H. A. K RASHINSKY (2012): "Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and En-
  trepreneurship Revisited," Review of Income and Wealth, 58(2), 279­306.

F EINBERG , R. M.      AND   D. K UEHN (2018): "Guaranteed Nonlabor Income and Labor Supply: The Ef-
  fect of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 18(3),
  20180042.

F ORTIN , B.   AND   G. L ACROIX (1997): "A Test of the Unitary and Collective Models of Household Labour
  Supply," The Economic Journal, 107(443), 933­955.

G ELBER , A. M., A. I SEN       AND   J. S ONG (2016): "The Effect of Pension Income on Elderly Earnings:
  Evidence from Social Security," Discussion paper.

G USTMAN , A. L., T. L. S TEINMEIER          AND   N. TABATABAI (2010): "What the Stock Market Decline
  Means for the Financial Security and Retirement Choices of the Near-Retirement Population," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 24(1), 161­82.

H AMERMESH , D. S. (1999): "Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1085­1123.

H ANKINS , S.    AND   M. H OEKSTRA (2011): "Lucky in Life, Unlucky in Love?: The Effect of Random
  Income Shocks on Marriage and Divorce," Journal of Human Resources, 46(2), 403­426.

H EATHCOTE , J., K. S TORESLETTEN AND G. L. V IOLANTE (2017): "Optimal Tax Progressivity: An Ana-
  lytical Framework," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1693­1754.

H ERSCH , J.   AND    J. B. S HINALL (2019): "When equitable is not equal: experimental evidence on the
  division of marital assets in divorce," Review of Economics of the Household, pp. 1­28.

                                                       64
H OLTZ -E AKIN , D., D. J OULFAIAN AND H. S. ROSEN (1993): "The Carnegie Conjecture: Some Empirical
  Evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2), 413­435.

          (1994): "Sticking it Out: Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political
  Economy, 102(1), 53­75.

H OYNES , H. AND J. ROTHSTEIN (2019): "Universal basic income in the United States and advanced coun-
  tries," Annual Review of Economics, 11, 929­958.

H URD , M. D., M. R ETI     AND   S. ROHWEDDER (2009): "The Effect of Large Capital Gains or Losses on
  Retirement," in Developments in the Economics of Aging, NBER Chapters, pp. 127­163. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

H URST, E.    AND   A. L USARDI (2004): "Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneurship,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 319­347.

I MBENS , G. W., D. B. RUBIN AND B. I. S ACERDOTE (2001): "Estimating the Effect of Unearned Income
  on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of Lottery Players," American
  Economic Review, 91(4), 778­794.

I N RE M ARRIAGE OF M AHAFFEY (1990):. 206 Ill. App. 3d 859 (Ill. App. Ct.).

I N RE M ARRIAGE OF S WARTZ (1993):. 512 N.W.2d 825 (Iowa Ct. App.).

JACOB , B. A.   AND    J. L UDWIG (2012): "The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply: Evidence
  from a Voucher Lottery," American Economic Review, 102(1), 272­304.

JACQUET, L., E. L EHMANN AND B. VAN         DER   L INDEN (2013): "Optimal redistributive taxation with both
  extensive and intensive responses," Journal of Economic Theory, 148(5), 1770­1805.

JAPPELLI , T.   AND   L. P ISTAFERRI (2010): "The Consumption Response to Income Changes," Annual Re-
  view of Economics, pp. 479­506.

J ONES , D.   AND   I. M ARINESCU (2019): "The Labor Market Impacts of Universal and Permanent Cash
  Transfers: Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund," Manuscript, pp. 1­72.

K ATZ , L. F. AND A. B. K RUEGER (2019): "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the
  United States, 1995­2015," ILR Review, 72(2), 382­416.

K EANE , M. P. (2011): "Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4), 961­
  1075.

K EARNEY, M. S. (2005): "State Lotteries and Consumer Behavior," Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-
  12), 2269­2299.

K EARNEY, M. S. AND M. M OGSTAD (2019): "Universal basic income (UBI) as a policy response to current
  challenges," Report, Aspen Institute, pp. 1­19.

                                                      65
K ENNAN , J.    AND   J. R. WALKER (2011): "The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Deci-
  sions," Econometrica, 79(1), 211­251.

K ILLINGSWORTH , M.         AND   J. H ECKMAN (1986): "Female Labor Supply: A Survey," in Handbook of
  Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, vol. 1, pp. 103­204. Elsevier.

K IMBALL , M. S.      AND   M. D. S HAPIRO (2010): "Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution Effects
  Both Large or Both Small?," Working paper.

K IND , A. J.   AND   W. R. B UCKINGHAM (2018): "Making Neighborhood-Disadvantage Metrics Accessible
  -- The Neighborhood Atlas," New England Journal of Medicine, 378(26), 2456­2458, PMID: 29949490.

K LEVEN , H. J.     AND   C. T. K REINER (2006): "The marginal cost of public funds: Hours of work versus
  labor force participation," Journal of Public Economics, 90(10-11), 1955­1973.

K LEVEN , H. J.     AND   E. A. S CHULTZ (2014): "Estimating Taxable Income Responses Using Danish Tax
  Reforms," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4), 271­301.

KO SAR
   ¸   , G., T. R ANSOM        AND   W.   VAN DER   K LAAUW (2021): "Understanding migration aversion using
  elicited counterfactual choice probabilities," Journal of Econometrics.

K RUEGER , A. B.      AND   J.-S. P ISCHKE (1992): "The Effect of Social Security on Labor Supply: A Cohort
  Analysis of the Notch Generation," Journal of Labor Economics, 10(4), 412­437.

K UHN , P., P. KOOREMAN , A. S OETEVENT             AND   A. K APTEYN (2011): "The Effects of Lottery Prizes on
  Winners and Their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery," American Economic Review,
  101(5), 2226­47.

L INDH , T.   AND   H. O HLSSON (1996): "Self-Employment and Windfall Gains: Evidence from the Swedish
  Lottery," The Economic Journal, 106(439), 1515­1526.

L OWREY, A. (2018): Give people money: How a universal basic income would end poverty, revolutionize
  work, and remake the world. Broadway books.

L UDWIG , J., G. J. D UNCAN , L. A. G ENNETIAN , L. F. K ATZ , R. C. K ESSLER , J. R. K LING AND L. S AN -
  BONMATSU       (2013): "Long-Term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families: Evidence from Mov-
  ing to Opportunity," American Economic Review, 103(3), 226­31.

L UDWIG , J., J. B. L IEBMAN , J. R. K LING , G. J. D UNCAN , L. F. K ATZ , R. C. K ESSLER        AND   L. S AN -
  BONMATSU       (2008): "What Can We Learn about Neighborhood Effects from the Moving to Opportunity
  Experiment?," American Journal of Sociology, 114(1), 144­188.

M AC URDY, T. E. (1983): "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of Labor Supply and
  Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Uncertainty," International Economic Review, 24(2), 265­289.




                                                           66
M AESTAS , N., K. J. M ULLEN , D. P OWELL , T.         VON     WACHTER   AND   J. B. W ENGER (2018): "The Value
  of Working Conditions in the United States and Implications for the Structure of Wages," Working Paper
  25204, National Bureau of Economic Research.

M AS , A. AND A. PALLAIS (2017): "Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements," American Economic Review,
  107(12), 3722­59.

M EGHIR , C.   AND   L. P ISTAFERRI (2004): "Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity," Econometrica,
  72(1), 1­32.

M OLLOY, R., C. L. S MITH      AND   A. W OZNIAK (2011): "Internal Migration in the United States," Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 173­96.

N OELKE , C., N. M C A RDLE , M. BAEK , N. H UNTINGTON , R. H UBER , E. H ARDY               AND   D. ACEVEDO -
  G ARCIA (2020): "Technical Documentation," .

N YKVIST, J. (2008): "Entrepreneurship and Liquidity Constraints: Evidence from Sweden," The Scandi-
  navian Journal of Economics, 110(1), 23­43.

OECD (2010): SMEs, Entrepreneurship and Innovation.

O SWALD , F. (2019): "The effect of homeownership on the option value of regional migration," Quantitative
  Economics, 10(4), 1453­1493.

PACINI , D.   AND   F. W INDMEIJER (2016): "Robust inference for the Two-Sample 2SLS estimator," Eco-
  nomics Letters, 146, 50­54.

P ENCAVEL , J. (1986): "Labor supply of men: A survey," Handbook of Labor Economics, 1, 3­102.

P ICCHIO , M., S. S UETENS    AND    J. C.   VAN   O URS (2018): "Labour Supply Effects of Winning a Lottery,"
  The Economic Journal, 128(611), 1700­1729.

ROSEN , S. (1986): "The theory of equalizing differences," Handbook of Labor Economics, 1, 641­692.

ROSENBAUM , J. (1995): "Changing the geography of opportunity by expanding residential choice: Lessons
  from the Gautreaux program," Housing Policy Debate, 6, 231­269.

S AEZ , E. (2001): "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates," The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 68(1), 205­229.

S AEZ , E., J. S LEMROD     AND   S. H. G IERTZ (2012): "The elasticity of taxable income with respect to
  marginal tax rates: A critical review," Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1), 3­50.

S AEZ , E.   AND   G. Z UCMAN (2016): "Wealth inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
  capitalized income tax data," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 519­578.




                                                          67
S CHULTZ , T. P. (1990): "Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility," The Journal
  of Human Resources, 25(4), 599­634.

S MITH , M., O. Z IDAR   AND   E. Z WICK (2020): "Top Wealth in America: New Estimates and Implications
  for Taxing the Rich," Manuscript, pp. 1­117.

S MITH V. S MITH (1990):. 162 A.D.2d 346 (N.Y. App. Div.).

S TERN , A. (2016): Raising the floor: How a universal basic income can renew our economy and rebuild
  the American dream. Public Affairs.

S TEWART, C. (1939): "Income Capitalization as a Method of Estimating the Distribution of Wealth By Size
  Groups," in Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 3, pp. 95­146. NBER.

S UN , L. AND S. A BRAHAM (2020): "Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies with Hetero-
  geneous Treatment Effects," Working Paper.

TAYLOR , M. P. (2001): "Self­Employment and Windfall Gains in Britain: Evidence from Panel Data,"
  Economica, 68(272), 539­565.

T HOMAS V. T HOMAS (2003):. 353 S.C. 523 (S.C.).

U LLAH V. U LLAH (1990):. 161 A.D.2d 699 (N.Y. App. Div.).

W ILSON , W. J. (1987): The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy.
  University of Chicago Press.

W ISWALL , M.   AND   B. Z AFAR (2017): "Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human Capital, and
  Gender*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1), 457­507.

W OLF, C. (2019): "The missing intercept: A demand equivalence approach," Discussion paper.

YANG , A. (2018): The war on normal people: The truth about America's disappearing jobs and why
  universal basic income is our future. Hachette UK.




                                                    68
                                                    Online Appendix

A      Appendix Tables


                                          Table A.1: Distribution of lottery winnings


               Prize Range            Count       Mean Pre-Tax Winnings                  Median Pre-Tax Winnings
                                                           (per winner)                            (per winner)
                                        (1)                       (2)                                     (3)

               < 50K                  24,800                  $36,512                                 $34,700
               50K to 100K            28,689                  $63,374                                 $59,400
               100K to 200K           17,521                  $126,020                               $119,100
               200K+                  19,721                $1,405,008                               $307,200

               All Winners            90,731                  $359,743                                $67,800

Notes: The table summarizes the distribution of pre-tax lottery winnings in our sample of working-age winners. All monetary values are reported
in 2016 U.S. dollars, using the Consumer Price Index to adjust for inflation. Medians are rounded to the nearest hundred.




                                                                        1
                                    Table A.2: Wealth effects by labor market attachment

                                                                                                 Sample

                                                                            Quartile 1        Quartile 2        Quartile 3         Quartile 4
                                       Labor Force        Full Sample
            Outcome                                                      Pre-Win Income    Pre-Win Income    Pre-Win Income     Pre-Win Income
                                       Attachment
                                                               (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)

                                                             -2.2856         -1.4003           -2.2948            -2.6196           -3.0596
                                         Baseline
                                                            (0.0571)        (0.0628)           (0.0861)          (0.0935)          (0.1541)

     Winner Wage Earnings                                    -2.6437         -1.7358           -2.6309            -2.8243           -3.3511
                                    Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.0661)        (0.0968)           (0.0903)          (0.0995)          (0.1580)

                                                             -2.9566         -2.6015           -2.9885            -2.9500           -3.4603
                                  FT Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.0792)        (0.3019)           (0.0987)          (0.1046)          (0.1621)

                                                             -2.0245         -1.2514           -2.0422            -2.2590           -2.7035
                                         Baseline
                                                            (0.0492)        (0.0589)           (0.0764)          (0.0813)          (0.1311)

    Per-Adult Wage Earnings                                  -2.2414         -1.4446           -2.2479            -2.3421           -2.8994
                                    Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.0546)        (0.0896)           (0.0781)          (0.0847)          (0.1269)

                                                             -2.4729         -1.9109           -2.5386            -2.4170           -2.9483
                                  FT Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.0644)        (0.2741)           (0.0833)          (0.0887)          (0.1283)

                                                             -2.3394         -1.3339           -2.2720            -2.6450           -3.1298
                                         Baseline
                                                            (0.0657)        (0.1051)           (0.0867)          (0.0996)          (0.1820)

 Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings                              -2.5170         -1.5688           -2.2965            -2.5543           -3.4340
                                    Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.0972)        (0.1764)           (0.1185)          (0.1320)          (0.2471)

                                                             -2.7651         -2.5804           -2.6287            -2.6342           -3.4363
                                  FT Employed Pre-Win
                                                            (0.1140)        (0.5710)           (0.1365)          (0.1366)          (0.2499)


Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on three earnings outcomes. These estimates are calculated
by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, for each outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each
event time , then taking the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean wealth effect in the post-win
period. Column 1 reports wealth effects for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 to 5, we report wealth effects for subsamples of winners falling
into each quartile of the pre-win distribution of adjusted gross income. For each outcome, along the rows, we report the wealth effects for the
main, unconditional analysis sample ("Baseline") as well as for the subsample of winners who were employed (that is, had positive winner wage
earnings) in the baseline pre-win period ("Employed Pre-Win") and the subsample of winners who received wage earnings of at least $15,000 (in
2016 USD) in the baseline pre-win period ("FT Employed Pre-Win"). We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in square
brackets), clustering on winner. To ease of interpretability, we scale earnings responses by $100.




                                                                        2
Table A.3: IV estimates of the effect of an exogenous change in unearned income (capitalization approach)


                                                                                        Sample

                                                               Quartile 1            Quartile 2           Quartile 3           Quartile 4
                                           Full Sample
                Outcome                                     Pre-Win Income       Pre-Win Income       Pre-Win Income        Pre-Win Income
                                                (1)                (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)

                                              -0.5182            -0.2925              -0.4278              -0.5283               -0.7385
   Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings
                                             (0.0815)           (0.0669)             (0.0874)              (0.1041)             (0.3306)

                                              -0.1077            -0.0404              -0.0609              -0.1143               -0.1941
   Per-Adult Labor Earnings Taxes
                                             (0.0201)           (0.0221)             (0.0244)              (0.0277)             (0.0892)

                                              0.5882             0.7463               0.6318                0.5858               0.4533
  Implied Consumption Expenditure
                                             (0.1689)           (0.2294)             (0.2280)              (0.2159)             (0.4781)


Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. These estimates are calculated by first estimating
separate regressions for the first- and second-stage model as described in Section 3.3, only now using unearned income as the endogenous variable.
For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for
post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and then form the ratio to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports
mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 to 5, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of
unearned income for subsamples of winners falling into each quartile of the pre-win distribution of adjusted gross income. We use the delta method
to calculate two-sample IV standard errors as in Pacini and Windmeijer (2016) (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. We use a ratio of
weighted-averages due to the additional imprecision in the cohort-by-event-time ratios when using the capitalization method.




                                                                         3
         Table A.4: Effects of unearned income on take-up of retirement benefits and labor market exit


                                                                                                   Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                           Full Sample
              Outcome                               Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                                  (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                                                                        Take-Up of Retirement Benefits
                                               Estimate                        0.0169                  0.0333                     0.0114
                                            Standard Error                    (0.0061)                (0.0181)                   (0.0115)
   Claiming OASI Benefits
                                         Counterfactual Mean                    0.77                    0.74                       0.73
                                          Percentage Change                      2.2                     4.5                        1.6
                                                                                                Labor Market Exit
                                               Estimate                        0.0720                  0.0532                     0.0581
                                            Standard Error                    (0.0078)                (0.0140)                   (0.0152)
          One-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                    0.43                    0.63                       0.33
                                          Percentage Change                     16.7                     8.5                       17.4
                                               Estimate                        0.0790                  0.0703                     0.0678
                                            Standard Error                    (0.0086)                (0.0156)                   (0.0164)
          Two-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                    0.40                    0.58                       0.30
                                          Percentage Change                     19.7                    12.2                       22.3
                                               Estimate                        0.0721                  0.0879                     0.0290
                                            Standard Error                    (0.0144)                (0.0390)                   (0.0251)
          Five-Year Exit
                                         Counterfactual Mean                    0.35                    0.48                       0.31
                                          Percentage Change                     20.6                    18.5                        9.5

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on take up of retirement benefits and labor market
exit for winners aged 62-64. The dependent variables are binary indicators for the receipt of OASI benefits and labor force exit respectively. These
estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income (nt ) as the endogenous variable.
For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for
post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and then form the ratio to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports
mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of
unearned income for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income.
We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled
by $10,000. The counterfactual means correspond to the fraction of winners that would have taken up retirement benefits or exited the labor market
in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $10,000 in percentage change terms
relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                          4
                  Table A.5: Effects of unearned income on entrepreneurship and self-employment


                                                                                                          Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                                  Full Sample
                Outcome                                    Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                                        (1)                  (2)                        (3)
                                                     Estimate                        0.0107                  0.0092                      0.0115
                                                  Standard Error                    (0.0006)                (0.0025)                    (0.0009)
  Transition to Low-Paying SE
                                               Counterfactual Mean                    0.03                    0.05                        0.03
                                                Percentage Change                     31.1                    17.1                        42.1
                                                     Estimate                       -0.0004                 -0.0009                     -0.0011
                                                  Standard Error                    (0.0004)                (0.0012)                    (0.0006)
 Transition to High-Paying SE
                                               Counterfactual Mean                    0.01                    0.01                        0.02
                                                Percentage Change                     -2.9                    -6.3                        -6.3

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on the propensity to start a business associated
with annual profits of $15,000 or less (low-paying SE), or a business with profits of more than $15,000 (high-paying SE). The estimation sample
is restricted to winners and not-yet winners in paid-employment at event time w - 2. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS
regression, as described in Section 3.3, using unearned income (nt ) as the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-
weighted averages of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and
then form the ratio to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned
income for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for subsamples of winners
falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard
errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $10,000. The counterfactual means
correspond to the fraction of employed winners that would have received income from self-employment in the absence of winning (see Appendix E
for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $10,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                           5
                                           Table A.6: Effects of wealth on job mobility


                                                                                               Quartile 1                Quartile 4
                                                                       Full Sample
             Outcome                             Value                                      Pre-Win Income            Pre-Win Income
                                                                              (1)                 (2)                       (3)
                                            Estimate                       0.0004                 0.0033                    -0.0043
                                         Standard Error                   (0.0018)               (0.0052)                   (0.0030)
    Any Job-to-Job Move
                                      Counterfactual Mean                   0.46                   0.67                       0.36
                                       Percentage Change                     0.1                    0.5                       -1.2
                                            Estimate                       0.0096                 0.0123                     0.0011
                                         Standard Error                   (0.0017)               (0.0053)                   (0.0026)
       Downward Move
                                      Counterfactual Mean                   0.23                   0.31                       0.19
                                       Percentage Change                     4.3                    4.0                        0.6
                                            Estimate                      -0.0092                -0.0090                    -0.0054
                                         Standard Error                   (0.0016)               (0.0052)                   (0.0023)
          Upward Move
                                      Counterfactual Mean                   0.24                   0.36                       0.17
                                       Percentage Change                    -3.9                   -2.5                       -3.2

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on the frequency and direction of job-to-job moves. The
estimation sample is restricted to winners and not-yet winners in paid-employment pre- and post-win. Outcomes are defined as binary and equal
to 1 if the firm is either different from, or higher or lower ranked than the firm prior to winning the lottery. Firms are ranked by the mean wage
paid to its employees. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3. For each outcome, we then
take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for the full analysis sample.
In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the
pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering
on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $100,000. The counterfactual means correspond to the job mobility rates that would
have occurred in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage
change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                        6
                              Table A.7: Effects of wealth on earnings by gender of the winner


                                                                                              Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                      Full Sample
                Group                         Value                                        Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                            (1)                  (2)                        (3)
                                                                                Winner Wage Earnings (per $100)
                                         Estimate                        -2.5714                 -1.6983                    -3.1973
                                      Standard Error                    (0.0826)                (0.0859)                   (0.2081)
           Male Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                  38235.23                14288.29                   66641.39
                                    Percentage Change                      -6.7                   -11.9                       -4.8
                                         Estimate                        -1.8539                 -1.0093                    -3.2610
                                      Standard Error                    (0.0651)                (0.0785)                   (0.2026)
         Female Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                  26576.05                10946.22                   47967.19
                                    Percentage Change                      -7.0                    -9.2                       -6.8
                                                                         Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings (per $100)
                                         Estimate                        -2.7046                 -1.7517                    -3.5947
                                      Standard Error                    (0.0852)                (0.1267)                   (0.2065)
           Male Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                  36131.60                15015.03                   62948.19
                                    Percentage Change                      -7.5                   -11.7                       -5.7
                                         Estimate                        -1.7193                 -0.8651                    -2.6204
                                      Standard Error                    (0.1041)                (0.1926)                   (0.3929)
         Female Winner
                                   Counterfactual Mean                  31112.13                12875.22                   58251.54
                                    Percentage Change                      -5.5                    -6.7                       -4.5

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on earnings separately by gender of the winner. These estimates
are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of
 w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of an extra
dollar of wealth. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects
of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross
income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means correspond
to the average earnings the winner would have received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change"
reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                           7
                         Table A.8: Effects of wealth on earnings by marital status of the winner


                                                                                                Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                       Full Sample
                Group                          Value                                         Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                              (1)                  (2)                        (3)
                                                                                 Winner Wage Earnings (per $100)
                                          Estimate                        -2.9677                  -2.6210                     -3.1574
                                       Standard Error                    (0.1194)                 (0.2250)                    (0.3004)
         Married Winner
                                    Counterfactual Mean                  38275.25                 11892.97                    62152.53
                                     Percentage Change                      -7.8                    -22.0                        -5.1
                                          Estimate                        -2.0146                  -1.2763                     -3.0077
                                       Standard Error                    (0.0603)                 (0.0634)                    (0.1749)
          Single Winner
                                    Counterfactual Mean                  29816.89                 13198.26                    57815.81
                                     Percentage Change                      -6.8                     -9.7                        -5.2
                                                                           Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings (per $100)
                                          Estimate                        -2.8043                  -2.3592                     -3.2473
                                       Standard Error                    (0.1400)                 (0.5071)                    (0.3593)
         Married Winner
                                    Counterfactual Mean                  38033.72                 12365.40                    63576.97
                                     Percentage Change                      -7.4                    -19.1                        -5.1
                                          Estimate                        -2.2221                  -1.3374                     -3.1445
                                       Standard Error                    (0.0693)                 (0.0961)                    (0.1907)
          Single Winner
                                    Counterfactual Mean                  30994.56                 14686.77                    58302.67
                                     Percentage Change                      -7.2                     -9.1                        -5.4

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on earnings separately by marital status of the winner. These
estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted
averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of
an extra dollar of wealth. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean
effects of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted
gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means
correspond to the average earnings the winner would have received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage
Change" reports the effect per $100,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                            8
                             Table A.9: Effects of unearned income on marriages and divorce


                                                                                           Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                                   Full Sample
             Outcome                        Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                          (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                        Estimate                       0.0174                 0.0388                     0.0009
                                     Standard Error                   (0.0018)               (0.0056)                   (0.0029)
          New Marriage
                                  Counterfactual Mean                   0.14                   0.14                       0.15
                                   Percentage Change                    12.3                   27.1                        0.6
                                        Estimate                      -0.0143                -0.0309                    -0.0122
                                     Standard Error                   (0.0022)               (0.0087)                   (0.0032)
              Divorce
                                  Counterfactual Mean                   0.11                   0.17                       0.09
                                   Percentage Change                    -12.4                  -18.1                      -13.4

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income on the propensity to enter or leave marriage. The
estimation sample is restricted to winners and not-yet winners that are tax filers. When we study the effect on new marriages (divorce), we further
restrict the sample to individuals that were not married (married) in w - 2. These estimates are calculated by first estimating a 2SLS regression, as
described in Section 3.3, using unearned income (nt ) as the endogenous variable. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages
of w, and w, for each event time , and then take the mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, and then form the ratio
to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of unearned income. Column 1 reports mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for the full
analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of unearned income for subsamples of winners falling into the first
and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate standard errors (reported
in parenthesis), clustering on winner. To ease interpretability, each estimate is scaled by $10,000. The counterfactual means correspond to the
marriage and divorce rates that would have occurred in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports
the effect per $10,000 in percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                                                                         9
                      Table A.10: Effects of wealth on wage earnings of winners and their spouse


                                                                                       Quartile 1                 Quartile 4
                                                               Full Sample
               Group                    Value                                       Pre-Win Income             Pre-Win Income
                                                                      (1)                 (2)                        (3)
                                   Estimate                       -2.9677                 -2.6210                    -3.1574
                                Standard Error                   (0.1194)                (0.2250)                   (0.3004)
               Winner
                             Counterfactual Mean                 38275.25                11892.97                   62152.53
                              Percentage Change                     -7.8                   -22.0                       -5.1
                                   Estimate                       -1.0505                 -0.3263                    -1.7283
                                Standard Error                   (0.1032)                 (0.2175)                  (0.3223)
               Spouse
                             Counterfactual Mean                 27141.85                 6727.89                   46890.46
                              Percentage Change                     -3.9                    -4.8                       -3.7

Notes: This table presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on wage earnings for winners and non-winning spouses. The
estimation sample is restricted to married couples. Estimates are calculated by first estimating separate regressions for the first- and second-stage
model as described in Section 3.3. For each outcome, we then take cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each event time , and then take the
mean across estimates for post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} to recover the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth. Column 1 reports mean effects
of an extra dollar of wealth for the full analysis sample. In columns 2 and 3, we report mean effects of an extra dollar of wealth for subsamples of
winners falling into the first and fourth quartile of the pre-win distribution of per-adult adjusted gross income. We use the delta method to calculate
standard errors (reported in parenthesis), clustering on winner. The counterfactual means correspond to the average earnings the winner and spouse
would have received in the absence of winning (see Appendix E for details). The row "Percentage Change" reports the effect per $100,000 in
percentage change terms relative to the counterfactual mean.




                          Table A.11: Summary statistics for winning member of the household


                                                                                  Winner         Spouse
                                                                                   (1)             (2)
                                         Covariate                Statistic
                                         Wage Earnings             Mean           $42,465        $33,037
                                         Employment                Prop.            0.80           0.73
                                         Age                       Prop.           47.07          46.65
                                         Female                    Prop.            0.36           0.64
                                         Primary Earner            Prop.            0.62           0.38
                                         Older Member              Prop.            0.50           0.50
                                         Same Age                  Prop.            0.11           0.11
                                                                                        p < 0.001

Notes: This table presents a summary of the descriptive statistics in our sample of married winners, separately for the winner and spouse. All
monetary values are reported in 2016 U.S. dollars, using the Consumer Price Index to adjust for inflation. All values are measured two years prior to
the win year. At the bottom of the table, we report the p-value from an F -test that one or more of the covariate means is different between winners
and their spouses.




                                                                         10
B      Appendix Figures


                        Figure B.1: Comparison of approaches to control for life-cycle effects




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on winner wage earnings. For the red series, each set of estimates is based on
estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for
each event time . For the blue series, we instead use a non-parametric estimator due to Calloway and Sant'Anna (2020) which adjusts for age
differences between current and later winners through an inverse-probability-weighted (IPW) DiD estimator. 90 percent confidence intervals are
displayed for the red series, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                                                                     11
                       Figure B.2: Unadjusted versus winsorized estimates of effect of winning




Notes: In this figure, we summarize the estimates of the effect of winning the lottery on winner wage earnings corresponding to an unadjusted
measure of wage earnings ("Unadjusted") as well as various winsorized measures. Each set of estimates is based on estimating a version of
equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90
percent confidence intervals are displayed for the "Unadjusted" estimates, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event
time.




                   Figure B.3: Effect of winning on per-adult capital income and its components




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on per-adult capital income, as well as all of the components comprising capital
income. Each set of estimates is based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking
cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. Throughout, we
use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                                                                      12
                                                       (a) Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings

                                            Figure B.4: Wealth effects by age of winner

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the mean effect of an extra dollar of wealth on per-adult total labor earnings. The estimates are calculated by
first estimating a 2SLS regression, as described in Section 3.3 for the binary outcome, then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of  w, for each
event time , then taking the mean across estimates for all post-win event times {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} ("Avg (+1 to +5)"), a shorter-run set of post-win event
times {1, 2} ("Short Run (+1 to +2)"), and a longer-run set of post-win event times {3, 4, 5} ("Long Run (+3 to +5)"). For each temporal average,
we report wealth effects for the subsample of younger winners (age 30 - 46) and older winners (age 47 - 64). 90 percent confidence intervals are
displayed, clustering on winner.




                                                                          13
                                   Figure B.5: Effect of winning on geographic mobility




                      (a) Full sample                                                             (b) Homeowners and renters




               (c) Young and old winners                                                          (d) Parents with young kids




                                                       (e) Work attachment

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on geographic mobility by demographic characteristics. Each set of estimates is
based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of
w, for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event
time.




                                                                      14
                                    Figure B.6: Effect of winning on labor market dynamics




            (a) Claiming social security benefits                                                           (b) Labor market exit




(c) Transition from paid employment into self-employment                                                  (d) Job-to-job transitions

 Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on various outcomes related to labor market dynamics, based on estimating a version
 of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90
 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. In the regressions for subfigures (a)-(c),, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.
 In the regressions for subfigure (d), by construction of the outcome variables, the regression coefficients in w - 2 are zero. To allow for potentially
 different annual transition rates between current and later winners, we then normalize the effect in event time w - 1 to be zero in these regressions.




                                                                          15
                                 Figure B.7: Effect of winning by gender and marital status




     (a) Wage earnings of male and female winners                                  (b) Total per-adult labor income of male and female winners




   (c) Wage earnings of single and married winners                                (d) Total per-adult labor income of single and married winners

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on earnings by gender and marital status of the winner. Each set of estimates is based
on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome, and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for
each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner. Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                                                                        16
                              Figure B.8: Effect of winning on family formation and stability




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on family formation and stability. The estimation sample is restricted to winners and
not-yet winners that are tax filers. When we study the effect on new marriages (divorce), we further restrict the sample to individuals that were not
married (married) in w - 2. Each set of estimates is based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome,
and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner.
Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                Figure B.9: Effect of winning on wage earnings of the winner and his or her spouse




Notes: This figure presents estimates of the impact of winning on wage earnings for winners and non-winning spouses. The estimation sample is
restricted to married couples. Each set of estimates is based on estimating a version of equation (3.4) (as described in Section 3.1) for each outcome,
and then taking cohort-size-weighted averages of w, for each event time . 90 percent confidence intervals are displayed, clustering on winner.
Throughout, we use w - 2 as the omitted event time.




                                                                         17
                            (a) Marginal tax rates                                               (b) Total labor earnings

   Figure B.10: The effect of an unconditional cash transfer on marginal tax rates and total labor earnings


Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our analysis of the effects of UBI program on a) marginal tax rates and b) total labor earnings. In both
figures, the x-axis corresponds to a value of the compensated labor supply elasticity,  c . In a), the dependent variable is a measure of the change in
marginal tax rates due to the introduction of a marginal UBI, scaled by $1,000. In b), the dependent variable is the change in total labor earnings
due to the introduction of a marginal UBI. The line in both figures corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered using our estimated
earnings responses for a given value of the compensated labor supply elasticity.




                                                                          18
                     (a) % change in total earnings (Y )                                        (b) % change in revenues (R)

     Figure B.11: The effect of a 1 pp increase in the top tax rate on total labor earnings and tax revenues


Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our analysis of the effects of an increase in top marginal tax rates on a) total labor earnings and b) total
revenues. In both figures, the x-axis corresponds to a value of the compensated labor supply elasticity,  c . In a), the dependent variable is a measure
of the percentage change in total labor earnings due to an increase in top marginal tax rates. In b), the dependent variable is the percentage change
in total revenues due to an increase in top marginal tax rates. In both figures, we scale the dependent variable by 0.01, and so the units are the
percentage change due to a 1 percentage point increase in the top marginal tax rate. The darker line in both figures corresponds to the value of the
dependent variable recovered using our estimated earnings responses for a given value of the compensated labor supply elasticity. The lighter line
in both figures corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered for a given value of the compensated labor supply elasticity assuming
no income effects.




                  Figure B.12: Revenue-maximizing top tax rates (with and without income effects)


Notes: In this figure, we report the results of our application of the optimal tax formula of Diamond and Saez (2011), taking expression (H.48) and
assuming policy invariance to recover revenue-maximizing tax rates using equation (5.21). In the figure, the x-axis corresponds to a value of the
compensated labor supply elasticity,   ¯c  . The darker line corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered using our estimated earnings
                                        ¯
responses for a given value of the compensated labor supply elasticity. The lighter line corresponds to the value of the dependent variable recovered
for a given value of the compensated labor supply elasticity assuming no income effects.




                                                                            19
C    Definition of variables and their sources
    · Age: Age of an individual in calendar year t is measured as the difference between t and birth year
      reported for each de-identified Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) on Data Master-1 (DM-1) from
      the Social Security Administration.

    · Gender: Gender of an individual is reported for each de-identified TIN on DM-1 from the Social
      Security Administration.

    · Marital status: For tax filers, marital status is determined based on the filing status observed on Form
      1040 at the tax-paying unit (TPU) level. All non-filers are treated as single, in line with Cilke (1998),
      Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez, Schanzenbach and Yagan (2011), and subsequent work utilizing ad-
      ministrative tax records in the U.S.

    · Form W-2G reported gross winnings: Reported in box 1 ("Gross winnings") of Form W-2G for each
      de-identified TIN. In the administrative data, the source of the winnings is labeled, with a separate
      category for payments from state lotteries. We only utilize Form W-2G issued by state lotteries for
      lottery payments.

    · Wage earnings: Reported in box 1 of Form W-2 for each de-identified TIN. For individuals receiving
      multiple W-2s in a given calendar year (from multiple employers), we sum across all W-2s in the
      same calendar year. This measure of wage earnings corresponds to total taxable remuneration for
      labor services of a direct employee, and includes wages, tips, salary, and taxable fringe benefits. For
      individuals with no Form W-2 in a given calendar year, wage earnings are set to 0.

    · Employment: A binary indicator for having positive wage earnings (as defined above) for each de-
      identified TIN in each calendar year.

    · Employer: For individuals linked to a single firm through Form W-2, this is the identity of their
      employer (which is a de-identified employer ID number, or EIN). For individuals linked to multiple
      firms through Form W-2, this is the identity of the highest-paying employer.

    · Per-adult wage earnings: For single workers, this is equivalent to wage earnings as defined above.
      For married workers, this is the sum of own and spouse wage earnings in a given calendar year,
      divided by 2 (that is, per-adult). We use Form 1040 filing in order to identify married workers and
      make spousal links.

    · Self-employment income: For single tax filers, we define self-employment income as the sum of
      self-employment business income (Form 1040), farm income (Form 1040), and partnership income
      (Schedule E) in a given calendar year. For married tax filers, this is self-employment income of the
      TPU, divided by 2 (that is, per-adult). For non-filers, self-employment income is set to 0.

    · Total labor earnings: The sum of per-adult wage earnings and self-employment income, both as
      defined above.

                                                     20
· Capital income: For single tax filers, we define capital income as the sum of dividend income (Form
  1040), interest income (Form 1040), pension and annuity income (Form 1040), rental and royalty
  income (Form 1040 Schedule E), and non-labor income from estates, trusts, farms, and mortgage
  investments (Form 1040 Schedule E) in a given calendar year. For married tax filers, this is capital
  income of the TPU, divided by 2 (that is, per-adult). For non-filers, capital income is set to 0.

· Social Security benefit payments: For single tax filers, we define Social Security benefit payments
  as the gross Social Security benefit payments reported on Form 1040 in a given calendar year. For
  married tax filers, this is Social Security benefit payments of the TPU, divided by 2 (that is, per-adult).
  For non-filers, Social Security benefit payments is set to 0.

· Unemployment insurance payments: For single tax filers, we define unemployment insurance pay-
  ments as the gross unemployment insurance payments reported on Form 1040 in a given calendar
  year. For married tax filers, this is unemployment insurance payments of the TPU, divided by 2 (that
  is, per-adult). For non-filers, unemployment insurance payments is set to 0.

· Gross income: For single tax filers, this is the sum of total labor earnings, capital income, Social
  Security payments, and unemployment insurance payments. For married tax filers, this is the gross
  income of the TPU, divided by 2 (that is, per-adult).

· Adjusted gross income: For single tax filers, this is adjusted gross income as reported on Form 1040.
  For married tax filers, this is the adjusted gross income reported for the TPU, divided by 2 (that is,
  per-adult). For non-filers, adjusted gross income is set to 0.

· Homeownership: A binary indicator for the receipt of at least one Form 1098 for each de-identified
  TIN in each calendar year. All individuals paying mortgage interest in excess of $600 (per mortgage)
  in a calendar year receive a Form 1098 . Using such a binary indicator as a proxy for homeownership
  is in line with past work utilizing tax return data in the U.S. (e.g., Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez,
  Schanzenbach and Yagan, 2011).

· Total income taxes: For single tax filers, this is the combined federal and state income taxes owed, as
  calculated using the combined federal and state tax calculator of Bakija (2019). For married tax filers,
  this is the combined federal and state income taxes owed for the TPU, divided by 2 (that is, per-adult).
  For non-filers, total income taxes are set to 0.

· Marginal tax rate: The change in total income taxes of the TPU (as defined above) from a mechanical
  $1 increase in wage earnings (i.e., a forward difference approximation), using the combined federal
  and state tax calculator of Bakija (2019).

· Census tract: The 2010 Census tract (Census-defined geographic aggregation) corresponding to the
  ZIP Code of an individual in calendar year t. To map ZIP Code to 2010 Census tract, we use quar-
  terly crosswalk files provided in HUD crosswalk files, accessible here: https://www.huduser.gov/
  portal/datasets/usps_crosswalk.html.


                                                     21
· Census county: The 2010 Census county corresponding to the ZIP Code of an individual in calendar
  year t. A Census county nests multiple Census tracts.

· Tract-level local labor market measures: We consider several measures of local labor markets,
  each defined as a time-invariant measure for each 2010 Census tract. The source of these tract-
  level measures is the Opportunity Atlas, as introduced in Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and
  Porter (2020). Details on each measure, and the crosswalk files, are accessible here: https://
  opportunityinsights.org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/. We briefly describe each mea-
  sure below, taking descriptions from: https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/
  2019/07/Codebook-for-Table-9.pdf

     ­ Wage growth: Wage growth for high school graduates. Wages are constructed by dividing the
       average high school graduate annual earnings by the product of overall average weekly hours
       worked and 52. High school graduate wage growth is then computed as the difference in loga-
       rithms between high school graduate wages in 2010-2014 and school graduate wages in 2005-
       2009. Wages are measured in the 2005-2009 and 2010-2014 American Community Surveys.
     ­ Job growth: Average annualized job growth rate over the time period 2004 to 2013. Constructed
       using LODES - WAC data files provided by the Census Bureau. Data unavailable for Mas-
       sachusetts and Washington D.C.
     ­ Job density: Number of jobs per square mile in each tract. Constructed using LODES - WAC
       data files provided by the Census Bureau.
     ­ Total jobs: Total number of jobs in own and neighboring tracts whose centroids fall within a
       radius of 5 miles from own tract centroid. Constructed using information from the Workplace
       Area Characteristics (WAC) data files in the LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics
       (LODES) provided by the Census Bureau.
     ­ High-paying jobs: Number of jobs with earnings greater than $3,333 per month in own and
       neighboring tracts whose centroids fall within a radius of 5 miles from own tract centroid. Con-
       structed using LODES - WAC data files provided by the Census Bureau.
     ­ Employment rate: The rate of employment computed as total employed population (the sum
       of employed females and employed males) divided by the total population 16 years and over.
       Obtained from 2000 Decennial Census
     ­ Short commute: Share of workers 16 years and over who do not work at home whose commute
       is shorter than 15 minutes. Measured in the 2006-2010 ACS.
     ­ Commute time: Mean commute time for workers over 16 years old in the tract, as measured in
       the 2000 Decennial Census.
     ­ Population density: Number of residents per square mile, calculated by dividing the total tract
       level population in the Decennial Census from 2010 with tract land area given in square miles
       from the 2010 Census Gazetteer Files


                                               22
· Tract-level neighborhood quality measures: We consider several measures of neighborhood quality,
  each defined as a time-invariant measure for each 2010 Census tract. The descriptions and sources of
  these tract-level measures are as follows:

     ­ Opportunity Atlas (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): Average family income
       for children with parents at the 25th percentile of income; source:https://opportunityinsights.
       org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ Childhood Opportunity Index (Noelke, McArdle, Baek, Huntington, Huber, Hardy and Acevedo-
       Garcia, 2020): Omnibus index of neighborhood quality, with a focus on conditions that encour-
       age upward mobility of children; source: https://data.diversitydatakids.org/dataset/
       coi20-child-opportunity-index-2-0-database
     ­ Area Deprivation Index (Kind and Buckingham, 2018): Omnibus index of neighborhood dis-
       advantage, with a focus on susceptibility to disease and poor health; source: https://www.
       neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/
     ­ Poverty rate (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): Share of individuals in
       the tract below the federal poverty line, measured in the 2006-2010 ACS; source: https:
       //opportunityinsights.org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ College attainment (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): Number of people
       aged 25 or older who have a bachelor's degree, master's degree, professional school degree,
       or doctorate degree, divided by the total number of people aged 25 or older in a Census tract.
       Estimated using the 2006-2010 ACS; source: https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/
       the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ Test scores (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): Mean 3rd grade math test
       scores in 2013; source: https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ Teen birth (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): Fraction of women who grew
       up in the given tract who ever claimed a child who was born when they were between the ages of
       13 and 19 as a dependent at any point; source: https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/
       the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ Single parents (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): The number of households
       with females heads (and no husband present) or male heads (and no wife present) with own
       children under 18 years old present divided by the total number of households with own children
       present. Estimated using the 2006-2010 ACS; source: https://opportunityinsights.org/
       paper/the-opportunity-atlas/
     ­ Median rent (2BR) (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter, 2020): The median gross rent
       for renter-occupied housing units with two bedrooms that pay cash rent (from the 2011-2015
       ACS); source: https://opportunityinsights.org/paper/the-opportunity-atlas/




                                               23
D     Decomposition into intensive and extensive margin contributions
Preliminaries. For an earnings variable Y, let Yi,t (1) and Yi,t (0) be the potential outcomes of an individual
that has experienced or has not experienced her first-observed win, respectively. Furthermore, let Ei,t 
1{Yi,t = 0} be a binary random variable indicating whether an individual works. Observed outcomes are
linked to potential outcomes as follows

                                    Yi,t = Yi,t (0) + Di,t (Yi,t (1) - Yi,t (0))
                                    Ei,t = Ei,t (0) + Di,t (Ei,t (1) - Ei,t (0)),                             (D.1)

where Di,t is an indicator variable that takes value 1 if individual i experiences the first-observed lottery win
by year t.
     For simplicity, we focus on a particular cohort w and event time          > 0. Specifically, we are interested
in decomposing the effect of winning in year w on earnings Y in the event time               > 0 into extensive- and
intensive-margin responses. It is well known that under a common trends assumption, the average effect of
winning in w in the event time can be identified with a DiD estimator as follows:

                             ~ i,w = 1
w,  E Yi,w+ (1) - Yi,w+ (0)| D
                          ~ i,w = 1 - E Yi,w+ - Yi,w-s | D
     = E Yi,w+ - Yi,w-s | D                              ~ i,w = 0                  ( DiD(Yw+ ))
                 ~ i,w = 1 - E Yi,w+ | D
     = E Yi,w+ | D                     ~ i,w = 0 - E Yi,w-s | D
                                                              ~ i,w = 1 - E Yi,w-s | D
                                                                                     ~ i,w = 0                     ,

                              (A)                                                      (B)


where                                         
                                              1 if i won in w
                                    ~ i,w
                                    D       =                           .
                                              0 if i has not won by w +


Main decomposition of DiD(Yw+ ). We decompose each of the terms (A) and (B):

              ~ i,w = 1, Ei,w+ = 1 P Ei,w+ = 1| D
A = E Yi,w+ | D                                 ~ i,w = 1

                ~ i,w = 0, Ei,w+ = 1 P Ei,w+ = 1| D
    - E Yi,w+ | D                                 ~ i,w = 0

                ~ i,w = 1, Ei,w+ = 1 - E Yi,w+ | D
    = E Yi,w+ | D                                ~ i,w = 0, Ei,w+ = 1                                ~ i,w = 0
                                                                                        P Ei,w+ = 1| D
                                                w+   intensive margin (post-win)

                ~ i,w = 1, Ei,w+ = 1
    + E Yi,w+ | D                                           ~ i,w = 1 - P Ei,w+ = 1| D
                                               P Ei,w+ = 1| D                        ~ i,w = 0

                                            w+   extensive margin (post-win)


and analogously,




                                                           24
               ~ i,w = 1, Ei,w-s = 1 - E Yi,w-s | D
B = E Yi,w-s | D                                  ~ i,w = 0, Ei,w-s = 1                                             ~ i,w = 0
                                                                                                      P Ei,w-s = 1| D
                                                  w-s   intensive margin (pre-win)

                ~ i,w = 1, Ei,w-s = 1
   + E Yi,w-s | D                                              ~ i,w = 1 - P Ei,w-s = 1| D
                                                 P Ei,w-s = 1| D                         ~ i,w = 0

                                             w-s   extensive margin (pre-win)


Then, bringing the two separate decompositions together, we have

                                    DiD(Yw+ ) = w+ - w-s + w+ - w-s ,
                                                       intensive margin      extensive margin


We perform these decompositions for each cohort w and each event time . In Table 3.3, we report the share
of the observed earnings response that is attributable to the extensive-margin response for each quartile,

                                                 (w)     w   w (w+ - w-s )
                                                                                    .
                                                   (w)       w   w DiD(Yw+ )

We then construct the aggregate share of the observed earnings response that is attributable to the extensive-
margin as the mean of the weighted-average extensive contribution                        (w)      w   w (w+ - w-s ) across
quartiles divided by the mean of the weighted-average total response                    (w)     w   w DiD(Yw+ ) across quar-
tiles.47

Decomposition of per-unit DiD(Yw+ ). From the above expression, it follows immediately that the de-
composition of earnings response per dollar of lottery winnings is

                         DiD(Yw+ )            w+ - w-s             w+ - w-s
                                          =                    +                    ,                                   (D.2)
                                ~ i,w = 1
                       E Li,w | D                    ~ i,w = 1
                                            E Li,w | D                    ~ i,w = 1
                                                                 E Li,w | D
                                                   intensive margin (per unit)    extensive margin (per unit)


where Li,w are the lottery winnings of household i of cohort w.where w is the weight for cohort w and we
use (w) as each cohort w may have a distinct set of identified event-time estimates.

Decomposing differences across subset-specific per-unit DiD(Yw+ ). In Figure 3.5, we report how
wealth effects differ across prize size. Next, we are interested in decomposing the difference in the ob-
served earnings response per dollar of lottery winnings between two subsets of winners defined according
to a time-invariant covariate X  {x , x }. Specifically, we decompose the difference in the per-dollar earn-
ings response between those who won between $30,000 to $300,000 (x ) and those who won more than
$1,000,000 (x ).
  47
    Using our theoretical framework in Section 5, we can conduct an alternative decomposition using our estimates of MPE(y ) in
Table 4.1 and the change in employment per dollar of unearned income as an estimate of L (y ). This decomposition yields very
similar results.


                                                                 25
    As shown in Figure 3.5, we observe

                          DiD(Yw+ , X = x )                                         DiD(Yw+ , X = x )
   =              w|x                                       -             w|x                                     > 0.
          (w) w
                                 ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                        E Li,w | D                               (w) w
                                                                                           ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                                                  E Li,w | D

Using the decomposition in equation (D.2), we can equivalently write this as

                                          w+ (x ) - w-s (x ) + w+ (x ) - w-s (x )
                     =              w|x
                            (w) w
                                                         ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                E Li,w | D
                                          w+ (x ) - w-s (x ) + w+ (x ) - w-s (x )
                        -           w|x                                           .
                            (w) w
                                                          ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                 E Li,w | D

Re-arranging the terms yields

                              w+ (x ) - w-s (x )                                      (w+ (x ) - w-s (x ))
      =              w|x                                        -            w|x
             (w) w
                                     ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                            E Li,w | D                               (w) w
                                                                                              ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                                                     E Li,w | D
                                      between-group difference in intensive margin (per unit)
                              w+ (x ) - w-s (x )                                      (w+ (x ) - w-s (x ))
         +           w|x                                        -            w|x
             (w) w
                                     ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                            E Li,w | D                               (w) w
                                                                                              ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                                                     E Li,w | D
                                      between-group difference in extensive margin (per unit)


In Table 3.4, we report the share that is attributable to the between-group difference on the extensive margin
for each quartile,
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                             w+ (x ) - w-s (x )                                      (w+ (x ) - w-s (x ))         
    -1               w|x                                      -              w|x                                     .
         
             (w) w
                                    ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                           E Li,w | D                                (w) w
                                                                                             ~ i,w = 1, Xi = x
                                                                                    E Li,w | D                    
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                                                                 d

We then construct the aggregate share that is attributable to the between-group difference on the extensive
margin as the mean of the weighted-average extensive contribution per dollar d across quartiles divided by
the mean of the weighted-average total response per dollar  across quartiles.




                                                            26
E      Recovering counterfactual means with DiD
In this section, we discuss how we can recover the counterfactual mean of an outcome for lottery winners
had they not won. Throughout, for simplicity, we focus on a particular cohort w and event time > 0, and
so the discussion below is implicitly conditional on w and .
     For an economic outcome variable Y, let Yi,t (1) and Yi,t (0) be the potential outcomes of an individual
that has experienced or has not experienced her first-observed win, respectively. We can represent observed
Yi,t as

                                   Yi,t = Yi,t (0) + Di,t (Yi,t (1) - Yi,t (0)),                         (E.1)

where Di,t is an indicator variable that takes value 1 if individual i experiences the first-observed lottery
win by year t. We are interested in estimating the average effect of winning in year w on outcome Y in the
event time  0, which we define as w,  E [ Yi,w+ (1) - Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w] . The obvious difficulty
is that while E [ Yi,w+ (1)| i won in w] is observed directly, the counterfactual E [ Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w] is
not. Under an identifying common trend assumption

    E [ Yi,w+ (0) - Yi,w-s (0)| i won in w] = E [ Yi,w+ (0) - Yi,w-s (0)| i has not won by w + ] ,       (E.2)

standard arguments imply that DiD estimator (3.3) recovers w, . Under the same common trend assump-
tion, we can also identify E [ Yi,w+ (1)| i won in w] with a simple rearrangement of terms: E [ Yi,w+ (0)| i won in w] =
E [ Yi,w+ | i won in w] - w, .
     When we implement this approach, we calculate E [ Yi,w+ (1)| i won in w] directly as the observed mean
for cohort w in event time , and we use our cohort-specific event-study estimates of equation (3.4) as our
estimate of w, .




                                                        27
F    Decomposition of moving probabilities
In this section, we discuss how we can decompose the total effect of moving into the contribution from
mutually exclusive and exhaustive types of moves. Throughout, for simplicity, we focus on a particular
cohort w and event time > 0, and so the discussion below is implicitly conditional on w and .
    Following the discussion in Section 6.1, let Mi,t be a binary indicator equal to 1 if the household's
Census tract is different from that in the prior year, and 0 otherwise. Let d  {1, 2, 3}denote three mutually
                                             d denote an indicator corresponding to a move of type d.
exclusive and exhaustive types of moves. LetMi,t
By definition, we can decompose the total probability of moving as follows:

                                                   1                                2                                3
               P [Mi,t = 1]             =       P Mi,t =1                +       P Mi,t =1                +       P Mi,t =1                (F.1)
          total probability of moving       probability of type-1 move       probability of type-2 move       probability of type-3 move


Now, we consider the total effect on moving for cohort w in event time l. As elsewhere, we define potential
outcomes for moving: Mi,t (1) and Mi,t (0) are the potential outcomes of an individual that has experienced
or has not experienced her first-observed win, respectively. We define analogous potential outcomes for
each type-d move. The average effect of winning in year w on moving probability in the event time  0 is

                                            E [ Mi,w+ (1) - Mi,w+ (0)| i won in w] .                                                       (F.2)

By substituting (F.1) into (F.2), we can re-write as follows:

                                                      1            1
          E [ Mi,w+ (1) - Mi,w+ (0)| i won in w] = E Mi,w + (1) - Mi,w+ (0) i won in w
                  total effect on probability of moving                                   effect on type-1 move
                                                                              2            2
                                                                         + E Mi,w + (1) - Mi,w+ (0) i won in w
                                                                                             effect on type-2 move
                                                                              3            3
                                                                         + E Mi,w + (1) - Mi,w+ (0) i won in w .
                                                                                              effect on type-3 move


Finally, we can calculate the contribution of each component to the total moving effect by dividing the
component effect by the total effect (F.2).




                                                                     28
G     A static unitary model of household labor supply
Consider a family with two decision-making members i  {1, 2} of working age. In the unitary model
of family labor supply, the household behaves as if it maximizes a joint, price-independent social utility
function subject to a family budget constraint. The household's maximization problem reads


                                               max u(c, y1 , y2 )
                                             {c,y1 ,y2 }

subject to
                                  c = y1 + y2 - T (y1 + y2 ) + n1 + n2 ,

where c = c1 + c2 is household consumption, and yi and ni are earned and unearned income of household
member i, respectively. Our objective is to analyze how a change in n1 and n2 affects the labor supply of
both household members.
    Assuming an interior solution, the FOCs of this optimization problem are

                           (1 - T (y1 + y2 ))uc (c, y1 , y2 ) + uy1 (c, y1 , y2 ) = 0
                           (1 - T (y1 + y2 ))uc (c, y1 , y2 ) + uy2 (c, y1 , y2 ) = 0                       (G.1)

These first-order conditions implicitly define the Marshallian labor supply functions y1 = y1 (n1 , n2 ) and
y2 = y2 (n1 , n2 ) of each household member. Total differentiation yields

-   (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c dn1 + (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c dn2 = (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy1 + uy1 y1 - T uc dy1
                                                                + (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy2 + ucy1 ) + uy1 y2 - T uc dy2
-   (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c dn1 + (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c dn2 = (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy1 + ucy2 ) + uy2 y1 - T uc dy1
                                                                + (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy2 + uy2 y2 - T uc dy2
                                                                                                             (G.2)

Moreover, we can write

                                              y1                y1
                                        dy1 =    dn1 +             dn2
                                              n1                n2
                                              y2                y2
                                        dy2 =    dn1 +             dn2 .                                    (G.3)
                                              n1                n2

Next, we consider, without loss of generality, an increase in unearned income for household member 1, while
unearned income of household member 2 remains unchanged, i.e., dn1 > 0 and dn2 = 0. Substituting (G.3)




                                                           29
into (G.2) and dividing through by dn1 yields

                                                                                         y1
        - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c = (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy1 + uy1 y1 - T uc
                                                                                         n1
                                                               J11
                                                                                                 y2
                                   + (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy2 + ucy1 ) + uy1 y2 - T uc
                                                                                                 n1
                                                                  J12
                                                                                                  y1
        - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c = (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy1 + ucy2 ) + uy2 y1 - T uc
                                                                                                  n1
                                                                     J21
                                                                                         y2
                                   + (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy2 + uy2 y2 - T uc
                                                                                         n1
                                                               J22

We can re-write this system of equations in matrix form as

                                            y1
                            J11 J12         n1           - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c
                                            y2      =
                            J21 J22         n1           - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c
                               J

By Cramer's rule, the solution then reads

                                        y1   |J1 |             y2 |J2 |
                                           =             and     =
                                        n1    |J |             n1 |J |

where |J | is the determinant of the matrix J and

         |J1 | = - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c     (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy2 + uy2 y2 - T uc
              + (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c      (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy2 + ucy1 ) + uy1 y2 - T uc

and

         |J2 | = - (1 - T )2 ucc + uy2 c     (1 - T )2 ucc + 2(1 - T )ucy1 + uy1 y1 - T uc
              + (1 - T )2 ucc + uy1 c      (1 - T )2 ucc + (1 - T )(ucy1 + ucy2 ) + uy2 y1 - T uc

This formulation highlights that household members may differentially adjust their individual labor supply
in response to a given change in unearned income, unless uy1 c = uy2 c and uy2 y2 = uy1 y1 . Moreover, the
system of equations (G.2) implies that individual labor supply responses are symmetric,

                                        y1   y1                y2 y2
                                           =            and      =   .                                   (G.4)
                                        n1   n2                n1 n2

This, in turn, implies that household labor supply does not vary as a function of the recipient of the unearned
income. That is, we have
                                          (y1 + y2 )    (y1 + y2 )
                                                     =             .                                     (G.5)
                                            n1            n2

                                                        30
Testing the unitary model under random assignment of winning within households.                                    Let households
be indexed by i = 1, ..., N and let Di be an indicator variable that takes value 1 if household i wins the
lottery. Furthermore, let Ii  {1, 2} be a random variable that indicates the identity of the household member
who wins the lottery. Suppose that household member 1, on average, reduces his or her labor supply by more
than household member 2 in response to winning the lottery, i.e.,

                                           dy1,i            dy2,i
                                     E           Di = 1 < E       Di = 1 .                                                  (G.6)
                                           dni              dni

For concreteness, we begin with our empirical observation that winners adjust their labor supply on average
by more than the non-winning spouse:

        dy1,i                    dy2,i                                               dy2,i                    dy1,i
EI E          Di = 1, Ii = 1 + E       Di = 1, Ii = 2                < EI E                Di = 1, Ii = 1 + E       Di = 1, Ii = 2
         dni                      dni                                                 dni                      dni
                         winner response                                                                spouse response


which, in light of equation (G.6), can be re-written as

                                                 dy1,i                                 dy2,i
                 P ( Ii = 1| Di = 1)   E          dni    Di = 1, Ii = 2 - E             dni     Di = 1, Ii = 2
                                     >                                                                             .
                 P ( Ii = 2| Di = 1)   E
                                                 dy1,i
                                                         Di = 1, Ii = 1 - E
                                                                                       dy2,i
                                                                                                Di = 1, Ii = 1
                                                  dni                                   dni

                                                                                    P( Ii =1|Di =1)
Under random assignment of winning within households, we have                       P( Ii =2|Di =1)   = 1. Under the symmetry
                                                 dy1,i                    dy2,i
                                             E    dni
                                                         Di =1,Ii =2 -E    dni
                                                                                  Di =1,Ii =2
condition (G.4), we then also have that          dy1,i                    dy2,i                  = 1, which in turn implies that
                                             E    dni
                                                         Di =1,Ii =1 -E    dni
                                                                                  Di =1,Ii =1
winners cannot be more responsive than their spouses if winning is randomly assigned within the household
and the assumptions of the unitary model hold. Conversely, a finding of differential responses between
spouses may be due to either non-random assignment of winning within household or a violation of the
unitary model.




                                                               31
H       Appendix for Section 5
H.1     The canonical model of labor supply
In this section we derive explicit expressions for income and substitution effects in terms of properties of
the utility function ui . We apply the implicit function theorem to equation (5.3) to show that
                                          ui,c
                                          yi     + (1 -  )ui,cc + ui,cy
                               iu   =-                                           ui,yy   ,                            (H.1)
                                         (1 -  )ui,cc + 2ui,cy +                 1-
                                                  (1 -  )ui,cc + ui,cy
                               i = -                                            .                                     (H.2)
                                         (1 -  )2 ui,cc + 2(1 -  )ui,cy + ui,yy

Using Slutsky (5.4), we can also show that

                                                                     ui,c
                                ic = -                                                               .                (H.3)
                                            (1 -  )u                                         ui,yy
                                          yi         i,cc + 2ui,cy +                         1-


At the optimum, condition (5.3) implies that

                                                         ui,y
                                                     -        = 1 - .                                                 (H.4)
                                                         ui,c

Using this relationship, we can write equations (H.1), (H.2), and (H.3) as

                                         ui,y         ui,y      2                 ui,y
                                           
                                          yi     -    ui,c          ui,cc +       ui,c       ui,cy
                                iu   =           2                                                   ,                (H.5)
                                          ui,y                            ui,y
                                          ui,c       ui,cc - 2            ui,c   ui,cy + ui,yy
                                                         ui,y
                                                         ui,c       ui,cc - ui,cy
                                i =              2                                                   ,                (H.6)
                                          ui,y                            ui,y
                                          ui,c       ui,cc - 2            ui,c   ui,cy + ui,yy
                                                                    ui,y
                                                                      
                                                                     yi
                                ic =             2                                                   .                (H.7)
                                          ui,y                            ui,y
                                          ui,c       ui,cc - 2            ui,c   ui,cy + ui,yy

H.2     Proof of Lemma 1
Preliminaries. As a preliminary step, we consider maximization problem (5.8). The first-order condition
reads
                    int
             ui,y (yi         int
                        - T (yi   ) + n     int             int        int     int     int
                                       i , yi ) = - 1 - T (yi ) ui,c (yi - T (yi ) + ni , yi ).

Taking into account that L ni = 1, we apply the implicit function theorem to show

                                                             int ) u
                                                     1 - T (yi
               int                                                  i,cc + ui,cy
            L yi   =-                                                 2                                           .   (H.8)
                             int )u + 1 - T (y int )
                        -T (yi                                                              int ) u
                                                                          ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi
                                   i,c        i                                                    i,cy + ui,yy




                                                                32
                int )          2                     int ) u                            int
Let Ki  1 - T (yi                  ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi      i,cy + ui,yy and let i  T (yi ). We then write equation
(H.8) as
                                                    int )u
                                                T (yi            (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy
                                       int                i,c
                                    L yi   1-                 =-                       .                        (H.9)
                                                   Ki                    Ki
By substituting expressions (H.2) and (H.3) into equation (H.9), we obtain,

                                                        int          i
                                                     L yi   =              ,                                   (H.10)
                                                                  1 + i ic
                int )y int
            T (yi
where i     1-T (yi  int ) .
                       i




MPE. We now show that the MPE(y ) is well-defined, and given by the expression in Lemma 1. Since
L (y, 0) = 0 by definition, we get

                                        Ey [yi (Lann ) - y ]
                   
    MPE(y )  L Ey yi = ann
                       lim
                                 L 0            Lann
                                        (1 - L (y, Lann )) Ey yi    int (Lann ) - y
                                                                                               L (y, Lann )(0 - y )
                               = ann
                                  lim                                                +    lim
                                 L 0                       Lann                         Lann 0        Lann
                                               int    ann
                                             y (L ) - y                       L (y, L )ann
                                      lim i
                               = Ey ann                ann
                                                                - y ann lim
                                     L 0             L               L 0          Lann
                                       int                L (y, Lann )
                               = Ey L yi   - y ann lim                 .                                        (H.11)
                                                L 0          Lann

Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in Lann ,

                                                             L (y, Lann )
                                             L (y )  ann
                                                     lim                  0
                                                       L   0    Lann

exists. Therefore, MPE(y ) is well-defined.
   The first term in expression (H.11) is the intensive-margin contribution, while the second term represents
the extensive-margin contribution to MPE(y ). By substituting expression (H.10) into (H.11), we then obtain

                                            MPE(y ) = MPEint (y ) + MPEext (y ),

where
                                                        i
                                   MPEint (y )  Ey            ,     MPEext (y )  -yL (y ).
                                                     1 + i ic




                                                              33
MPT. We take similar steps to derive the expression for the MPT(y ) in Lemma 1. Concretely, we have

                                    Ey [T (yi  (Lann )) - T (y )]
                  
MPT(y )  L Ey T (yi ) = ann
                        lim
                             L 0                Lann
                                    (1 - L (y, Lann )) Ey T yi      int (Lann ) - T (y )
                                                                                                         L (y, Lann ) (T (0) - T (y ))
                           = ann
                              lim                                                             +    lim
                             L 0                              Lann                                Lann 0             Lann
                                              int     ann
                                    Ey T yi (L ) - T (y )                                                      ann
                                                                                                       L (y, L )
                           = ann
                              lim                    ann
                                                                      - (T (y ) - T (0)) ann    lim
                             L 0                  L                                          L 0          Lann
                                                y int (Lann ) - y                                   L (y, Lann )
                           = T (y )Ey annlim i                     -   ( T ( y ) - T (0))   lim
                                       L 0              Lann                               Lann 0      Lann
                                                                             L (y, L ) ann
                                          int
                           = T (y )Ey L yi    - (T (y ) - T (0)) ann lim                                           (H.12)
                                                                   L 0            Lann

Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in Lann ,

                                                          L (y, Lann )
                                         L (y )  ann
                                                 lim                   0
                                                   L    0    Lann

exists. Therefore, MPT(y ) is well-defined.
    The first term in expression (H.12) is the intensive-margin contribution, while the second term represents
the extensive-margin contribution to MPT(y ). By substituting expression (H.10) into (H.12), we then obtain

                                       MPT(y ) = MPTint (y ) + MPText (y ),

where
                                              i
                MPTint (y )  T (y )Ey               ,        MPText (y )  - (T (y ) - T (0)) L (y ).
                                           1 + i ic

H.3     Proof of Proposition 1
Preliminaries. As a preliminary step, we consider the maximization problem (5.8) under the UBI pro-
gram,
                                                    max ui (ci , yi )                                            (H.13)
                                                    ci ,yi

subject to
                                         ci = yi - T (yi ) -  (B )yi + ni.                                       (H.14)

The first-order condition reads

       int
ui,y (yi        int
           -T (yi             int
                    ) -  (B )yi   + n     int             int                int    int         int   int
                                     i , yi ) = - 1 - T (yi ) -  (B ) ui,c (yi -T (yi ) -  (B )yi + ni , yi ).
                                                                                                                 (H.15)
Taking into account that   B ni   = 1 and  (0) = 0, we apply the implicit function theorem to show

                                      int  
                                 1 - yi                   int ) u
                                                  1 - T (yi
            int                           B                      i,cc + ui,cy - ui,c B 
         B yi   =-                                           2                                           .       (H.16)
                          int )u + 1 - T (y int )
                     -T (yi                                                        int ) u
                                                                 ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi
                                i,c        i                                              i,cy + ui,yy




                                                             34
                int )              2                     int ) u                        int
Let Ki  1 - T (yi                      ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi      i,cy + ui,yy and i  T (yi ). We then write equation
(H.16) as
                                                                                                            ui,c
                   int )u
               T (yi            (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy   y int                    (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy +     int
                                                                                                            yi
    int                  i,c
 B yi       1-               =-                       + i                                       Ki
                                                                                                                   B  (H.17)
                  Ki                    Ki             1 - i                                   1-i

By substituting expressions (H.2) and (H.3) in equation (H.17), we get
                                                                                               ui,c
                                                            y int    (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy +    int
                                                                                               yi
                             int
                          B yi   [1      +   i ic ]   = i + i                    Ki
                                                                                                      B ,              (H.18)
                                                           1 - i                1-i

               int T (y int )
              yi
where i            1-i
                       i
                              .   By substituting expression (H.1) in (H.18), we end up with

                                                             i       int
                                                                    yi      iu
                                                 int
                                              B yi   =            -               B .                                  (H.19)
                                                          1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic

                                                    is well-defined, and given by the expression
Total earnings response. We now show that B Y  B Eyi
in Proposition 1. By definition, we have B (y, 0) = 0 for all y . We then get

                                  Ey [yi  (B ) - y ] dH (y )
           
  B Y  B Eyi = lim
                           B 0                  B
                                  [1 - B (y, B )] Ey yi    int (B ) - y dH (y )
                                                                                         B (y, B ) [0 - y ] dH (y )
                         = lim                                                   + lim
                           B 0                          B                          B 0             B
                                   Ey yi  int (B ) - y
                                                                            B (y, B )
                         =    lim                       dH (y ) - y lim                dH (y )
                             B 0             B                          B 0      B
                                         y int (B ) - y                       B (y, B )
                         = Ey lim i                      dH (y ) - y lim                dH (y )
                                  B 0            B                       B 0       B
                                     int                        B (y, B )
                         = Ey B yi       dH (y ) - y lim                  dH (y ).                            (H.20)
                                                         B 0        B

Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in B ,

                                                                     B (y, B )
                                                       B (y )  lim             0
                                                               B 0     B

exists. Therefore, B Y is well-defined. By substituting expression (H.19) in (H.20), we end up with

                                                 i        
                                                         yi     iu
                           B Y = E                    -               B  -             yB (y )dH (y ),
                                              1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic

        = y  (0) = y int (0).
where yi   i        i




                                                                    35
                                                                                (B )) in Proposition 1.
Total tax responses. We take similar steps to derive the expression for B ET (yi
Concretely, we have

                             Ey [T (yi (B )) - T (y )] dH (y )
       
B ET (yi (B )) = lim
                     B 0                     B
                             [1 - B (y, B )] Ey T yi      int (B ) - T (y ) dH (y )
                                                                                             B (y, B ) [T (0) - T (y )] dH (y )
                 = lim                                                              + lim
                     B 0                                B                             B 0                  B
                                     Ey yi  int (B ) - y
                                                                                           B (y, B )
                 =    T    (y ) lim                       dH (y ) - [T (y ) - T (0)] lim             dH (y )
                               B 0              B                                     B 0       B
                                          y int (B ) - y                                    B (y, B )
                 =    T    (y )Ey lim i                   dH (y ) - [T (y ) - T (0)] lim              dH (y )
                                    B 0          B                                     B 0       B
                                      int                                    B (y, B )
                 =    T    (y )Ey B yi    dH (y ) - [T (y ) - T (0)] lim                dH (y ).             (H.21)
                                                                         B 0      B

Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in B ,

                                                            B (y, B )
                                          B (y )  lim                 0
                                                      B 0     B
                    (B )) therefore is well-defined. By substituting expression (H.19) in (H.21), we get
exists, and B ET (yi

                                  i        
                                          yi     iu
           
    B ET (yi (B )) = Ei                -               B  -                 [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y ),    (H.22)
                               1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic

              ), and y  = y  (0) = y int (0).
where i  T (yi        i    i        i


Tax rate increase. In the first step, we derive the expression for B  in Proposition 1. By substituting
expression (H.22) into equation (5.11), we get

                                        i         
                                                 yi     iu
     B R = -1 + Y B  + Ei                  c -                B  -                [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y ).
                                     1 + i i   1 - i 1 + i ic

Since the UBI is assumed to be revenue neutral, we must have B R = 0. Therefore, B  must satisfy

                                    1 - Ei 1+ i
                                             i  c +       [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                                  i
                            B  =                                y   u
                                                                                           .                   (H.23)
                                                             i i
                                                      Y - E 1-     i
                                                               i 1+i  c i


                                                                    x( )-x(0)
In the second step, we prove that B   0. Let  x  lim0                            be the marginal impact of the labor
tax surcharge  on any variable x that is differentiable in . As stated in Proposition 1, we assume that T (·)
is to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve. This implies that a small increase in marginal tax rates increases
tax revenues,
                                                         
                                        R( ) = Y +  ET (yi ( )) > 0.                                           (H.24)




                                                          36
Following similar steps as above, we can show that

                                                 int
                  ET (yi ( )) =       T (y )Ey  yi   dH (y ) -        [T (y ) - T (0)]  dH (y ).        (H.25)

          int , we apply the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition (H.15). Taking into account
To find  yi
that  ni = 0, we get
                                                        
                                                       yi     iu
                                           int
                                          yi   =-                   .                                   (H.26)
                                                     1 - i 1 + i ic
Substituting expression (H.26) in (H.25) yields
                                            
                                         i yi    iu
                        
                   ET (yi ( )) = -E                    -         [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )dH (y ).
                                        1 - i 1 + i ic

Substituting this expression into (H.24) implies
                                  
                               i yi    iu
                       Y -E                  -       [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )dH (y ) > 0.
                              1 - i 1 + i ic

Since  (y )  0 for all y and taxes are increasing in earnings, it follows that the denominator in (H.23) is
positive. Since i  0, B (y )  0 for all y, and taxes are increasing in earnings, it is straightforward to
verify that the numerator in expression (H.23) is also positive. Therefore, B   0.

Marginal propensity to stop working.       Lastly, we prove that B (y )  L (y )  0. Consider any house-
hold i who receives a lottery L with an annuity Lann that is equal to the UBI payment B. The per-period
utility from not working, ui (ni - T (0), 0) + vi , is the same under the lottery and under UBI. As we estab-
lished above, marginal taxes weakly increase under UBI, B   0. This, in turn, implies that the maximal
attainable utility from working under UBI is weakly smaller than the maximal attainable utility from working
under the lottery. Therefore, every household who stops working under the lottery also wants to stop work-
ing under the UBI program for a given change in unearned income . This implies L (y, )  B (y, ),
and by taking the limit   0, we get 0  L (y )  B (y ).


H.4    Proof of Corollary 1
From Proposition 1, we know that B (y )  L (y )  0 and

                                  1 - Ei 1+ i
                                           i  c +      [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                               i
                          B  =                               y    u
                                                                                        .
                                                          i i
                                                   Y - E 1-     i
                                                            i 1+i  c  i


Therefore,
                                  1 - Ei 1+i
                                           i  c +      [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y )dH (y )
                                               i
                          B                                  y    u
                                                                                        .
                                                          i i
                                                   Y - E 1-     i
                                                            i 1+i  c  i




                                                       37
Since T (·) is assumed to be to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve, we know from the proof of Proposition
               y
              i i    u           u
1 that Y - E 1- i 1+i  c > 0. If i  0 for all i,we obtain
                    i
                         i


                              1 - Ei 1+i
                                       i  c +       [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y )dH (y )       1 - MPT
                                            i
                    B                                                                =
                                                       Y                                    Y

where the equality follows from Lemma 1. Taking further into account that i  0 for all i and B   0, it
is also easy to verify that

                                     i        
                                             yi     iu
                      B Y = E             -               B  -                 yB (y )dH (y )
                                  1 + i ic 1 - i 1 + i ic
                                   i
                              E          - yL (y )dH (y )
                                1 + i ic
                              = MPE.


H.5    Proof of Corollary 2
Preliminaries. As a preliminary step, it is useful to derive the object Ey 1+1
                                                                             i  c . By rearranging the intensive-
                                                                                     i
margin earnings response (H.10) we get

                                                i = (1 + i ic ) L yi
                                                                   int
                                                                       .

Using Slutsky (5.4) we obtain

                                                   iu - (1 - i )L yiint
                                            ic =                     int
                                                                         ,
                                                   1 + i (1 - i )L yi

and since iu =  u and i =  for all i, we find

                                                                        int
                                                1 +  [1 - T (y )] Ey L yi
                                          1
                                  Ey          =                             .
                                       1 + ic            1 +  u

By substituting expression (H.10) and applying Lemma 1, we obtain

                                          1     1 +  [1 - T (y )] MPEint (y )
                                  Ey          =                               .                         (H.27)
                                       1 + ic            1 +  u




                                                           38
Tax rate increase. With iu =  u and i =  for all i, we know from Proposition 1 that
                                            i
                                    1 - Ei 1+  c +          [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                                 i
                          B  =                                     y
                                                                         u
                                                             i i
                                                      Y - E 1- i 1+ c        i
                                            i
                                    1 - Ei 1+  c +          [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                                 i
                               =                         T (y )y      1
                                          Y - u         1-T (y ) Ey 1+i c dH (y )

                                            i
                                    1 - Ei 1+  c +          [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y )dH (y )
                                                 i
                                                         T (y )y      1
                                          Y - u         1-T (y ) Ey 1+i c dH (y )



By Lemma 1 we then get

                                                            1 - MPT
                                 B                      T (y )y
                                                                                      .                 (H.28)
                                                                     1
                                          Y - u        1-T (y ) Ey 1+i c dH (y )



Substitute expression (H.27) into (H.28) to get

                                                            1 - MPT
                                    B                 u
                                           Y -       1+ u        T (y )D(y )dH (y )

where
                                                  y
                                     D(y )               + y MPEint (y ).                               (H.29)
                                              1 - T (y )

Total earnings response. We take similar steps and apply Lemma 1 and Proposition 1 to show that

                                 i          
                                           yi         u
                   B Y = E            -                      B  - yB (y )dH (y )
                              1 + ic 1 - i 1 + ic
                               i                                       u
                         =E        c - yB (y )dH (y ) - B                  D(y )dH (y )
                            1 + i                                   1 +  u
                               i                                      u
                         E           -    y  L ( y ) dH ( y ) - B          D(y )dH (y )
                            1 + ic                                  1 +  u
                                         u
                         = MPE - B                    D(y )dH (y ),
                                       1 +  u

By substituting equation (H.28) into the above expression, we end up with

                                                                    u
                                                                  1+ u       D(y )dH (y )
                        B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                       u
                                                                                                  ,
                                                        Y -       1+ u       T (y )D(y )dH (y )

where D(y ) is defined in (H.29).

H.6     Bounds for homogeneous compensated elasticities
Another way to use Proposition 1 is to assume that there is no heterogeneity in compensated elasticities, i.e.,
ic =  c for all i. We then obtain the following Corollary:

                                                            39
Corollary 4. Suppose ic =  c and i =  for all i. Then

                                                     1 - MPT
                             B                 c
                                                                           ,
                                        Y -   1+ c    T (y )D(y )dH (y )
                                                                      c
                                                                    1+ c       D(y )dH (y )
                             B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                    c
                                                                                                    ,
                                                            Y -     1+ c       T (y )D(y )dH (y )

                     y           1+ c     int
where D(y )       1-T (y )   +     c y MPE (y ).

                                                                                u
                                                                        c . By rearranging the intensive-margin
                                                                     i
Proof. As a preliminary step, it is useful to derive the object Ey 1+ i             i
earnings response (H.10) we get
                                                 i = (1 + i ic ) L yi
                                                                    int
                                                                        .

Using Slutsky (5.4) we obtain

                                          iu = ic + (1 - i )(1 + i ic )L yi
                                                                          int
                                                                              .

By taking expectations conditional on y, we get

                                     Ey iu =  c + [1 - T (y )](1 +  c )Ey L yi
                                                                             int
                                                                                 ,

where we used ic =  c and i =  for all i. By substituting expression (H.10) and applying Lemma 1, we
obtain

                                    Ey iu =  c + [1 - T (y )](1 +  c )MPEint (y ),                      (H.30)

and, therefore,
                                          iu       c
                                   Ey          =        + [1 - T (y )]MPEint (y ).                      (H.31)
                                        1 +  c   1 +  c
       Next, we consider an increase in tax rates. By applying Lemma 1 and Proposition 1, it is easy to verify
that
                                                 i
                                         1 - Ei 1+  c +        [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                 B  =                                y    u
                                                                i i
                                                         Y - E 1-     i
                                                                  i 1+ c
                                                 i
                                         1 - Ei 1+  c +        [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y )dH (y )
                                                                     y    u
                                                                                                        (H.32)
                                                                i i
                                                         Y - E 1-     i
                                                                  i 1+ c
                                                     1 - MPT
                                    =             T (y )y     iu                                        (H.33)
                                         Y -     1-T (y ) Ey 1+ c dH (y )

By substituting expression (H.31) in (H.33), we get

                                                               1 - MPT
                                         B              c
                                                 Y -   1+ c        T (y )D(y )dH (y )


                                                              40
where
                                               y        1 +  c
                                  D(y )               +        y MPEint (y ).                          (H.34)
                                           1 - T (y )     c
       Lastly, we consider the total earnings response. By applying Lemma 1 and Proposition 1, we can show
that

                                    i        
                                            yi         iu
                      B Y = E          -                       B  - yB (y )dH (y )
                                 1 +  c 1 - i 1 +  c
                                  i                                    
                                                                      yi     iu
                            =E        -    y  B ( y ) dH  ( y ) - E              B 
                               1 +  c                               1 - i 1 +  c
                                  i                                    
                                                                      yi    iu
                            E         -    y  L ( y ) dH  ( y ) - E              B 
                               1 +  c                               1 - i 1 +  c
                                          c
                            = MPE - B                 D(y )dH (y ).
                                        1 +  c

By substituting equation (H.33) in the above expression, we end up with

                                                                  c
                                                                1+ c   D(y )dH (y )
                         B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                    c
                                                                                            ,
                                                          Y -   1+ c   T (y )D(y )dH (y )

where D(y ) is given by expression (H.34).


H.7      Proof of Proposition 2
Preliminaries. We consider a perturbation of the top income tax rate ¯ that affects only taxpayers with
income above some threshold y                                y
                            ¯. Any household i with income yi ¯ solves

                                                 max ui (ci , yi )
                                                 ci ,yi


subject to
                                              ci = (1 - ¯)yi + ni

The first-order condition reads

                     ui,y (1 -    int
                               ¯)yi   + n     int
                                         i , yi   = -(1 - ¯)ui,c (1 -    int
                                                                      ¯)yi   + n     int
                                                                                i , yi   .

From the point of view of household i, an increase in the top tax rate of d¯ leads to an increase in unearned,
or virtual, income by y
                      ¯d¯ in each subsequent period if household i continues to work. This implies that
 ni = y.
      ¯ We then apply the implicit function theorem to show that
                                                  ) [u
                                            y - yi
                                int        (¯         i,cy + (1 - ¯)ui,cc ] + ui,c
                               yi   =-                                                ,                (H.35)
                                         (1 - ¯)2 ui,cc + 2 (1 - ¯) ui,cy + ui,yy




                                                          41
        = y int . By substituting expressions (H.1) and (H.2) into (H.35), we get
where yi   i

                                                                  
                                                                 yi
                                              int
                                             yi    ¯i -
                                                  =y                  u.                                              (H.36)
                                                                1-  ¯ i

Tax revenues.    Following the same steps as in the proof for Lemma 1, it is easy to verify that
                                                                    
                                                yi                                                  dH (y )
                ¯T (y ) = Ey
               Ey          ¯   ¯i -
                             ¯ y                    u -                (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )                .        (H.37)
                                               1-  ¯ i          y
                                                                ¯                                  1 - H (¯
                                                                                                          y)

H.8    Proof of Corollary 3
Preliminaries. Only earnings above the threshold y
                                                 ¯ are affected by the perturbation in .
                                                                                       ¯ It is therefore
useful to derive the object  Ey 
                              ¯yi . Using expression (H.36), we can follow the same steps as in the proof
for Lemma 1 to show that
                                                                            
                                                      yi                                   dH (y )
                          Ey        ¯i -
                                  ¯ y
                           ¯yi = Ey                       u -                  y (y )               .                 (H.38)
                                                     1-  ¯ i            y
                                                                        ¯                 1 - H (¯
                                                                                                 y)

This, in turn, implies that the marginal impact on total earnings is given by
                                                                                       
                                                           a      u
                       Y = [1 - H (¯
                                   y )] y  ¯ i -
                                        ¯ Ey                    ¯ i -
                                                               Ey                         y (y )dH (y ),
                                                          1- ¯                     y
                                                                                   ¯

                yi
where a  Ey
          ¯      ¯.
                 y    In addition, we substitute the expression from Proposition 2 in (5.15), to show that

                                                                                       
                                                      a      u
       R = [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                   y )] y        ¯ i -
                              ¯ Ey                         ¯ i
                                                          Ey                   -          (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )dH (y ).
                                                     1- ¯                          y
                                                                                   ¯


Since  (y )  0 for all y  y
                          ¯, we get

                                                                                 a      u
                          R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                     y )] y        ¯ i -
                                                ¯ Ey                                  ¯i
                                                                                     Ey             ,                 (H.39)
                                                                                1- ¯
                                                                a      u
                          Y  [1 - H (¯
                                     y )] y  ¯i -
                                          ¯ Ey                       ¯ i .
                                                                    Ey                                                (H.40)
                                                               1- ¯

                                                        y
Case (a) in Corollary 3. If iu  0 for all i who earn yi ¯, then inequalities (H.39) and (H.40) can
simply be written as

                                     R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ [a - 1 + 
                                                y )] y          ¯Ey
                                                                  ¯i ] ,                                              (H.41)
                                     Y  [1 - H (¯
                                                y )] y
                                                     ¯Ey
                                                       ¯ i .                                                          (H.42)

Since i  0 and i  0 for all i, Lemma 1 implies

                                             int             i
                                       MPE         = Ey
                                                      ¯             Ey
                                                                     ¯ i .                                            (H.43)
                                                          1 + i ic


                                                          42
Given this relationship, we can write inequalities (H.41) and (H.42) as

                                                                                         int
                                  R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                             y )] y     ¯ × MPE                                ,
                                                                  int
                                  Y  [1 - H (¯    ¯ × MPE .
                                             y )] y

Case (b) in Corollary 3. If iu = ¯u for all i who earn y   y
                                                           ¯, then the same arguments as above allow us
                                                        i
to write inequalities (H.39) and (H.40) as

                                                                           int        a ¯u
                            R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                       y )] y     ¯ MPE                          -                      ,
                                                                                     1-¯
                                                      int        a ¯u
                            Y  [1 - H (¯
                                       y )] y
                                            ¯ MPE           -        .
                                                                1-¯

H.9    Increase in top marginal tax rates under homogeneous compensated elasticities
We begin by deriving the object  Ey 
                                  ¯yi . We know from expression (H.36) that

                                                                  
                                                                 yi
                                             int
                                            yi    ¯i -
                                                 =y                   u.
                                                                1-  ¯ i

Using Slutsky (5.4) we can write this as
                                                                     
                                                                    yi
                                         int         
                                        yi      y - yi
                                             = (¯      ) i -             c.
                                                                   1-  ¯ i

Following the same steps as in the proof for Lemma 1, we can show that
                                                                                 
                                                       yi                                           dH (y )
                       Ey
                        ¯yi = Ey  y - yi
                               ¯ (¯      ) i -             c -                       y (y )                  .             (H.44)
                                                      1-  ¯ i                y
                                                                             ¯                     1 - H (¯
                                                                                                          y)

This, in turn, implies that the marginal impact on total earnings is given by
                                                                                               
                                                             a      c
                 Y = [1 - H (¯    ¯ (1 - a)Ey
                             y )] y         ¯ i -                 ¯ i -
                                                                 Ey                                y (y )dH (y ),
                                                            1- ¯                           y
                                                                                           ¯

                yi
where a  Ey
          ¯      ¯.
                 y    As above, we can use Slutsky (5.4) to rewrite the expression in Proposition 2. We get

                                                                        
                                                   yi                                                         dH (y )
           ¯T (yi ) = Ey
          Ey           ¯    y - yi
                         ¯ (¯      ) i -               c -                 (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )                      .
                                                  1-  ¯ i           y
                                                                    ¯                                        1 - H (¯
                                                                                                                    y)

Substitute this expression in (5.15), to get
                                                                                               
                                                        a      c
  R = [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
              y )] y     ¯ (1 - a)Ey
                                   ¯ i -                     ¯ i
                                                            Ey                       -             (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )dH (y ).
                                                       1- ¯                                y
                                                                                           ¯




                                                      43
Since  (y )  0 for all y  y
                          ¯, we get

                                                                           a      c
                    R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                               y )] y               ¯ i -
                                          ¯ (1 - a)Ey                           ¯ i
                                                                               Ey          ,   (H.45)
                                                                          1- ¯
                                                              a      c
                    Y  [1 - H (¯    ¯ (1 - a)Ey
                               y )] y         ¯i -                 ¯i .
                                                                  Ey                           (H.46)
                                                             1- ¯

Since i  0 and i  0 for all i, Lemma 1 implies

                                          int             i
                                    MPE         = Ey
                                                   ¯             Ey
                                                                  ¯ i .                        (H.47)
                                                       1 + i ic

Given this relationship, we can write inequalities (H.45) and (H.46) as

                                                                         int        a ¯c
                    R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                               y )] y     ¯ (1 - a) × MPE                      -           ,   (H.48)
                                                                                   1-¯
                                                            int        a ¯c
                    Y  [1 - H (¯    ¯ (1 - a) × MPE
                               y )] y                             -        ,                   (H.49)
                                                                      1-¯

where we used ic = ¯c for all i who earn y   y
                                             ¯.
                                          i




                                                       44
I     Extending the analysis in Section 5
In this section we extend our analysis from Section 5 to allow for retirement. We do so by developing an
overlapping generations (OLG) model with heterogeneous agents.


I.1   A heterogeneous-agent OLG model
There is a measure one of heterogeneous households. Each household i lives for T + K periods, where it
can choose to work in each of the the first T periods, but is unable to work in the subsequent K periods of
retirement. For the first T periods, the household may receive labor income yi,t , while for the last K periods
the household receives a social security transfer S. Utility of household i in each of the first T periods is
given by ui , defined in equation (5.7), while per-period utility thereafter is ui (c, 0) . Households discount
                           ¯)-1 and maximize lifetime utility,
the future at rate  = (1 + r

                                                   T                               T +K
                                 max                     t-1 ui (ci,t , yi,t ) +             t-1 ui (ci,t , 0)   (I.1)
                           {ci,t ,yi,t ,ni,t }t
                                                  t=1                              t=T +1

subject to
                                           
                                           y - T (y ) - y + n                               if t  T
                                            i,t    i,t   i,t  i,t
                                  ci,t   =                                                             ,
                                           S + n                                            if t > T
                                                           i,t

                                             ¯)ai,t-1 - ai,t ,
                                 ni,t = (1 + r

and ai,0 are given initial assets. As in Section 5, we can split household i's problem (I.1) into two sub-
problems due to time-separability in lifetime utility. To study the outer (intertemporal) subproblem that
characterizes the optimal choice of unearned income across the life cycle, we define the indirect utility
functions,

                             Vi (n,  )  max {ui (c, y ) |c = y - T (y ) - y + n } ,
                             ~i (n,  )  max {Vi (n,  ), ui (n - T (0), 0) + vi } ,
                             V
                                Wi (n)  ui (S + n, 0).

The indirect utility functions represent the maximal attainable utility of the inner (intratemporal) subprob-
lems as a function of unearned income n and an earnings tax surcharge . The outer subproblem of household
i can then be written as
                                                  T                              T +K
                                   max                   t-1 V
                                                             ~i (nw
                                                                  i,t , 0)   +             t-1 Wi (nr
                                                                                                    i,t )        (I.2)
                               {nw     r
                                 i,t ,ni,t }t     t=1                            t=T +1




                                                                     45
subject to
                                  T                       K
                                        t-1 nw
                                             i,t + 
                                                    T
                                                               t-1 nr
                                                                    i,t = (1 + r
                                                                               ¯)ai,0 .
                                 t=1                    t=1

                                                                               r,
Given this formulation, it is then immediately clear that optimal choices nw,
                                                                           i,t , ni,t      are independent of
                                                                                              t
t. Moreover, if household i works in period t , then it works in all periods t = 1, ..., T and V ~i (·, ·) can be
                                                                               r,
replaced with Vi (·, ·) in maximization problem (I.2). The optimal bundle nw,
                                                                           i , ni in this case is then
the solution to the following system of equations:

                                                              Vi,n = Wi,n ,
                                  1 -  T w,     1 -  K r,
                                        ni +  T       n = (1 + r
                                                               ¯)ai,0 ,
                                   1-            1- i

where Vi,n and Wi,n denote the partial derivatives of Vi (n,  ) and Wi (n) with respect to n, evaluated at
              r,
(nw,
  i , 0) and ni , respectively. Let Vi,nn and Vi,n denote the partial derivatives of Vi,n with respect to n
and , respectively. Before we proceed, we make make the following assumption:
Assumption 1. The utility function ui (c, y ) is such that Vi,nn < 0 and Vi,n  0.
      This is a natural assumption. By the envelope theorem, we have Vi,n = ui,c . Thus, we assume that an
increase in unearned income or a decrease in marginal tax rates decreases the marginal utility of consumption
of household i. Lemma 2 provides sufficient conditions for that.
Lemma 2. Wi,nn  0. Vi,nn  0 if i  -1 and ui,cy  0. Vi,n  0 if iu  0 and leisure is a normal
good, or if iu is sufficiently close to 0.
Proof. See Appendix I.4.1.

I.2    Marginal propensities: MPE and MPT
As in Section 5, we first present the theoretical analogues to MPE and MPT that we estimated in Section
4. Suppose that wealth of household i increases unexpectedly by the amount L. Without loss of generality,
we assume that this occurs in year 1 of her life. We are interested in the marginal impact of this windfall.
For any equilibrium variable x(Lann ) that is differentiable in Lann , let the marginal effect of this increase
                                   x(Lann )-x(0)
be defined as L x  limLann 0           Lann      ,where   the annuitized value Lann is determined by equation (4.2)
and given by
                                                            1-
                                               Lann =               L.                                        (I.3)
                                                          1 -  T +K
We are interested in the average earnings and tax responses to a one dollar increase in this annuity. Lemma
3 provides a generalization of Lemma 1 when we allow for retirement.
Lemma 3. MPE(y ) and MPT(y ) are well-defined for all y and satisfy

                                       MPE(y ) = MPEint (y ) + MPEext (y ),
                                       MPT(y ) = MPTint (y ) + MPText (y ),


                                                              46
where

                          i            
          MPEint (y )  Ey      c L nw,
                                    i ,                     MPEext (y )  -yL (y ),
                      1 + i i
                                 i          
             int
          MPT (y )  T (y )Ey          L nw,
                                         i ,                MPText (y )  - [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y ),
                             1 + i ic
               )y 
          T (yi
and i           ) .
          1-T (yi
                  i


                                                                         
Proof. All arguments are identical to the proof for Lemma 1, except L nw,
                                                                       i  does not need to be equal to
1.

     As in the case without retirement, Lemma 3 shows that the expressions for the MPE(y ) and MPT(y )
consist of two terms that capture intensive- and extensive-margin responses. The extensive-margin responses
are proportional to L (y ), which is simply the marginal propensity to stop working of households making
                                                                                      w,
y dollars on average. The intensive-margin responses are proportional to Ey 1+ i
                                                                              i  c L ni ,where in contrast
                                                                                    i
                                              
to Lemma 1, we have an additional factor L nw,
                                            i  that captures the savings response through the marginal
                                                                 
impact on unearned income during the working life. To find L nw,
                                                              i , we consider the outer subproblem (I.2)
of household i. The first-order conditions imply

                                                    Vi,n = Wi,n ,
                               1- T       T1-
                                              K
                                  nw,  +        nr, = (1 + r
                                                           ¯)ai,0 + L.
                               1- i         1- i

By differentiating both equations with respect to Lann , we get

                                                                              
                                                    Vi,nn L nw,
                                                             i  = Wi,nn L nr,
                                                                           i ,                        (I.4)
                             1 - T           T1-
                                                 K
                                                        r,   1 -  T +K
                                   L nw,
                                      i   +         L n i  =           .                              (I.5)
                              1-               1-              1-
                                                        
Note that when K = 0, equation (I.5) implies that L nw,
                                                     i   = 1. This is the case without retirement that we
considered in Section 5, where households increase their unearned income by Lann in each period following
their lottery win. For K  0, it is immediate to verify that the marginal effect on unearned income during
the working life is given by

                                                    1 -  T +K
                                 L nw,
                                    i  =                            V
                                                                            0                         (I.6)
                                           1 -  T + (1 -  K ) T Wi,nn
                                                                  i,nn


         w,
where L ni   0 follows from  < 1 and Vi,nn , Wi,nn  0 from Lemma 2. Universal Basic Income
     We now extend the framework to analyze the introduction of a UBI of size B. We abstract from transi-
tional dynamics and instead focus on the steady state when all agents live through the UBI system all their
lives. Tax revenues in steady state are given by

                                                                          K
                      R(B ) = E [-B +  (B )yi (B ) + T (yi (B ))] -          [T (0) - S ] ,           (I.7)
                                                                        T +K

                                                     47
where  (B ) is set such that R(B ) = R(0), i.e., revenue neutral. To understand this expression, note that
                                                                                  (B ) = 0. There is a
we take expectations across all households, where households in retirement have yi
            K                                                      K
measure   T +K   of retired households, so the additional term   T +K   [T (0) - S ] is simply an adjustment factor
that takes into account that those households receive social security transfers S rather than T (0).
    In order to bound the effects of UBI, we begin by comparing the savings response to a one dollar increase
in UBI and an annuity payment. Lemma 4 provides such a comparison.
                                                                        
Lemma 4. Suppose Assumption 1 is satisfied. If B   0 then B nw,
                                                             i    L nw,
                                                                     i    0.

Proof. See Appendix I.4.2.

    To understand this result, consider a lottery with an implied annuity of the same size as the UBI. If
marginal taxes increase under the UBI program, then Assumption 1 implies that consumption of household
i decreases in response to the increase in tax rates. This, in turn, implies that the household must save less for
retirement in order to achieve a smooth consumption profile, which means that it allocates more unearned
income to each period of the working life. Equipped with Lemma 4 we can now examine the implications
of a UBI program on earnings, taxes and tax rates.

Proposition 3. The marginal impact of the UBI is

                                 i                  
                                                   yi     iu
                                            w,
    B ET (yi (B )) = Ei                 B n i  -                B  -             [T (y ) - T (0)]B (y )dH (y ),
                              1 + i ic           1 - i 1 + i ic
                                           w,
                         1 - E i 1+i
                                   i  c B ni  + [T (y ) - T (0)]B (y )dH (y )
                                        i
                 B  =                                 y     u
                                                                                       ,
                                                    i i
                                             Y - E 1-     i
                                                      i 1+i  c   i

                            i                  
                                              yi     iu
                                       w,
                 B Y = E           B n i  -                B  -                yB (y )dH (y ).
                         1 + i ic           1 - i 1 + i ic

Moreover, if T (·) is to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve, then B (y )  L (y )  0 for all y and
B   0.

Proof. See Appendix I.4.3.

    Proposition 3 represents a generalization of Proposition 1. The key difference is that the intensive-
margin response to the unconditional cash transfer is now scaled by the marginal effects on unearned income
      
B nw,
   i . As shown in Lemma 4, higher marginal tax rates induce households to allocate more unearned
income per period than they would have allocated following a pure increase in an annuity payment. This
additional unearned income amplifies the intensive-margin earnings response. As a result, the bounds on tax
rates and earnings responses that we derived in Section 5 remain valid.
                                                                                           
Corollary 5. Suppose Assumption 1 is satisfied. Then Corollary 1 holds. Moreover, if L nw,
                                                                                        i    1, then
Corollary 2 holds as well.

Proof. See Appendix I.4.4.


                                                       48
                                                                                                               
      It is useful to observe that we can, in principle, measure the average effect on unearned income, EL nw,
                                                                                                            i ,
in the data using our capitalization approach from Section 4. Empirically, we showed in Figure 4.1a that
the impact of winning on unearned income is quantitatively similar under the capitalization approach as
                                                                           
compared to the annuitization approach. This, in turn, suggests that EL nw,
                                                                         i   1.


I.3     Top income tax rates
Lastly, we examine the implications of an increase in top marginal tax rates. As in the previous section,
we abstract from transitional dynamics and focus on the steady state when all households live through the
post-reform tax system all their lives.
      As in Section 5, we assume that T (y ) converges to some level ¯ for all incomes above some threshold
                  yi
¯. Let a  Ey
y          ¯       y
                   ¯   be the average earnings of households in the top bracket, normalized by y
                                                                                               ¯.
      We define  x to be the marginal impact on variable x from an increase in the top rate ¯, as in our
earlier definitions of L and B . From the point of view of household i, an increase in top tax rates by d¯
is equivalent to an increase in unearned, or virtual, income by y
                                                                ¯d¯ in each period of household i's working
life. The corresponding increase in the present value of unearned income is therefore given by

                                             T
                                                               1 - T
                                                    t-1 y
                                                        ¯d¯=         y
                                                                     ¯d¯.
                                                                1-
                                             t=1

To bound the effects of an increase in the top tax rate, it is useful to examine the marginal effects of the
change in tax rates on savings and earnings.
                                                                             y
Proposition 4. Suppose Assumption 1 is satisfied. Then, for all i who earn yi ¯,

                                                1 - T            
                                     nw,
                                      i             T + K
                                                          ¯L nw,
                                                          y    i ,                                             (I.8)
                                              1-
                                                1 - T                 
                                                                     yi
                                       int                     w,
                                      yi                  ¯
                                                          y  n
                                                            L i
                                                                  -       u,                                   (I.9)
                                              1 -  T +K             1-  ¯ i

where the intensive-margin earnings response satisfies
                                                                    
                                                                   yi
                                                         
                                            int
                                           yi   = i  nw,  -             u.                                    (I.10)
                                                      i
                                                                  1-  ¯ i

Proof. See Appendix I.4.5.

      Expression (I.8) compares the effects of the tax reform on unearned income with the effects of a pure
increase in the present value of unearned income implied by the tax reform while keeping tax rates fixed.
Similar to our discussion of Lemma 4, expression (I.8) highlights that an increase in marginal tax rates
induces households to allocate more unearned income per period during their working life than they would
                                                                 1- T
have allocated following a pure increase in wealth of size      1- T +K
                                                                        y
                                                                        ¯.   Proposition 4 shows that the intensive-
margin earnings response to an increase in the top tax rate consists of two terms. The first term in expression
(I.10) captures the standard income response that calls for a reduction in earnings by i for every additional


                                                          49
dollar of unearned income. The second term captures the intensive-margin response of earnings to higher
tax rates. Importantly, we can derive a bound on the earnings response through the additional effect of
higher marginal taxes on per-period unearned income. Using Lemma 3 and Proposition 4, we then obtain
an extension of Corollary 3.
                        int         int
Corollary 6. Let MPE           Ey
                                ¯MPE (y ).
                                        y
      (a) If iu  0 for all i who earn yi ¯ then

                                                                    1 - T           int
                               R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                          y )] y                            ¯ × MPE
                                                                                        ,
                                                                  1 -  T +K
                                                      1 - T        int
                               Y  [1 - H (¯
                                          y )] y
                                               ¯              × MPE .
                                                    1 -  T +K

      (b) If iu = ¯u for all i who earn y   y
                                            ¯ then
                                         i

                                                              1 - T           int  a ¯u
                    R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                               y )] y     ¯                       T +  K
                                                                         × MPE -                   ,
                                                            1-                    1-¯
                                               1 - T               int     a ¯u
                    Y  [1 - H (¯
                               y )] y
                                    ¯                       × MPE -            .
                                             1 -  T +K                   1- ¯

Proof. See Appendix I.4.6.

      Corollary 6 is similar to Corollary 3 that we derived in Section 5. The only difference is that the
                                                    1- T
intensive-margin MPE is scaled by the factor       1- T +K
                                                                 to account for the differences in the time horizon at
which households can adjust their earnings. Assuming T = 40 and K = 20, and a post-tax interest rate
                      1- T                            int
r
¯ = 2.5%, implies    1- T +K
                                 0.8. With an MPE            -0.4 and a  3, a 1 percentage point increase in the
tax rate ¯ = 0.5 for the top 1% of households implies that earnings would decrease by at least $1,600 and
tax revenues would increase at most by $9,200 for each household in the top 1 percent according to Case (a)
in Corollary 6. The corresponding numbers we report in Section 5 are $2,000 and $9,000. Thus, allowing
for retirement has only a negligible effect on our quantitative conclusions from Section 5.


I.4     Proofs
I.4.1    Proof of Lemma 2

By the envelope theorem, we have

                                                     int       int      int       int
                                Vi,n (n,  ) = ui,c (yi   - T (yi   ) - yi   + n, yi   ),

       int is the solution to problem (5.8) for some arbitrary (n,  ). Differentiate this expression with respect
where yi
                                
to n and , and evaluate at (nw,
                             i , 0) to get

                                                      int                  int
                               Vi,nn = 1 + (1 - i )n yi   ui,cc + ui,cy n yi   ,                                (I.11)
                                          int             int                 int
                                Vi,n = - yi   - (1 - i ) yi   ui,cc + ui,cy  yi   ,                             (I.12)


                                                            50
                                                                        i                 y int   u
where ui,cc and ui,cy are evaluated at (cint  int         int
                                         i , yi ), and n yi =             c,
                                                                      1+i i
                                                                                 int = - i
                                                                                yi      1-i 1+i  c . Expression
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                      i
(I.12) can be written as
                                       int                                    int
                              Vi,n = -yi   ui,cc + [ui,cy + (1 - i )ui,cc ]  yi   .
                                               int u
We have ui,cc  0 by convexity, and therefore -yi                u
                                                    i,cc  0. If i is arbitrarily close to zero, then so is
  int , which can be chosen to ensure that V
 yi                                          i,n  0.
    Alternatively, for a fixed iu  0, we have  yi
                                                int  0. If leisure is a normal good,   0, then
                                                                                     i
ui,cy + (1 - i )ui,cc  0, and we find Vi,n  0. To see this, consider expression (H.6). The denominator
must be negative, since it is the same denominator as in equation (H.7), and we have ic  0 and ui,y  0.
Therefore the numerator in (H.6) must be positive. By substituting expression (H.4) in (H.6), we establish
that ui,cy + (1 - i )ui,cc  0 if i  0. Expression (I.11) can be written as

                                                                              int
                                 Vi,nn = ui,cc + [ui,cc (1 - i ) + ui,cy ] n yi   .

                                                                                              int  0
We have ui,cc  0 by convexity. Since leisure is assumed to be a normal good, i  0, we have n yi
and ui,cc (1 - i ) + ui,cy  0. If ui,cy  0 and i  -1, it is easy to verify that Vi,nn  0.
    By the envelope theorem, we also have

                                            Wi,n (n) = ui,c (n + S, 0).

                                                                    
Differentiate this expression with respect to n and evaluate at nr,
                                                                 i to get


                                                  Wi,nn = ui,cc .

Wi,nn  0 then follows directly from ui,cc  0.

I.4.2   Proof of Lemma 4

We consider the outer subproblem (I.2) of a working household i in year 1 of her life under UBI. Household
i solves
                                       1 - T                     T1-
                                                                     K
                              max            Vi (nw
                                                  i ,  ( B )) +        Wi (nr
                                                                            i ),                          (I.13)
                              w r
                              ni ,ni    1-                         1-
subject to
                           1 - T w      1 - K r                 1 -  T +K
                                ni +  T      ni = (1 + r
                                                       ¯)ai,0 +           B,
                            1-           1-                       1-
        1- T +K
where     1- B    is the present value of the UBI payments. The first-order conditions imply

                                                 Vi,n = Wi,n ,
                       1 -  T w,     1 -  K r,                1 -  T +K
                             ni +  T       ni = (1 + r
                                                     ¯)ai,0 +           B.
                        1-            1-                        1-




                                                        51
By differentiating both equations with respect to B , we get

                                                                                 
                                            Vi,nn B nw,
                                                     i   + Vi,n B  = Wi,nn B nr,
                                                                              i ,                                         (I.14)
                              1-  T        1-         1-      K                       T +K
                                 B nw,
                                    i  + T     B nr,
                                                  i =                                        .                            (I.15)
                              1-            1-         1-

Rearrange these expressions to get

                       Vi,nn       1 - T    w,   Vi,n         -T 1 - 
                                                                      T +K
                             +  -T       B i
                                          n    +        B  =               .
                       Wi,nn       1 - K         Wi,nn            1 - K

                                  Vi,n              Vi,nn
Under Assumption 1, we have       Wi,nn     0 and   Wi,nn      0. If B   0, then

                                                             1 -  T +K
                                  B nw,
                                     i                                         V
                                                                                      0.
                                               1 -  T + (1 -  K ) T Wi,nn
                                                                      i,nn


Substitute expression (I.6) in the inequality above to get

                                                            
                                               B nw,
                                                  i   L nw,
                                                         i    0.

I.4.3   Proof of Proposition 3

Preliminaries. As a preliminary step, we consider the inner subproblem (5.8) under the UBI program,

                                                    max ui (ci , yi )                                                     (I.16)
                                                    ci ,yi


subject to
                                                                            
                                          ci = yi - T (yi ) -  (B )yi + nw,
                                                                         i .                                              (I.17)

The first-order condition reads

                                     int                                                       w, int
       int
ui,y (yi        int
           -T (yi           int
                    )- (B )yi   +nw,                   int                int    int       int
                                  i , yi ) = - 1 - T (yi ) -  (B ) ui,c (yi -T (yi )- (B )yi +ni , yi ).
                                                                                                                          (I.18)
We apply the implicit function theorem to show
                                      
                 int             B nw,
                                    i
                                          int  
                                       - yi   B
                                                                     int ) u
                                                             1 - T (yi      i,cc + ui,cy - ui,c B 
              B yi   =-                                            2                                           .          (I.19)
                               int )u + 1 - T (y int )
                          -T (yi                                                         int ) u
                                                                       ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi
                                     i,c        i                                               i,cy + ui,yy

                int )     2                     int ) u                        int
Let Ki  1 - T (yi             ui,cc + 2 1 - T (yi      i,cy + ui,yy and i  T (yi ). We then write equation
(I.19) as
                                                                                                                   ui,c
                   int )u
               T (yi            (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy          y int                  (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy +       int
                                                                                                                   yi
                         i,c                                
    int
 B yi       1-               =-                       B nw,
                                                         i   + i                                   Ki
                                                                                                                          B 
                  Ki                    Ki                    1 - i                               1-i
                                                                                                                          (I.20)


                                                              52
By substituting expressions (H.2), and (H.3) into equation (I.20), we get
                                                                                                      ui,c
                                                                    y int   (1 - i )ui,cc + ui,cy +    int
                                                                                                      yi
                                                               
                         int
                      B yi   (1       +   i ic )   =   i B nw,
                                                            i     + i                      Ki
                                                                                                             B ,           (I.21)
                                                                   1 - i                  1-i

                  int T (y int )
                 yi
where i               1-i
                          i
                                 .   By substituting expression (H.1) into (I.21), we end up with

                                                            i                 int
                                                                             yi      iu
                                              int                      w,
                                           B yi   =                B n i  -                B .                             (I.22)
                                                         1 + i ic           1 - i 1 + i ic

                                                    is well-defined, and given by the expression
Total earnings response. We now show that B Y  B Eyi
in Proposition 3. Following similar steps as in the proof for Proposition 1, we can show that

                                                                 int                    B (y, B )
                             B Y  B Eyi =                  Ey B yi   dH (y ) -    y lim           dH (y ).                 (I.23)
                                                                                    B 0   B

                                                                                                                             B (y,B )
Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in B , B (y )  limB 0                        B        
0 exists for all y . Therefore, B Y is well-defined. Furthermore, since B (y, 0) = 0, we have                          int (0)
                                                                                                                      yi         =
  (0)
yi      =    .
            yi   By substituting expression (I.22) in (I.23), we end up with

                                              i                
                                                              yi     iu
                                                       w,
                        B Y = E                      n
                                                    B i   -                B  -                 yB (y )dH (y ).
                                           1 + i ic         1 - i 1 + i ic

Total tax responses. We take similar steps as in the proof for Proposition 1 to derive the expression for
        (B )). Specifically, we can show that
B ET (yi

                                                       int                                      B (y, B )
         B ET (yi (B )) =                  T (y )Ey B yi   dH (y ) -        [T (y ) - T (0)] lim          dH (y ).         (I.24)
                                                                                            B 0   B

                                                                                                                             B (y,B )
Since the earnings density h(y ) is assumed to respond smoothly to a perturbation in B , B (y )  limB 0                        B        
0, exists for all y , and B ET                 (B ))
                                            (yi          therefore is well-defined. By substituting expression (I.22) in (I.24),
we get

                                          i               
                                                         yi     iu
                                                    
        
 B ET (yi (B )) = Ei                         c B nw,
                                                  i  -                B  -                 [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y ), (I.25)
                                       1 + i i         1 - i 1 + i ic

              ) and y  = y  (0) = y int (0).
where i  T (yi       i    i        i


Tax rate increase. In the first step, we derive the expression for B  in Proposition 3. By differentiating
equation (I.7), we get
                                                                            
                                                   B R = -1 + Y B  + B ET (yi (B )) .                                      (I.26)




                                                                       53
By substituting expression (I.25) into equation (I.26), we get

                                   i               
                                                  yi     iu
                                             
 B R = -1 + Y B  + Ei                 c B nw,
                                           i  -                B  -                [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y ).
                                1 + i i         1 - i 1 + i ic

Since the UBI is assumed to be revenue neutral, we must have B R = 0. Therefore, B  must satisfy
                                               w,
                              1 - Ei 1+ i
                                       i  c B ni  +           [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                             i
                      B  =                                     y   u
                                                                                               .             (I.27)
                                                            i i
                                                     Y - E 1-     i
                                                              i 1+i  c i


In the second step, we prove that B   0. Using Lemma 3 and 4, it is easy to verify that the numerator in
expression (I.27) is positive. Thus, for B   0 to hold, we must show that the denominator in expression
(I.27) is positive.
                         x( )-x(0)
    Let  x  lim0                     be the marginal impact of an the labor tax surcharge  on any variable x
that is differentiable in . Since T (·) is to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve, we must have

                                                         
                                        R( ) = Y +  ET (yi ( )) > 0.                                         (I.28)

Following the same steps as above, we can show that

                                                  int
                  ET (yi ( )) =        T (y )Ey  yi   dH (y ) -      [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )dH (y ).          (I.29)

          int , we apply the implicit function theorem to the first-order condition (I.18) to get
To find  yi

                                               i                
                                                               yi     iu
                                   int                  w,
                                  yi   =              n i  -                .                                (I.30)
                                            1 + i ic         1 - i 1 + i ic
                                                               
We then consider the outer subproblem (I.13) to determine  nw,
                                                            i . The first-order conditions imply


                                                  Vi,n = Wi,n ,
                        1-  T      T1-
                                       K
                                           r,                   1 -  T +K
                           nw,  +        n    = (1 + r
                                                     ¯ ) ai,0 +           B.
                        1- i         1- i                         1-

By differentiating both equations with respect to  , we get

                                                                                 
                                                 Vi,nn  nw,
                                                         i   + Vi,n = Wi,nn  nr,
                                                                              i ,                            (I.31)
                             1 - T          T1-
                                                K
                                                       
                                    nw,
                                     i   +         nr,
                                                    i = 0.                                                   (I.32)
                              1-              1-




                                                         54
Rearrange these expressions to get

                                                         Vi,n
                                                         Wi,nn
                                   nw,
                                    i      =-    Vi,nn         1-       T   ,
                                                 Wi,nn   +  -T 1 - K
                                                                    V
                                        
                                                     (1 -  T ) Wi,n
                                    nr,
                                     i     =                   V
                                                                i,nn
                                                                                    .
                                                T (1 -  K ) Wi,nn
                                                              i,nn
                                                                   + 1 - T

                                Vi,n             Vi,nn
Under Assumption 1, we have     Wi,nn    0 and   Wi,nn    0. This implies

                                                      
                                                   nw,
                                                    i   0,                                                          (I.33)
                                                       
                                                   nr,
                                                    i          0.

By substituting expression (I.30) into (I.29), we get

                                 i                
                                                 yi     iu
                                          w,
        ET (yi ( )) = Ei                n
                                        i    -                -                   [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )dH (y ),
                              1 + i ic         1 - i 1 + i ic

and therefore

                               i                
                                               yi     iu
                                        w,
      R( ) = Y + Ei                   n i  -                -                   [T (y ) - T (0)]  (y )dH (y ) > 0
                            1 + i ic         1 - i 1 + i ic

Since   0 and taxes are increasing in earnings, we get

                                           i                 
                                                            yi     iu
                                                     w,
                            Y + Ei                 n i  -                > 0.
                                        1 + i ic          1 - i 1 + i ic

Inequality (I.33) together with i  0 further implies
                                                     
                                                  i yi    iu
                                         Y -E                   > 0,
                                                 1 - i 1 + i ic

which establishes that the denominator in expression (I.27) is positive. Therefore, B   0.

Marginal propensity to quit. Lastly, we prove that B (y )  L (y )  0. Consider any household i who
receives a lottery L equal to the present value of UBI payments B. Lemma 4 implies that the per-period
                                  
utility from not working, ui (nw,
                               i   - T (0), 0) + vi , is weakly larger under UBI than under the lottery. As
we established above, marginal taxes weakly increase under UBI, B   0. This, in turn, implies that the
maximal attainable utility from working under UBI is weakly smaller than the maximal attainable utility
from working under the lottery. Therefore, every household who wants quit under the lottery also wants
to quit under UBI for a given change in unearned income . This implies L (y, )  B (y, ), and by
taking the limit   0, we get 0  L (y )  B (y ).




                                                         55
I.4.4   Proof of Corollary 5

Corollary 1 with retirement. We show that if Assumption 1 is satisfied and iu  0 for all i, then

                                                   1 - MPT
                                        B                  ,    B Y  MPE.
                                                      Y

From Proposition 3, we know that B (y )  L (y )  0 and

                                               w,
                             1 - E i 1+i
                                       i  c B ni  + [T (y ) - T (0)]B (y )dH (y )
                                               i
                    B  =                                         y   u
                                                                                        .
                                                             i i
                                                      Y - E 1-     i
                                                               i 1+i  c  i


Therefore,
                                               w,
                             1 - E i 1+ i
                                       i  c B ni  + [T (y ) - T (0)]L (y )dH (y )
                                               i
                    B                                            y   u
                                                                                        .
                                                             i i
                                                      Y - E 1-     i
                                                               i 1+i  c  i

                                      
By Lemma 4, using   B nw,
                       i        L nw,
                                   i         0, we can also write this as

                                               w,
                             1 - E i 1+i
                                       i  c L ni  + [T (y ) - T (0)]L (y )dH (y )
                                               i
                    B                                            y   u
                                                                                       .
                                                             i i
                                                      Y - E 1-     i
                                                               i 1+i  c  i


Lastly, since T (·) is assumed to be to the left of the peak of the Laffer curve, we know from the proof for
                          y
                          i i   u            u
Proposition 3 that Y - E 1- i 1+i  c > 0. If i  0 for all i, we obtain
                                i
                                    i


                                       w,
                     1 - E i 1+ i
                               i  c L ni  + [T (y ) - T (0)]L (y )dH (y )            1 - MPT
                                        i
              B                                                                  =           ,
                                                       Y                                Y

where the equality follows from Lemma 3. Taking further into account i  0 for all i and B   0, we
also find

                             i                 
                                              yi     iu
                                       w,
                B Y = E              n
                                   B i    -                B  -              yB (y )dH (y ).
                          1 + i ic          1 - i 1 + i ic
                           i           
                      E          B nw,
                                    i    - yB (y )dH (y )
                        1 + i ic
                           i           
                      E          L nw,
                                    i   - yL (y )dH (y )
                        1 + i ic
                      = MPE.




                                                           56
Corollary 2 with retirement. We show that if Assumption 1 is satisfied, and iu =  u and i =  for all i,
then

                                                 1 - MPT
                          B              u
                                                                       ,
                                  Y -   1+ u      T (y )D(y )dH (y )
                                                                 u
                                                               1+ u        D(y )dH (y )
                          B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                  u
                                                                                                ,
                                                        Y -    1+ u        T (y )D(y )dH (y )

                  y
where D(y )    1-T (y )   + y MPEint (y ).
   As a preliminary step, it is useful to consider the object Ey 1+1
                                                                   i  c . The intensive-margin earnings re-
                                                                                     i
sponse in Lemma 3 implies
                                                               L yiint
                                             i = (1 + i ic )         .
                                                               L nw,
                                                                  i

Using Slutsky (5.4) we obtain

                                                                   y int
                                                   iu - (1 - i )  L i
                                                                   nw,
                                           ic =
                                                                    L i
                                                                                 ,
                                                                     y int
                                                  1 + i (1 - i )  L i
                                                                   nw,
                                                                    L i


                               
Taking into account that L nw,
                            i    1,we find

                                                                       int
                                               1 +  [1 - T (y )] Ey L yi
                                          1
                                  Ey        c                              ,
                                       1 + i            1 +  u

where we used iu =  u and i = . By applying Lemma 3, we then get

                                        1    1 +  [1 - T (y )] Ey MPEint (y )
                                Ey                                            .                         (I.34)
                                     1 + ic             1 +  u

Tax rate increase. With iu =  u and i =  for all i,we know from Proposition 3 that
                                       i       w,
                               1 - Ei 1+  c B ni  +           [T (y ) - T (0)] B (y )dH (y )
                                             i
                     B  =                                       y
                                                                                                    .
                                                              i i   1
                                                    Y -  u E 1- i 1+ c       i


                                      
Using B (y )  L (y ) and B nw,
                            i   L nw,
                                   i    0,we obtain
                                        i       w,
                                1 - Ei 1+  c L ni  +          [T (y ) - T (0)] L (y )dH (y )
                                             i
                      B                                         y
                                                                                                    .
                                                              i i   1
                                                    Y -  u E 1- i 1+ c       i


By applying Lemma 3, we can write this as

                                                           1 - MPT
                                           B                    y
                                                              i i   1
                                                    Y -  u E 1- i 1+ c       i




                                                         57
By substituting expression (I.34), we end up with

                                                             1 - MPT
                                     B               u
                                                                                                     (I.35)
                                              Y -   1+ u       T (y )D(y )dH (y )

                   y
where D(y )     1-T (y )   + y MPEint (y ).

Total earnings response. By taking similar steps as above, it is easy to verify that

                                 i               
                                                yi     u
                                         w,
                  B Y = E            B
                                       n i  -                 B  -                  yB (y )dH (y )
                              1 + ic          1 - i 1 + ic
                                 i               
                                                yi    u
                                        w,
                           E       c L ni   -                 B  -                  yL (y )dH (y )
                              1 + i           1 - i 1 + ic
                                        u
                            MPE - B             D(y )dH (y ).
                                     1 +  u

Substitute equation (I.35) to get

                                                                     u
                                                                   1+ u   D(y )dH (y )
                           B Y  MPE - (1 - MPT)                     u
                                                                                               .
                                                             Y -   1+ u   T (y )D(y )dH (y )

I.4.5   Proof of Proposition 4

We consider a perturbation of the top income tax rate ¯ that affects only taxpayers with income above some
threshold y                                y
          ¯. Any household i with income yi ¯ solves

                                                    max ui (ci , yi )
                                                    ci ,yi


subject to
                                                                  
                                              ci = (1 - ¯)yi + nw,
                                                                i

The first-order condition reads

                                         int                                    int
                 ui,y (1 -    int
                           ¯)yi   + nw,
                                     i , yi  = - (1 - ¯) ui,c (1 -    int
                                                                   ¯)yi   + nw,
                                                                             i , yi .

We apply the implicit function theorem to show
                                              
                               int      ( nw,
                                           i
                                                   ) [u
                                               - yi    i,cy + (1 - ¯)ui,cc ] + ui,c
                              yi   =-                                                    ,           (I.36)
                                          (1 - ¯)2 ui,cc + 2 (1 - ¯) ui,cy + ui,yy

        = y int . By substituting expressions (H.1) and (H.2) into (I.36), we get
where yi   i

                                                                       
                                                                      yi
                                                        
                                           int
                                          yi   = i  nw,  -                 u.                        (I.37)
                                                     i
                                                                     1-  ¯ i




                                                             58
             
To find  nw,
          i   we consider the outer problem (I.2), taking into account that the present value of unearned
                      1- T
income increased by    1-    y
                             ¯d¯. The first-order conditions imply

                                                     Vi,n = Wi,n ,
                        1 -  T w,     1 -  K r,                1 - T
                              ni +  T       ni = (1 + r
                                                      ¯)ai,0 +       y
                                                                     ¯d¯.
                         1-            1-                       1-

By differentiating both equations with respect to d¯, we get

                                                                             
                                             Vi,nn  nw,
                                                     i   + Vi,n = Wi,nn  nr,
                                                                          i ,                                  (I.38)
                             1-   T      1-        1-     K                         T
                                 nw,
                                  i  + T      nr,
                                               i =    y
                                                      ¯.                                                       (I.39)
                             1-           1-       1-

Rearrange these expressions to get

                          Vi,nn       1 - T     w,   Vi,n     -T 1 - 
                                                                      T
                                +  -T         n i  +       =            y
                                                                        ¯
                          Wi,nn       1 - K          Wi,nn       1 - K

                                 Vi,n             Vi,nn
Under Assumption 1, we have      Wi,nn    0 and   Wi,nn    0. Therefore,

                                                               1 - T
                                   nw,
                                    i   y
                                        ¯                                       V
                                                                                      .
                                               1 -  T +  T (1 -  K ) Wi,nn
                                                                       i,nn


Substitute expression (I.6) in the above inequality to get

                                                    1 - T          
                                       nw,
                                        i                   ¯L nw,
                                                            y   i    0.
                                                  1 -  T +K

This relationship, together with equation (I.37) and i  0, implies
                                                             
                                                            yi
                                                  
                                     int
                                    yi   = i  nw,  -            u
                                               i
                                                           1-  ¯ i
                                               1 - T                
                                                                   yi
                                                             w,
                                                       y
                                                       ¯ L
                                                           n    -       u.
                                             1 -  T +K       i
                                                                  1-  ¯ i

I.4.6   Proof of Corollary 6
                                                                
Preliminaries. As a preliminary step, we derive the objects  Ey         ¯T (y ). Given the expres-
                                                              ¯yi and  Ey
           int in Proposition 4, we can follow the same steps as in the proof for Lemma 1 to show that
sion for  yi

                                                                   
                           w,                 yi                                 dH (y )
             Ey      ¯ i  ni
              ¯yi = Ey        -                   u -                  y (y )             .                    (I.40)
                                             1-  ¯ i           y
                                                               ¯                1 - H (¯
                                                                                       y)
                                                                       
                                               yi                                                   dH (y )
         Ey    
          ¯T (yi ) = Ey
                      ¯ ¯ i  nw,  -                u -                    (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )               (I.41)
                              i
                                              1-  ¯ i              y
                                                                   ¯                               1 - H (¯
                                                                                                          y)




                                                          59
From expression (I.40), it then follows immediately that the marginal impact on total earnings is given by
                                                                                      
                                           w,                    y
                                                                 ¯a      u
                  Y = [1 - H (¯
                              y )] Ey
                                    ¯  i  ni  -                        ¯ i -
                                                                      Ey                 y (y )dH (y ).
                                                                1-  ¯             y
                                                                                  ¯

                yi
where a  Ey
          ¯      ¯.
                 y    As in Section 5.4, the marginal impact of an increase in the top tax rate on tax revenue
is given by
                                                                      
                               R = [1 - H (¯      ¯ [yi - y
                                           y )] [Ey              ¯T (yi )] .
                                                          ¯] +  Ey                                                 (I.42)

By substituting expression (I.41) in (I.42), we find that
                                                                                      
                                                                    y
                                                                    ¯a u
    R = [1 - H (¯    ¯(a - 1) + Ey
                y )] y           ¯ ¯ i  nw, -                                 -          (T (y ) - T (0))  (y )dH (y )
                                         i
                                                                   1- ¯ i         y
                                                                                  ¯


Since  (y )  0 for all y  y
                          ¯, we get

                                                       w,                          y
                                                                                   ¯a      u
                    R  [1 - H (¯    ¯(a - 1) + 
                               y )] y             ¯i  ni
                                               ¯ Ey       -                              ¯ i
                                                                                        Ey           ,             (I.43)
                                                                                  1-  ¯
                                            w,                      y
                                                                    ¯a      u
                    Y  [1 - H (¯
                               y )] Ey
                                     ¯  i  ni  -                          ¯ i .
                                                                         Ey                                        (I.44)
                                                                   1-  ¯

                                                        y
Case (a) in Corollary 3. If iu  0 for all i who earn yi ¯, then inequalities (I.43) and (I.44) can be
written as

                                                                 w,
                               R  [1 - H (¯    ¯(a - 1) + 
                                          y )] y          ¯Ey
                                                            ¯i  ni  ,                                              (I.45)
                                                              w,
                                Y  [1 -       H (¯
                                                 y )] Ey
                                                       ¯  i  ni .                                                  (I.46)

Lemma 3 implies that

                                                   int             i           
                                           MPE           = Ey
                                                            ¯            L nw,
                                                                            i
                                                                1 + i ic

Since i  0 and i  0 for all i, we then have

                                     int               i                    w,
                               MPE         = Ey
                                              ¯              L nw,
                                                                i    Ey
                                                                      ¯i L ni .                                    (I.47)
                                                    1 + i ic
                                              
Using the relationship between L nw,
                                  i  and  nw,
                                           i   in Proposition 4, we can write (I.47) as

                                             int         1 -  T +K          w,
                                       MPE                           ¯  i  ni ,
                                                                    Ey
                                                         (1 -  T )¯
                                                                  y

and therefore
                                        1 - T       int        w,
                                                ¯MPE  Ey
                                                y       ¯  i  ni .
                                      1 -  T +K




                                                              60
Given this relationship, we can write inequalities (I.45) and (I.46) as

                                                              1 - T       int
                             R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                        y )] y                        ¯MPE    ,
                                                            1 -  T +K
                                                   1 - T      int
                             Y  [1 - H (¯
                                        y )] y
                                             ¯             MPE .
                                                 1 -  T +K

Case (b) in Corollary 3. If iu = ¯u for all i who earn y   y
                                                           ¯, then the same arguments as above allow us
                                                        i
to write inequalities (I.43) and (I.44) as

                                                   1 - T          int  a ¯u
                     R  [1 - H (¯    ¯ a-1+
                                y )] y     ¯             T + K
                                                               MPE -                ,
                                                  1-                  1-¯
                                         1 - T       int       a ¯u
                     Y  [1 - H (¯
                                y )] y
                                     ¯           MPE -             .
                                       1 -  T +K             1- ¯




                                                      61
J      Discussion of findings and comparison with existing work
Our paper is related to several other studies of the effect of lottery winnings on earnings. The three most
closely-related ones are Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001), Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling
(2017) (CLNO) and Picchio, Suetens and van Ours (2018). Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001) use mail
survey responses of a small number of lottery winners in one state in the U.S. (Massachusetts). Like us, both
CLNO and Picchio, Suetens and van Ours (2018) use administrative data (from Sweden and the Netherlands,
respectively) and estimate the effect of lottery winnings on various measures of labor market outcomes.
      Our work is difficult to compare directly to Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001) for two reasons. First,
they restrict their treated group to individuals winning prizes that were required to be paid out in equal
installments over 20 years rather than a one-time payment. Second, their data does not include either taxes
or labor market responses of the spouse. It is also difficult to compare our work directly to Picchio, Suetens
and van Ours (2018), in part because they do not account for income taxes, but also because they do not
calculate income effects and labor supply elasticities.48 CLNO, on the other hand, is a particularly relevant
comparison to our study. They report various estimates of wealth effects that are directly comparable to
our estimates in Section 3. In addition, they use these wealth effects to estimate a structural model of labor
supply, and calculate marginal propensities to earn as well as compensated and uncompensated elasticities
of labor supply. Using these calculations they argue that income effects are at most modest.
      We proceed to re-examine CLNO's conclusion about the size of income effects in two steps. In the
first step, we compare our estimated wealth effects with the ones reported in CLNO. While winner earnings
are substantially more responsive in the U.S. compared to Sweden, we find that accounting for spousal
responses and labor income taxation helps explain part of the differences in the estimates across countries.
In the second step, we re-estimate their model on their own data, but now accounting for spousal responses
and labor income taxation. The estimates we obtain for Sweden are more comparable to the sizable MPE
and income effects we report in Sections 4 and 5 for the U.S. Nonetheless, large differences remain: even
after adjustment, our estimates are approximately twice as large as those obtained for Sweden. This suggests
that generalizing the results from Sweden to the U.S. may warrant some care.


J.1     Comparison of wealth effects
CLNO estimate the effect of winning the lottery on total labor earnings of the winner as well as total labor
earnings of the household. In Table J.1 we summarize their findings and compare them to our estimated
wealth effects. Across both papers, we see that the estimated post-tax earnings responses of lottery winners
are negative and non-negligible (see Panel A in Table J.1). In our data, the winner reduces her post-tax total
earnings by 1.6 dollars each period per 100 dollars of winnings; in CLNO this value is 0.6 dollars. However,
the response of the post-tax total earnings of the winner underestimates the full extent of the labor market
response for two reasons.
   48
      In their Table D1, Picchio, Suetens and van Ours (2018) report unconditional wealth effect estimates for the winner for event
times = 1, 2, 3. Their average estimated wealth effect is very similar to the analogous estimate in Cesarini, Lindqvist, No-
towidigdo and Östling (2017), Table 3.




                                                               62
        First, taxes introduce a substantial wedge between pre- and post-tax wage earnings responses, especially
in Sweden. In the U.S., winners reduce their pre-tax earnings by 2 dollars each period per 100 dollars of
winnings compared to 1.6 dollars after taxes, implying an average retention rate of around 82 percent. In
Sweden, on the other hand, the wedge between pre- and post-tax earnings responses is substantially larger.
With an average retention rate of just over 50 percent, winner earnings responses almost double and increase
to 1.1 dollars each period per 100 dollars of winnings. Second, once we include spousal earnings, estimated
wealth effects increase even further. In the U.S., they increase to 2.3 dollars each period per 100 dollars
of winnings ­ an approximate 20 percent increase. By comparison, in Sweden they increase by about 23
percent, to 1.3 dollars per 100 dollars of winnings.
        Taken together, the results in Table J.1 show how responses measured post-tax and only for the winner
understate the responses measured pre-tax for the entire household. In the U.S., pre-tax household responses
are 1.5 times larger than post-tax winner earnings responses, whereas in Sweden they are 2.3 times larger.
As a consequence, the relative gap in wealth effects between the U.S. and Sweden decreases by around 35
percent once we account for spousal responses and labor income taxation.


                             Table J.1: Literature review of wealth effects of lottery winnings

                                                   Panel A: Post-Tax Earnings Responses

  Paper                                                      Post-Tax Earnings Measure         Post-Tax Lottery Winnings        Wealth Effect
  (1)                                                                      (2)                               (3)                            (4)

  Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo, and Östling (2017)       Winner Total Labor Earnings                    Total                       -0.576
  Our estimate                                               Winner Total Labor Earnings                    Total                       -1.597

                                                    Panel B: Pre-Tax Earnings Responses

  Paper                                                      Pre-Tax Earnings Measure          Post-Tax Lottery Winnings        Wealth Effect
  (1)                                                                      (2)                               (3)                            (4)

  Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo, and Östling (2017)       Winner Total Labor Earnings                    Total                       -1.066
  Our estimate                                               Winner Total Labor Earnings                    Total                       -1.955
  Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo, and Östling (2017)      Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings               Per-Adult                      -1.306
  Our estimate                                              Per-Adult Total Labor Earnings               Per-Adult                      -2.339


Notes: This table presents a comparison of our estimated wealth effects with the ones reported in Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling
(2017) (CLNO). In Panel A we compare our estimates of the post-tax total labor earnings responses of the lottery winner per 100 dollars of post-tax
winnings to the corresponding value reported in CLNO, Table 3. In Panel B we compare our estimate of the pre-tax earnings responses per 100
dollars of post-tax winnings to the corresponding values reported in CLNO. The winner total labor earnings response is reported in CLNO, Table
3; the household total labor response is reported in CLNO, Table 6.




                                                                       63
